Mrs. Telalian (Greece): I would like to begin by
expressing our appreciation to you, Madam President,
for organizing this important debate on an issue that is,
in our view, a critical component for lasting peace and
security. We also thank Judge Rosalyn Higgins,
President of the International Court of Justice (ICJ),
and Mr. Nicolas Michel, Under-Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs, for their important contributions earlier
today.
Greece would like to associate itself with the
statement to be delivered later by the Austrian
Presidency of the European Union.

The importance of international law and the rule
of law is reflected in various United Nations
conferences and summits, including the Millennium
Summit and the September 2005 summit, where world
leaders reaffirmed their commitment to the United
Nations Charter and to international law and
recognized them as the indispensable foundations of a
more peaceful, prosperous and just world. World
leaders also recognized the rule of law and human
rights as principal values of the United Nations system
and emphasized the important role of the International
Court of Justice in the prevention and resolution of
disputes among States. We are strongly committed to
those principles. With respect to the ICJ, we urge
States that have not yet accepted the compulsory
jurisdiction of the Court to do so and to make more
frequent resort to the Court.

The Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, should do more to promote the
pacific settlement of disputes. In that respect, we
would like to underline that full implementation of the
judgments and advisory opinions of the ICJ would
further enhance its role in promoting legality and the
primacy of international law in international relations.
The Council could also consider recommending - by
virtue of Article 36, paragraph 3, of the Charter - that
the parties refer a case to the ICJ. We are pleased that
Judge Higgins mentioned the need for that tool to be
brought to life. We fully agree.

The United Nations has been actively engaged in
issues related to the promotion of the rule of law and
transitional justice in war-torn societies. The Security
Council, for its part, has been supportive of the
principles of the rule of law and accountability for
international crimes in conflict and post-conflict
societies. The creation of the two International
Criminal Tribunals was a remarkable development that
can help those societies overcome past abuses and
achieve peace and national reconciliation.

The Security Council has also supported the
establishment of mixed international-national hybrid
tribunals to try the perpetrators of serious crimes. The
establishment of United Nations commissions of
inquiry to report on serious human rights violations in
specific countries is another means used by the Council
to address impunity, as, for example, in the case of
Cote d'Ivoire. It is important, however, that the
findings and recommendations of those commissions
be discussed by the Council and that the reports be
made public.

In addition, the referral of the situation in Darfur
to the International Criminal Court (ICC) was a bold
step in the direction of combating impunity through
international justice, since the ICC is, in our View, a
symbol for a new world order based on the rule of
international law. The Security Council should now
provide the Court with the support it needs to

accomplish its difficult mission to investigate,
prosecute and bring to justice those who bear the
greatest responsibility for war crimes committed in
Darfur. A major concern in that regard is the need to
protect witnesses.

Likewise, resolution 1688 (2006), on the transfer
of Charles Taylor to The Hague to be tried by the
Special Court for Sierra Leone on the premises of the
ICC, and resolution 1674 (2006), on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, reaffirm the Council's
commitment that justice and peace are mutually
reinforcing.

The Council should, however, take further steps
to ensure fair and expedient justice when serious
violations of humanitarian law have taken place. In that
regard, the recommendations of the Secretary-General
contained in his report on the rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies (S/2004/6l6) could be of great help. We urge
the Secretariat to prepare a report containing proposals
concerning the implementation of those
recommendations, as requested by the Council in 2004.

In recent years, the United Nations has moved
progressively from a culture of reaction to a culture of
prevention. An integrated approach to conflict
prevention, conflict management and peacebuilding
has been developed to deal with the new and expanded
agenda of peace and security. The protection of human
rights - especially those of children and women in
armed conflict, as well as of refugees and internally
displaced persons - has assumed a prominent place on
that agenda.

The Security Council, breaking with its tradition
of dealing with individual crises, has adopted a number
of resolutions to reinforce these issues. Resolution
1674 (2006), on the protection of civilians, contains
important elements to promote respect for international
humanitarian law, to pursue justice and the rule of law
and to protect civilians against human rights abuses in
conflict and post-conflict situations. The Council
should now implement these elements consistently in
its future mandates for peacekeeping operations.

Post-conflict peacebuilding is a major priority for
the United Nations system. The establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission will promote important
aspects of the rule of law in conflict-affected countries,
such as respect for human rights, constitution-making,
transitional justice mechanisms and legal and penal
reform, and will help alleviate many ethnic tensions.

On many occasions, the Security Council has
used targeted sanctions as a tool to modify the
behaviour of specific actors whose actions have been
identified by the Council as threats to international
peace and security. Targeted sanctions are also
currently used against those who commit serious
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, incite hatred and impede the peace
process.

There are, however, serious concerns about the
lack of fair and clear procedures for placing individuals
and entities on - and removing them from -
sanctions lists and for granting humanitarian
exceptions. Those concerns were also expressed at the
September 2005 world summit. In our view, the
Security Council should address this problem as soon
as possible. The sanctions committees should amend
their guidelines to bring them in line with procedural
fairness and effective remedy requirements. In that
respect, we would like to emphasize the important
contributions of Council members France and
Denmark, as well as of various processes. The recent
report published by the Watson Institute,
"Strengthening Targeted Sanctions through Fair and
Clear Procedures", which was sponsored by the
Governments of Switzerland, Germany and Sweden,
provides many useful options to that effect, and we
urge the sanctions committees to take those options
into consideration. I would like to add that we listened
with great interest to the comments made earlier by the
Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs on that
issue. We fully subscribe to his statement.

I would like to conclude by quoting Mrs. Louise
Arbour, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, who, in a recent address at Chatham
House, stated:

"With the continuing threat of terrorism, and
indeed with persistent armed conflicts and the
ever more perverse effects of extreme poverty, as
we experience this prolonged exposure to real
and perceived threats to our security, we are also
faced with an extraordinary opportunity to forge a
worldwide jurisprudence capable of protecting
fundamental human rights when it matters most."

That is, indeed, the challenge of our time.

