Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to thank Pakistan
for convening this open debate. I also wish to express
appreciation to Mr. Robert Serry for his briefing.

Japan has long understood the Palestinians'
aspiration to build an independent State and has
supported the right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination. Japan thus endorses a two-State solution
under which Israel and a future independent Palestinian
State would coexist side by side in peace and security.
In light of that, last November Japan voted in favour of
General Assembly resolution 67/ 19, regarding the status
of Palestine at the United Nations, and welcomes the
fact that the resolution was adopted with the support of
a large number of Member States.

Palestine now bears greater responsibilities
vis-a-vis the international community. Japan once
again calls upon Palestine not to use the non-member
observer State status accorded by the General Assembly
resolution to act in a way that might negatively affect
or hinder direct negotiations with Israel. We ask for
prudence with respect to its conduct, such as applying
for membership in international organizations - an
action that might negatively affect prospects for the
resumption of negotiations.

As for the situation in Gaza, we welcome the
fact that the calm brokered by Egypt in November
has largely held so far. We urge all parties concerned
to continue to respect the ceasefire with a view to
realizing a durable calm in Gaza. We also encourage
tangible steps towards intra-Palestinian reconciliation,
while rejecting any attempt to promote violence or to
deny Israel's right to exist.

It is regrettable that negotiations between the
parties remain stalled, putting in danger the prospect
for a two-State solution. Japan requests both Palestine
and Israel to establish relationships of mutual trust and
to promptly return to the negotiation table. Japan will
continue to actively contribute to moving the Middle
East peace process forward, in cooperation with the
United States, Arab countries, the Quartet and other
partners.

In that context, we deeply deplore that, after the
adoption of the General Assembly resolution, the Israeli
Government announced its approval of the large-scale
construction of housing units in East Jerusalem and
the West Bank. Settlement activities need to be frozen,
as they are a violation of international law. Japan is
also worried about a temporary suspension of the
transfer of tax revenues that Israel collects on behalf
of the Palestinian Authority. Support for the fiscal
stability of the Palestinian Authority is a necessary
task that Israel should carry out. We strongly hope
that following Israel's national elections yesterday, the
new Government to be formed will create conditions
for a resumption of meaningful peace negotiations by
rescinding those decisions, which are only exacerbating
tensions between the parties.

With respect to assistance to Palestine, Japan,
together with Palestine, will hold a conference on
cooperation among East Asian countries for Palestinian
development in February in Tokyo. Japan will thus
contribute to promoting assistance to the Palestinians
in cooperation with other East Asian countries.

Addressing the issues ofPalestinian refugees is also
of critical importance. Bearing in mind the crucial role
that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)plays in
this matter, since last November Japan has extended to it
another $10 million in assistance, including $7.7 million
in food aid. Japan remains firmly committed to making
substantial contributions to support UNRWA activities.

Allow me now to touch upon Syria. Japan is deeply
concerned by the serious and worsening situation
in Syria and profoundly deplores the death of many
thousands of people as a result of continued violence.
An attack against the University of Aleppo last week is
further tragic testimony to that. As an active member
of the Group of Friends of the Syrian People, Japan
reiterates its call on all parties in Syria to immediately
halt the violence and abuses of human rights, and
condemns the Syrian authorities for not keeping their
own commitments and responsibilities to protect their
own citizens. We support the diplomatic efforts of
Mr. Brahimi, the Joint Special Representative of the
United Nations and the League of Arab States, and
once again emphasize the importance of advancing the
process ofa Syrian-led political transition.

Faced with this appalling situation, we cannot
remain mere spectators. Last week, on Switzerland's
initiative, 57 countries, including Japan, jointly sent
a letter to the President of the Security Council,
requesting that the situation in Syria be referred to the
International Criminal Court (S/2013/19, annex). We
call on the Council to duly recognize the importance
of ensuring accountability for crimes committed on the
ground, and to send an unequivocal message demanding
that international human rights and humanitarian law
be observed by the Syrian authorities and all other
parties.

With the harsh winter inflicting tremendous
suffering on a growing number of refugees on
the ground, there is an urgent need to address the
rapidly deteriorating humanitarian situation in Syria.
Japan commends the Secretary-General's initiative
to convene a high-level international humanitarian
pledging conference for Syria, to be held on 30 January
in Kuwait City. The Government of Japan intends to
dispatch a senior-level delegation from the capital
with a view to making a significant contribution to
international efforts.

