Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to congratulate Malaysia for assuming
the presidency of the Security Council this month and
thank it for organizing this debate on children and
armed conflict, as well as its commitment and tireless
efforts in the framework of its chairmanship of the
Working Group of the Security Council on Children
and Armed Conflict.

I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, his Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and the
Executive Director of UNICEF Mr. Anthony Lake for
their respective briefings and the details they provided.

Twenty years ago, the world committed itself to take
action to combat the use of children in armed conflict.
Indeed, the publication in 1996 of the pioneering Graca
Machel report (see A/51/306) on the impact of armed
conflict on children led to the establishment in 1997
of the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
Since then, the Secretary-General has submitted annual

reports to the Security Council on this issue. Each
year, the publication of this report is an opportunity
to examine the situation of children in armed conflicts
and makes it possible to shed light on their sufferings
to the international community through the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Human Rights
Council. This makes it possible to continue to consider
this issue as a matter of urgency and to empower States
to engage politically to resolve it.

Since the establishment of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary General for Children
and Armed Conflict, thousands of boys and girls have
been released thanks to the implementation of action
plans mandated by the Security Council to put an end and
prevent the recruitment and use of children in conflicts.
Admittedly, the annual United Nations reports show
that tangible progress has been made in the protection
of children in armed conflict, notably with the adoption
of international standards for the protection of children
and the implementation of strategies and programmes
aimed at protecting children affected by war. However,
children remain the primary victims of conflicts.
Recent years have unfortunately been marked by an
alarming intensification and an agonizing recurrence of
conflicts, which have become increasingly complex and
destructive with unprecedented violence, devastating
effects and an increasingly terrifying involvement of
violent extremist groups.

This has highlighted the vulnerability of tens of
millions of children. Indeed, UNICEF estimates that
approximately 250 million children live in countries or
regions affected by armed conflicts. Over 20 million
children are refugees in neighbouring countries or
are internally displaced within their own country as
a result of a conflict or violations of human rights.
Millions of children have been seriously injured or
permanently disabled. Between January and July 2015,
nearly 133,000 children found refuge in some European
countries - an average of 19,000 children every
month - and one in four people in search of refuge is
a child, according to information provided by Eurostat.
Some reports state that there are 250,000 children in
the world today still directly or indirectly involved in
armed conflicts. The magnitude of these figures should
challenge the international community and encourage it
to review the international strategy for child protection.

Morocco is actively working to ensure that
children's rights are effectively respected and promoted
both in Morocco and worldwide. At the legislative level,

Morocco has acceded to all international instruments
protecting and promoting the rights of the child. In
fact, Morocco was among the first countries to sign
and ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict and the Paris commitments on this
issue. Morocco has also begun the process of ratifying
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child establishing a communications procedure.
In addition, Morocco's legal arsenal regulates military
recruitment and enrolment and acts in compliance with
international law.

Morocco has become diligently engaged in
international efforts to end the involvement of children
in armed conflict. Similarly, Morocco has always
supported the idea that the efforts of the international
community to deal effectively with this problem would
benefit from being part of a multifaceted approach
that is at once comprehensive, through a thorough
understanding of underlying and structural causes of
these conflicts; strategic, dealing not only with current
conflicts but also focusing on aspects of prevention;
cross-cutting, involving all stakeholders; and flexible,
taking into account the diverse and changing nature of
armed conflicts and their particular features.

The situation of children in Yemen, mentioned in
the annual report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/ 360),
remains a very troubling for Morocco. Indeed, the
dangerous developments there, including the use of
force and violence by the Houthis and the persistent
efforts to torpedo the achievements of the Yemeni
national dialogue, challenge us all and require a swift
solution to this conflict.

Before these acts and the dangers they represent,
the Kingdom of Morocco, together with other countries,
has expressed its full solidarity with the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia and its support for restoring legitimacy
to Yemen and has joined the Coalition in Yemen. This
Coalition was created in compliance with the rights
enshrined in the United Nations Charter to protect
civilians following the military escalation by the
Houthis, which has undermined the peace, stability and
security of Yemen.

Resolution 2216 (2015) reiterated its support for the
legitimacy of the President of Yemen, Mr. Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour, and asked all parties and
Member States to refrain from any action likely to
undermine the unity, sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Yemen, as well as the legitimacy
of the President of the country. The main objective
of the Coalition is to support the political transition
in Yemen, in accordance with the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and its implementation mechanism
and the results of the comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference, pursuant to all relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.

Moroccojoins the spirit ofopenness and cooperation
expressed by all members of the Coalition, which will
continue to work closely with all stakeholders to restore
peace and stability in Yemen and reach a political
solution to the conflict, in accordance with all relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, while ensuring the
protection of all civilians, particularly children.

Finally, Morocco reiterates its willingness to work
closely with all partners to develop a multifaceted
approach to the protection of children in armed conflict.

