Mr. Ruzicka (Slovakia): Slovakia would first like
to align itself with the statement delivered earlier by the
representative of the European Union.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2014/876). I would like
to welcome and thank Special Representative Haysom
for his briefing and wish him every success in his
endeavours, as the task remains huge. Slovakia will
continue to offer full support to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Of
course, I cannot proceed without thanking Ambassador
Tanin for his effort and his statement. I would also like
to thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, the Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

UNAMA's performance has been remarkable in
recent years. Its role in coming years will be no less
important in assisting the Afghan Government in the
reform process and in achieving good governance.
Commitments made in London in early December
encourage us in our efforts, guided as we are by the
spirit of inclusion and political unity. In this regard,
we invite the Afghan Government to continue its
outreach towards all legitimate political stakeholders in
Afghanistan.

While President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah are going to embody their vision in the
formation a new cabinet, UNAMA and the wider
international community stand ready to offer support
and experience with transition. We would like to
highlight the need for reform, especially in areas of
justice, institution-building and legislation. Expansion
of principles of rule of law at all horizontal levels
of governance will be crucial. The aforementioned
principles should be well anchored in the expected
revision of electoral law.

The fundamental prerequisites for development in
any country of the world are safety, security and stability.
Slovakia therefore appreciates the unanimous Security
Council decision to adopt resolution 2189 (2014), which,
inter alia, welcomes the NATO-Afghan Government
Agreement to establish a post-2014 non-combat mission.
In that regard, I am honoured to inform the Council that
on 10 December the Government of Slovakia approved
military troops to serve in the new Resolute Support
Mission in Afghanistan as of 1 January 2015. Slovakia
will also provide financial support for the Afghan
National Security Forces. This contribution is fully
in line with our long-term commitments and the spirit
of cooperation with the Government of Afghanistan.
Slovakia also remains active in development assistance
to the country, which continues to be among our official
development aid priorities. I think that we all can work
together and wish the Afghan people all the best in their
future endeavours.

