Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Portugal associates itself
with the statement made by the representative of the
presidency of the European Union.

The preambular part of the draft resolution before
the Security Council deplores the failure of UNITA to
comply with its obligations under the "Acordos de Paz",
the Lusaka Protocol and relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular, resolution 1118 (1997). The
draft resolution also declares that the resulting situation in
Angola constitutes a threat to international peace and
security in the region.

In his first progress report on the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA), the Secretary-
General notes that the progress achieved in Angola during
the previous two and a half years is being severely
undermined by persistent tensions throughout the country.
And he concludes that it is obvious that the current state
of affairs is mainly the result of delays by UNITA in
implementing its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol.

The Secretary-General also indicates that the
complete demilitarization of UNITA, the restoration of
State administration throughout the country, the
transformation of radio VORGAN into a non-partisan
station, and the true transformation of UNITA into a
political party are imperatives for the implementation of
the peace process. Portugal, as an observer of the peace
process, fully agrees with this position.

The international community has been following
very closely all the vicissitudes of the peace process in
Angola. Patience and persistence are probably the key
words if one wants to understand the work of the Security
Council regarding this situation. We have to bear in mind
that between the signing of the "Acordos de Paz" on 31
May 1991 and the end of 1996, the Security Council
adopted 21 resolutions directly related to the situation in
Angola. In addition, the President of the Security Council
issued 25 statements on the same subject. To complete
the picture, I would like to underline the fact that in 1997
this body has already adopted four resolutions and issued
three presidential statements on this same matter.

In a way, this statistical exercise also reveals the
unrelenting persistence of obstacles to the full
implementation of the peace process in Angola, due in
particular to the recurrent lack of compliance by UN ITA
with the obligations it freely undertook in the "Acordos
de Paz" and in the Lusaka Protocol. In 1992 UNITA
refused to accept the results of the elections in Angola,

 

even after the Security Council endorsed the statement by
the Secretary-General's Special Representative that the
election had been generally free and fair and called upon
UNITA to respect its results. The Angolan people was then
denied the opportunity of seeing its internal conflict put to
an end through democratic elections, without there having
to be winners or losers on the battlefield. The most
devastating war Angola has ever experienced ensued.

Two years later, UNITA was offered another
opportunity to get back on the road to peace. The Lusaka
Protocol, signed on 20 November 1994, brought to the
peace process the concept of political power-sharing, which
had not been foreseen by the agreement signed in 1991.
The President of the Security Council stated afterwards that
this Protocol and the 1991 peace accords should lay the
foundation for lasting peace in Angola.

The current situation in Angola seems to be a paradox,
although not an innocent one. On the one hand, UNITA
participates in the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation, its deputies have participated in the
activities of the National Assembly, and some of its
generals and other senior officers, as well as about 1,000
troops, have been incorporated into the Angolan Armed
Forces. But on the other hand, UNITA clearly has been
trying to keep a shadow army, its propaganda machine has
been working against the peace process, and, last but not
least, UNITA has been able to prevent the extension of the
State administration throughout the country. The National
Assembly approved a special status for the President of
UNITA as the Leader of the Largest Opposition Party, but
Dr. Savimbi still refuses to meet President Eduardo Dos
Santos in Luanda.

This is a crucial moment in the peace process in
Angola. It requires positive and decisive steps from
UNITA's leadership, instead of the repetition of the usual
tactics of last-minute, half-hearted concessions on the eve
of Security Council deliberations. These tactics are
unacceptable, unwanted and unjustifiable. The international
community has been clearly asking UNITA to abide by its
own commitments. Procrastination is no longer a viable
replacement for genuine national reconciliation and a lasting
peace in Angola.

UNITA has to understand that its current behaviour
left the Security Council without other credible options
besides the one of imposing additional sanctions. These
have been designed to stimulate UNITA to move in the
right direction. We want UNIT A back in the peace process.
We do not want to exclude UNITA from it. Portugal still
hopes, as do other members of the Council, that on 30
September the sanctions will not have to enter into force.
That would mean that UNITA's leadership had fully
understood the message we are sending today.

Portugal also supports the Secretary-General's
proposal to further postpone the withdrawal of the United
Nations military units from Angola and to retain in the
country up to 2,650 military personnel until the end of
October 1997, taking into account the situation on the
ground and the wish expressed by the Government of
Angola to maintain in the country a sizeable United
Nations presence until the demobilization process is over.
Portugal will maintain its participation in MONUA,
providing the missions medical unit as well as military
and civilian police observers.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
Security Council is giving UNITA another opportunity to
abide by the obligations it freely accepted in 1991 and in
1994. Now, UNITA is in a position to benefit from the
fruits of political power-sharing and national
reconciliation. The seeds of war must be definitively
relegated to the past. The Angolan people fully deserve
this. We hope that this time UNITA's leadership will be
able to understand that there is no better alternative to
peace, democracy and progress, and that it will act
accordingly. The international community expects no less
from UNITA.

