Ms. Lajous (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, my delegation would like to thank Mr. Michael
Steiner for his very comprehensive briefing today,
which complements the periodic report of the
Secretary-General (S/2002/779).

I should also like to express our appreciation for
this morning's statement by Deputy Prime Minister
Covic', who provided a distinct but complementary
View of the objectives for the future. We have also
viewed with great interest the document associated
with Mr. Covie's statement, on the decentralization
strategy in Kosovo and Metohija and on the
strengthening of national, local and community
Governments. We shall study it very carefully, and we
should like Mr. Covic' to know that this is a matter of
great interest and relevance to our country, where we
have recently made important progress with regard to
respect for autonomous indigenous peoples. We
believe, as he said this morning, in the importance of
the democratic process, respect for the mandate of
majorities, and respect for the rights of minorities.

At the same time, we have noted with satisfaction
that, during the time period covered by the report,
important advances have been made in Kosovo's
situation, mainly as a result of the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). In that connection, we should like to stress
something that we have emphasized in the past: the
importance that Mexico attaches to the definitive
formation of a multi-ethnic Government in Kosovo and
the prospects for the electoral processes that will take
place on 26 October.

In that context, it is encouraging to see the broad
interest of non-governmental organizations and
political entities - including some that represent the
Serbian population - in participating as observers of
the electoral process. Mexico considers it fundamental
that the members of the Serbian community and of
other minorities - including refugees and internally
displaced persons - participate in the electoral
process. We welcome the measures that UNMIK has
adopted, in cooperation with the authorities of the
Republics of Serbia and Montenegro, to ensure that
those outside Kosovo can vote by mail.

As has been said, the return of refugees and of
displaced persons to their communities of origin is a
basic condition to achieve reconciliation in Kosovo and
the final objective of a multi-ethnic Kosovo. That is
why, in my previous statement, I emphasized the
importance that Mexico attaches to the document of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), in which the principles for
sustainable return are established. We are pleased to
note that, for the first time since UNMIK's arrival in
Kosovo, there is an environment that favours inter-
ethnic dialogue and the possibility of return. We hope
that those conditions will continue and improve, and
that UNMIK will do its utmost to ensure that the
principles for the sustainable return of refugees and of
displaced persons can be carried out in practice.

The objectives and difficulties that UNMIK faces
are many, and I wish to join the delegations that have
taken the floor before me in pointing out some of my
delegation's concerns.

First, concerning the previous reference to the
Mitrovica situation, we believe that cooperation among
the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is
fundamental in order to resolve the problem of parallel
structures. Secondly, we should like to mention our
concern at the reduction in UNMIK's budget, which
could negatively affect the fulfilment of its tasks.
Finally, I should like to refer to what Mr. Steiner said
about the importance of ensuring the flow of financial
resources to Kosovo. Undoubtedly, the most important
point in ensuring the flow of those financial resources
is the full operation of the rule of law - and full
compliance with the laws - in Kosovo.

Nevertheless, we believe that, in addition to
achieving that goal, it is also necessary to promote the
integration of Kosovo's economy into the European
and international economies. In this connection, I
would like to know whether any specific attempts have
been made, similar to those that have been successfully
employed elsewhere in the world, to promote
microcredit programmes to ensure that refugees
returning to their communities have an opportunity to
begin economic activities, thereby directly promoting
the well-being of communities.

Obviously, the attitude of donors is essential to
doing all this. My delegation would like to appeal to
those who have been making considerable
contributions to Kosovo's economic recovery not to
overlook that aspect.

