Ms. Wolcott (United States of America): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's important
discussion. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his participation in this meeting and to
express our appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Holmes.

People in every country share the desire for a life
of opportunity for themselves and their children. They
want their nations to be successful, prosperous and to
ensure basic security, employment and educational
opportunities, by which each generation does better
than its predecessor.

There are many States throughout the world
striving to provide such an environment for their
citizens. However, repressive regimes, global terrorism
and extremism, intransigent poverty and other factors
prevent many people from having their basic needs met
and force them to live in fear.

The Secretary-General, in his most recent report
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
reminds us all that

"the protection of civilians is a human, political
and legal imperative that recognizes the inherent
dignity and worth of every human being. It is a
cause that unites us all in the responsibility to
protect civilians from abuse, to mitigate the
impact of warfare and to alleviate their
suffering." (S/2007/643, para. 3)

In that spirit, I would like to comment on some of
the challenges raised in the Secretary-General's report.

First is ensuring humanitarian access to civilians
in need. As noted in the report, humanitarian access to
conflict areas is often hindered by lack of security and
infrastructure. However, in some cases, State and
non-State actors flagrantly deny access, mobilizing
direct attacks against humanitarian workers and
making it impossible to meet emergency needs. In
many crises, deliberate attacks on humanitarian
workers remain a significant impediment to life-saving
aid. We must all work together to provide for the safety
and security of relief workers as well as civilians.

In Darfur, where more than 4.2 million people
depend on the lifeline that the international community
provides, aid is frequently hindered due to Government
actions, despite an agreement that the Government of
the Sudan and the United Nations signed in March to
foster an improved working relationship and to provide
a forum to address issues of concern. The absence of
key United Nations humanitarian staff to coordinate
the international response makes it more difficult for
humanitarian agencies to provide aid to the more than
one million people in southern Darfur.

Similarly, in Burma, the regime's restrictions on
humanitarian agencies led the International Committee
of the Red Cross and the United Nations Programme
on HIV and AIDS to close their offices, depriving
Burmese citizens who were in need.

With regard to the report's discussions of the
situation in Afghanistan and Iraq, I want to make clear
that the United States recalls the obligation of all
parties to the conflict, under applicable international
law, to allow and facilitate passage of humanitarian
relief, to the extent feasible, for civilians in need. We
urge all nations to follow through on these important
obligations. We support the Secretary-General's
observation that humanitarian agencies cannot assist
people they cannot reach.

The second challenge is the prevention of sexual
violence in conflict. The United States condemns
sexual violence as an instrument of policy and calls on
all Member States to end this gross injustice. We
applaud the recent adoption by the Third Committee of
the General Assembly of a draft resolution calling on
States to end impunity by prosecuting and punishing
those who rape and use other sexual violence to
advance military or political objectives, to protect and
support victims and to develop and implement
comprehensive strategies on prevention and
prosecution of rape.
The United States has responded in many ways to
the intolerable widespread violence against civilians.
At the behest of Secretary Rice, the United States
Department of State and the Agency for International
Development are implementing an initiative to target

five key strategic areas to help address the issue of
gender-based violence, including access to justice,
human rights monitoring efforts, access to accurate
information, and humanitarian protection to include
clinical care. The Department of State also supports
programmes focusing on prevention and response to
gender-based violence for Darfur-Sudanese refugees in
Chad. The United States urges all Member States to
take similar concrete steps to end impunity for
perpetrators and the use of rape as an instrument of
war.

The third challenge is strengthening refugee
protection and maximizing opportunities for refugees
and internally displace persons' self-reliance. The
United States continues to support strong and effective
international responses to humanitarian crises.
Unfortunately, protracted conflicts continue to create
forced displacement of large numbers of civilians.
Renewed displacement in Somalia, eastern Congo and
the Sudan's Darfur province are tragic reminders of the
risk to civilians who are deliberately targeted during
armed conflicts.

Where conflict is causing civilians to flee and
seek asylum, we are actively working with other
Governments to provide protection to those in need.

The United States remains the single largest
contributor of humanitarian assistance for Iraqis.
Between 2003 and the end of this year, we will have
provided almost $1 billion in humanitarian assistance
for Iraqis, both in Iraq and in neighbouring countries.
We have made almost $200 million available in 2007
to assist displaced Iraqis, including providing
$39 million to date to the joint United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees/UNICEF appeal for the
education of Iraqi children in Jordan and Syria. During
the past year, the United States has also significantly
ramped up resettlement processing for Iraqi refugees,
including expanding processing facilities and hiring
and training staff to process Iraqi refugee applicants in
Jordan, Syria, Egypt, Lebanon and Turkey. Now that
we have those facilities and personnel in place, we
hope to admit as many as 12,000 Iraqi refugees during
the course of the next fiscal year.
The United States continues to seek
comprehensive approaches to resolving protected
refugee situations through support for durable
solutions. We also seek innovative approaches to
developing livelihood strategies and to maximizing
opportunities for refugee self-reliance and
empowerment.

We call on Member States to renew their
commitment to upholding the right to asylum, to
protecting civilians from forcible return, and to
providing durable solutions for refugees. The United
States is proud to have assisted approximately
1 million African refugees to return home over the past
two years.

Fourthly, with respect to combating the deliberate
targeting of civilians, the Secretary-General's report
rightly underscores the importance of the principles of
distinction and proportionality. In resolution
1674 (2006), the Council recalled that the deliberate
targeting of civilians in situations of armed conflict is a
flagrant violation of international law, reiterated its
condemnation of such practices in the strongest
possible terms, and demanded that all parties
immediately put an end to such practices.

Yet all too often, we see parties to armed conflict
resort to the deliberate targeting of the civilian
population as a means to create a climate of fear. We
have seen, for example, the human toll of terrorist
attacks in Afghanistan. According to the Secretary-
General's September 2007 report on the situation in
Afghanistan, the country suffered from more than
100 suicide attacks between January and August of this
year, resulting in the deaths of more than 145 civilians.
The report also notes concern about incidental civilian
casualties resulting from military operations.

In Iraq, Afghanistan and elsewhere in the world,
we face ruthless enemies that have no respect for
human life and follow no rules of engagement. In our
own military operations, we do everything feasible to
avoid the loss of innocent life. We are very concerned
about civilian casualties and we take deliberate
precautions to minimize the risk to civilian
populations. In Afghanistan, the issue of civilian
casualties is at the top of the list of concerns for
commanders of NATO's International Security
Assistance Force and Operation Enduring Freedom. At
every phase of an operation, from beginning planning
to conducting the operation, precautions are taken to
minimize the risk to civilians. If operations pose a
significant risk to civilians, the operations are changed
or cancelled. As the NATO Secretary General has
stated, "If we cannot neutralize our enemy today
without harming civilians, our enemy will give us the
opportunity tomorrow".

In the first half of 2007, there were over 2,500
incidents of NATO troops in contact with the enemy.
Of those, there were 34 civilian casualty incidents, and
just four of those occurred during deliberately-planned
operations. Despite precautions, civilian casualties can
and do occur in a war zone. When that happens,
commanders work with the Government of Afghanistan
and the United Nations to conduct after-action reviews
with the goal of preventing future incidents. In glaring
contrast, terrorist groups in Afghanistan, Iraq and
elsewhere deliberately target civilians, in flagrant
violation of the most fundamental tenets of
international humanitarian law. It is well past time for
all Member States to have zero tolerance for armed
groups that deliberately target civilians or put civilians
in harm's way with the goal of spreading fear and
destabilizing communities.

Fifthly, with respect to addressing the
humanitarian impact of cluster munitions, it is
important to highlight the decision of the Meeting of
the States Parties to the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons (CCW) last week in Geneva to
instruct Government experts to "negotiate a proposal to
address urgently the humanitarian impact of cluster
munitions, while striking the right balance between
military and humanitarian considerations". The United
States believes that the CCW is the right framework to
take up that issue because it is uniquely well placed to
strike that balance between humanitarian and military
considerations. However, the United States believes
that cluster munitions continue to be legitimate
weapons when employed properly and in accordance
with existing international humanitarian law.

In conclusion, the United States applauds the
Secretary-General's report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and looks forward to
reviewing and considering the report's
recommendations. At this time, however, we note the
importance of the Security Council, when faced with
particular situations threatening international peace and
security, being able and willing to craft responses that
deal with the particularity of the threat at hand. It
follows from this that the adoption of a one-size-fits-all
approach - for example, statements that the Security
Council should in all cases adopt provisions of a
certain type - may not represent the most effective
way for the Security Council to proceed.

As an example, while we agree with the report

that disputes over land tenure can lead to armed

conflict and abuse when civilians are driven from their

homes and their properties are appropriated, it is less

clear to us that United Nations peacekeeping missions

should in all cases be mandated to deal with those
issues in the manner specified in the report.

With respect to the International Criminal Court,
we think it important for recommendations of that type
to distinguish in the future between the positions of
those that are parties to the Rome Statute and of those
that have chosen not to become parties. Different
States have different views about the best mechanism
for combating impunity, and it should not be assumed
that the International Criminal Court holds a privileged
position in the hierarchy of tools available for
combating impunity.

The United States appreciates the efforts of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), as well as OCHA's interest in keeping the
Council apprised and informed about that important
topic. We welcome the idea of OCHA inviting Security
Council members to informal OCHA briefings on
situations seized by the Council, but are not convinced
that a formal working group is necessary.

In closing, the United States would like to
commend OCHA and its humanitarian partners for
their valuable work in providing life-saving assistance
and advocating for the protection of civilians,
particularly children, women, the elderly and other
vulnerable groups.

