Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of Egypt, Sir, welcomes your presidency of
the Security Council for this month and welcomes your
initiative to organize this open debate. Such open
debates are among the ways to strengthen and deepen
the understanding and coordination between the
Security Council and the general membership on issues
that fall within the Council's purview. However, it is
incumbent upon us to start by assessing whether or not
these open debates have achieved their purposes.

The Egyptian delegation expresses its support for
the statement made earlier by the representative of
Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We must admit frankly that some of these open
debates have indeed contributed to strengthening the
overall understanding between the Council and the
general membership regarding critical issues relating to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
But the great majority have gone beyond that domain
and have aimed at reinforcing and entrenching the
Security Council's unusual and wilful encroachment on
issues that, under the Charter, lie primarily among the
prerogatives of the General Assembly and the

Economic and Social Council - in clear disregard of
repeated calls by Member States to put an end this
grave phenomenon.

The Security Council's involvement in issues of
human rights, women, crime, HIV/AIDS and so forth,
and its reported attempts to address economic and
environmental issues cause serious concern among the
general membership of the Organization. This shows
clearly that the Security Council needs genuine reform
of its working methods and an increase in its
membership in order to become more democratic and
more representative of the interests of all Member
States.

Today's debate falls into that grey area, which the
Security Council is attempting to exploit in order to
strengthen its control of an issue that - as document
8/2007/72 indicates - falls primarily within the
prerogatives of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council. Discussing the issue of
security sector reform represents a continuation of the
debates that took place in the Security Council and the
General Assembly on the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission. However, although the Security Council
has the right to discuss the activities of the
Peacebuilding Commission, it is not its prerogative to
look into the application dimensions of security sector
reform, even in cases of States emerging from conflict,
except within the context of its specific responsibility
on this issue, which is limited compared to the wider
responsibilities of the other principal organs of the
United Nations.

At a time when the issue of security sector reform
may have seen limited application by some European
regional organizations and among members of the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD), the attempt to indicate that
there is widespread agreement on a so-called new
concept is far from the reality. That is especially true
considering that security sector reform is linked to a
number of controversial ideas on which there is also no
consensus, such as the "responsibility to protect" and
"human security". These ideas seek to utilize
humanitarian concepts to codify interference in the
internal affairs of States without even reaching
international agreement on the definition of those
ideas, the scope of their application or their
relationship to the sovereignty of each State over its
territory.
Every effort in the field of security sector reform
assumes that there are existing flaws, a matter that
necessitates reaching general agreement - not in the
Security Council but in the General Assembly - on
justifications and on methods to assess the security
situation in order to define such flaws. General
agreement is also needed on the required institutional
reforms and, more important, on the principle that such
reforms must lie fully within national ownership when
it comes to determining needs and priorities, fully
supervising implementation and calling a halt to any
reform at any time.

If the purpose behind proposing this new issue is
to help States emerging from conflict to shoulder their
responsibilities, then the issue is actually about
rehabilitating security institutions, and not about
reform. Such matters fall within the purview of
national capacity-building. Undoubtedly, the
Peacebuilding Commission is better able to marshal
and direct the contributions of the international
community to support the process of rehabilitating
security institutions. It is also better able to coordinate
the efforts exerted in this respect through the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, the good offices of the Secretary-
General and the donor countries and international
financial institutions to deal with the concept of
peacebuilding in a holistic manner, in all its political,
security, economic, social and development
dimensions.

In the light of the procedural and substantive
difficulties that make the Security Council an
unsuitable venue for discussing this new thinking from
the standpoint of application, the delegation of Egypt
believes that it is necessary first to hold a
comprehensive debate in the General Assembly to
reach consensus on the objectives of reforms and on
the scope of their application. This should be
deliberated in the General Assembly along with similar
ideas that we failed to agree upon in the 2005 World
Summit, such as "human security" and the
"responsibility to protect", within a framework that
reaffirms commitment to all fundamental principles of
the United Nations Charter and international law. Most
important among such principles are respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of States and
non-interference in their internal affairs. The Secretary-
General must submit all relevant reports on the issue to
the General Assembly. The Security Council can then

discuss its limited role in supporting the national will
of States to reform their own security sectors, within
the limits of the Council's prerogatives, and only in
areas affecting the maintenance of international peace
and security. Thus, the adoption of a presidential
statement by the Security Council before such a debate
by the general membership of the United Nations
would not send the needed positive signal.

In creating a role for the Security Council in
security sector reform, as envisaged in the concept
paper - to rebuild the capacity of States in ensuring
security, justice and the rule of law, and to spread
democracy on the national level - we must first
uphold the values of democracy, equality and good
governance at the international level within an
integrated framework that strengthens the capacity of
the principal organs of the United Nations to ensure
security, justice and the rule of law - each within its
own institutional competence.

As our peoples and Governments work to deepen
the roots of democracy, respect for human rights and
political reform, our actions must be based on the
values of the societies themselves and must accord
with internal measures that cannot be imposed from
without. Such measures are founded on varied cultures,
customs, traditions and religions, which represent the
elements of human diversity, which in turn is the basis
for the dialogue among civilizations and religions.

If the United Nations is to continue to play its
designated role, we have a collective responsibility.
That responsibility rests on a firm determination to
make the Organization and its principal organs a
crucible of joint international efforts to deal effectively
and immediately with the regional and global issues
and problems that face us, instead of attempting to
deepen the encroachment of the Security Council on
issues that institutionally fall within the competence of
other principal organs.

