Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would first like to warmly welcome our
former colleagues, Mr. Ertugrul Apakan and Mr. Martin
Sajdik, who have undertaken a very difficult task and
for whose efforts we are very grateful. And of course I
would like to thank Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing.

The extremely grave crisis in Ukraine sparked
by a coup d'etat actively supported from outside the
country has now lasted two and a half years. Today,
astonishingly, the Permanent Representatives of the
United States and the United Kingdom have attempted
to tie the start of the crisis to the unification of Crimea
with Russia. There is no need to distort the facts. They
will not succeed in covering up their blame for the
crisis. At the moment Crimea is an island of stability by
comparison with Donbas in former Ukraine.

For the duration of the crisis in Ukraine, the Security
Council has unfortunately been used as a platform for
propaganda. The single, although very significant,
achievement within the walls of this Chamber was the
adoption of resolution 2202 (2015), which approved the
package of measures agreed to on 12 February 2015.
In adopting that resolution, the Council took on the
political responsibility for ensuring the implementation
of the package. That is what we must focus on. In our
conversations, some of our Western colleagues have
admitted that Kyiv is not implementing it. But they also
say that, while President Poroshenko personally agreed
to the document in Minsk, he does not have sufficient
political clout to implement its provisions. We do
not accept such explanations. Why did the current
Ukrainian leaders seize power through a coup d'etat if
they were not capable of governing their country?

We will be keeping a close watch on the behaviour
of the new Ukrainian Government. Mr. Yatsenyuk,
who was well known for his bellicose statements, has
resigned as Prime Minister. It appears that there are
no serious differences between the President and the
new Prime Minister and that the latter does intend to
implement reforms. But it seems clear that there can
be no question of reform succeeding until the bloody
conflict is settled and until Ukrainian society comes
together and rejects its hostile ideology of extreme
nationalism.

In that context, we were interested in the Ukrainian
delegation's proposal to hold this Security Council
meeting today, particularly since President Poroshenko
announced that this was done on his personal
initiative. We need to know what the new power
structure in Kyiv has to say about its intentions with
regard to implementing the Minsk agreements. That
is particularly the case in View of the fact that before
proposing that initiative, the Kyiv authorities, as usual,
consulted Washington, and an assistant to the Secretary
of State visited Kyiv. In their bilateral contacts, our
American partners have said that they would like to
make a constructive contribution to settling the crisis
in Ukraine and would even like to join the Normandy
format. In practice, however, as we have seen more than
once, their interactions with Kyiv have the opposite
effect, leading to a radicalization of the Ukrainian
authorities' positions and increasingly aggressive
rhetoric on their part. Now this has happened again.
With policies such as these, based on a hidden agenda,
Washington is undermining trust in its actions, and, as
everyone knows, not just in Ukraine but in many other
cases. The statement made today by the United States
representative is yet another example of that policy. And
today's statement by the representative of Ukraine was
deeply disappointing, with a lot of provocative rhetoric
and twisting of the facts but zero concrete plans for
implementing the Minsk agreements.

The tasks facing Kyiv in implementing the package
ofmeasures are very clear. The political triad is crucial.
First, it involves changing Ukraine's Constitution and
enacting a permanent law on special status for Donbas.
Secondly, it has to include the enactment of a law
on elections in Donetsk and Luhansk in agreement
with their representatives. Thirdly, it has to settle the
problem of amnesty in connection with the events that
have occurred in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
None of those issues has been resolved. Kyiv continues
to refuse to conduct a direct dialogue with the Donbas
representatives or to agree with them on the steps to be
taken, as provided for in the Minsk agreement. In Kyiv
they love to say that it is Russia that is not implementing
the package of measures. But it is not we who have to
enact all these laws, it is the Verkhovna Rada, and it
is not we who have to put them into effect, it is the
President of Ukraine. It is perfectly clear that they are
simply looking to shift the blame for their problems and
make it somebody else's headache.

We are always hearing from Kyiv that the main
obstacle to solving the fundamental problems with the
settlement is the instability of the ceasefire. However, if
we consider it logically and carefully compare the facts
of the reports of the Special Monitoring Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), it becomes clear whose interests are served
by constantly stirring up the situation on the contact
line. It is no accident that the Ukrainian authorities are
constantly putting out new ideas either about deploying
peacekeeping forces or sending in police with heavy
weapons. That is, after all, a very convenient way to
proceed: first deliberately fan tensions, and then offer
solutions that are unrelated to reality. The sole objective
is to play for time and to distract attention from the
non-implementation of the Minsk agreements. We are
concerned about reports with regard to the worsening
situation in the conflict zone in Donbas. The situation
began to heat up in December 2015, particularly after
Ukrainian armed forces began to occupy towns in the
neutral strip. On some occasions, they even crossed the
contact line as defined by the Minsk agreements. We
View those acts as very dangerous and provocative.

Ukrainian forces must pull out of those towns.
That assessment is supported by the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission. On 17 April, the representatives
of the Ukrainian forces, in discussion with OSCE
observers, did not hide their intention to occupy new
territories in the south-east. The number of violations
of the ceasefire have recently been equal to those in
the heated period of the summer of 2015. On some
days, there have been up to 4,000 such violations.
OSCE statistics indicate that the Ukrainian side is the
side that is most responsible for those violations. From
4 to 21 April, the Special Monitoring Mission noted a
threefold increase in Ukrainian heavy weapons in the
security zone. The most recent report states that only
9 per cent of the declared Ukrainian weapons remain in
their storehouses. A significant portion of the missing
weapons can be found in the forward positions of the
Ukrainian forces. They have continued to use heavy
weapons against Donbas towns. As a result, they are
destroying houses, and civilians are suffering.

Yesterday, the Ukrainian forces, armed with 120-
mm weapons, shelled the checkpoint and crossing point
of Olenivka. Four civilians were killed, including a
pregnant woman. Our British colleague said that he does
not care who is shooting, but it matters to us. There was
a meeting today of the Permanent Council of the OSCE
to consider specific measures to improve the security
situation. We need to have a permanent presence of
OSCE observers in there, and we must get Kyiv to
remove the serious constraints on their movements.
We must also monitor the weapon storehouses, and, if
necessary, put in surveillance cameras there and in the
most dangerous sectors. We must also have "mirror"
patrols, not only on all of the territory of the Donbas
region, but also in the rear guard of the Ukrainian army.
We must step up our efforts to ensure local ceasefires,
and we need to have a Joint Control Coordination Centre
whose patrols are manned by representatives of the
armed forces involved. We must have direct contacts
between the various sections. All those measures could
seriously reduce the number of incidents.

However, it is remains clear, as has been seen
in many regional crises throughout the world, that
maintaining a ceasefire without resolving the political
problems is impossible. Instead of promoting national
reconciliation by implementing the Minsk agreements,
Ukraine continues its witch hunts and efforts to prepare
for war. The latest example of that trend, instead of the
needed reforms, is the decision to set up a ministry to
deal with "anti-terrorist operations" in the "occupied
territories". Ukraine has persisted in calling the
representatives of Donetsk and Luhansk separatists,
despite the fact that those representatives signed the
Minsk agreements and demonstrated their willingness
to continue to live in a Ukrainian State. An economic
blockade remains in place on Donbas. All dissidents
are being called terrorists and separatists, and they are
being persecuted in all kinds of ways.

The standard operating procedure for those in
power in Kyiv has been torture and abuse ofindividuals,
arbitrary detention and extrajudicial punishment, much
of which has been cited by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, but
the Western patrons of human rights prefer not to
talk about that. The American and British Permanent
Representatives have tried again today to slander our
humanitarian convoys into Donbas. From the very
beginning, we called upon the Ukrainian Administration
to organize monitoring at the border, but Kyiv refused.
They have also refused permission to international
entities to carry out such inspections. Generating cheap
propaganda is preferable, it would seem, to relieving
the suffering of the people of Ukraine.

Today, it is not possible to forget the tragic date,
2 May 2014, when, two years ago, 48 people were burned
alive in Odessa and more than 200 were injured. No one
has been punished for that crime. The Council ofEurope
Office in Ukraine has stated that the investigation
carried out by the Ukrainian authorities does not meet
the requirements of the European Convention on Human
Rights, in particular the requirements of independence,
effectiveness, thoroughness and timeliness. We call
upon members of the Security Council not to forget that
tragic event. It is important to establish the truth and to
bring those responsible to justice.

In that context, we can only feel disgust at the
recent appointment to the speakership of the Ukrainian
Parliament, the Supreme Rada, of the odious person
known as the "Commander of the Maidan", who,
according to many witnesses, participated in the
provocative shooting by snipers, both in Kyiv during
the coup and in Odessa. It is not surprising that, when he
assumed that post, he proposed in Parliament that they
should remove the paragraph on the special status of
Donbas from the draft bill on changing the Constitution.
The recent meeting between him and a high-level
representative from Washington, DC, again reminds
us of the mechanism behind those bloody events.
In conclusion, I should like to again stress that
what is extremely important today is to implement
the package of measures on the Minsk agreements, as
well as the strict, consistent and full implementation
of the provisions of those agreements. It is the only
way forward for settling the conflict in Donbas and for
resolving all related problems.

That concludes the main part of my statement.
Now, ifI may be allowed, I would like to make two
brief comments.

As the Council is aware, we were not here to discuss
the issue of Crimea. That is because that is a domestic
affair of the Russian Federation. But since the issue was
raised, I would like to comment. Indeed, the Mejlis ofthe
Crimean Tatars was banned by Russia because of their
extremist activities. In some countries, after not enough
attention was paid to dealing with extremists, we can
see what serious consequences that has wrought. We
will not repeat that mistake. The reality is that, during
recent times, there has been a new wave of movement
of members of Crimean Tatars to Russian Crimea. We
have seen more then 1,000 requests from Uzbekistan
alone, for example, which have been accepted.

Kyiv should concern itself not about the Tatars in
Crimea but about Donbas, where heavy weaponry and
tanks have been attacking the civilian population, their
homes, schools and hospitals. The civilian population
is also under an economic blockade and their social
benefits and pensions have been cut off. Kyiv on a
daily basis is jeopardizing the people's rights to health
and to their very lives. We note that, in recent years
in Ukraine, they banned the Communist Party and
many other parties. They have also suppressed civil
society groups and people's access to the media. In
addition, they have seized and destroyed Orthodox
churches and monasteries under the Moscow Patriarch.
The Parliament has a draft bill aimed at banning the
activities of that Church in Ukraine, although 12,000
people are members of that Church. Such a campaign
could be compared, say, to efforts in a Catholic country
to ban the Catholic Church, for example, because they
did not like that Church. Therefore, our Ukrainian
colleagues and others who are selective human rights
activists should not preach sermons to us.

Now another minor comment, if I may. Mr. Sajdik
in his statement said something that seemed rather
strange to me. He said he requires an answer to the
issue of Kyiv's control over its borders. But the answer
to that can be found in paragraphs 9 and 11 of the Minsk
agreements" package of measures, which clearly state
that, after elections are held and the new Constitution
is adopted, Ukraine will then regain control over its
border. There are eight paragraphs that deal with what
exactly should figure in the Constitution about the
special status of eastern Ukraine, Donbas. The answers
are there. We must work in line with the provisions
of the agreements and draw up laws in consultation
with the representatives of the regions concerned. The
Ukrainian authorities do not want to do that, insisting
on restoring what they refer to as their territorial
sovereignty and control, all of which is a cause for
serious concern.

I have a further point. A very important fact has
been communicated to me. When I spoke about the
increased presence of Ukrainian armed forces on the
contact line, this is what I said: the most recent report
of the Special Monitoring Mission noted that Ukrainian
storehouses account for just 9 per cent of the arms stock.
Most of the rest of those weapons can be found in front-
line positions, which demonstrates the position of Kyiv
with regard to a peaceful settlement in the Donbas.

