Ms. Leendertse (Germany): Germany is firmly
committed to a rules-based international order and
multilateral cooperation, which is why Germany,
together with France and other States, hosted a
ministerial event during the high-level week here
in New York under the auspices of the Alliance for
Multilateralism, with the participation of ministers
from more than 50 States. Global challenges need to be
addressed together, in a joint effort and in a multilateral
framework that is able to defend what has been agreed.

What is true at the global level is also true at
the regional level, including when it comes to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The best and only way
to achieve a just and lasting solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is for the international community
to work together, remain committed to a common set
of rules and values, and do so in the framework of the
United Nations.

Germany therefore remains fully and firmly
committed to a negotiated two-State solution based on
the internationally agreed parameters. We believe a two-
State solution is the only viable answer to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict that meets Israeli and Palestinian
security needs, fulfils Palestinian aspirations for
statehood and sovereignty, ends the occupation that
began in 1967, resolves all permanent status issues, and
guarantees equal rights for all inhabitants.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is first and foremost
a political conflict that requires a political solution.
Addressing the economic aspects of the conflict alone
cannot replace a political solution negotiated between
the parties for the purposes of achieving lasting peace.
In line with the European Union and our European
partners, we welcome and support any initiative that
aims at reviving the peace process as long as it is based
on a commitment to a Viable two-State solution, as
internationally agreed, and as long as it is acceptable to
both parties, Israelis and Palestinians.

Joint efforts to restore a political perspective for the
resumption of the peace process are urgently needed.
We therefore support any attempt to restart meaningful
direct talks and negotiations between the parties with
the objective of reaching ajust and lasting solution.

There will not be and there cannot be a fast track
to peace. Forgoing the most controversial questions
of the peace process by taking them off the table or
creating facts on the ground will not lead to sustainable
peace. We therefore call on all parties to refrain from
taking unilateral measures and collectively counter
the negative developments on the ground that are
undermining the viability of a negotiated two-State
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis
of the internationally agreed parameters.

One of the main obstacles to a political settlement
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is, in our View,
the continued settlement activities in the territories
occupied since 1967. We reiterate our position that
Israeli settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories are illegal under international law and

undermine the prospects for a negotiated two-State
solution. We call upon Israel to end the expansion of
settlements, the legalization of settlement outposts and
the demolition, seizure and evictions of Palestinian-
owned structures. Germany will not recognize any
changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including those
concerning Jerusalem, other than those agreed upon by
the parties. Resolution 2334 (2016) needs to be fully
implemented, not only regarding settlement activities.
The obligations it sets out with regard to acts of terror,
violence against civilians, incitement, provocative
actions and inflammatory rhetoric need to be honoured
as well.

Germany condemns all attacks on Israel, including
the repeated firing of rockets from Gaza by Hamas and
other groups, in the strongest possible terms. Indeed,
Hamas and other groups must stop firing rockets
from Gaza into Israel. They must renounce the path of
violence and allow the Palestinian Authority to return
to Gaza. Against this backdrop, Germany welcomes
the announcement by President Abbas to hold elections
in the near future. Germany remains steadfast in
its commitment to Israel's security as a Jewish and
democratic State. We will not be silent whenever Israel's
security or right to exist is questioned or compromised.

The increase in Violence and provocative rhetoric
and actions is deeply worrying. We strongly urge all
sides to de-escalate, exercise restraint and refrain from
provocative rhetoric and actions. Considering recent
events at the Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount,
we recall the paramount importance of maintaining
the agreed status quo for keeping the peace at these
holy sites.

The deteriorating humanitarian and economic
situation in Gaza, in particular the situation in the
health-care sector, remains deeply worrisome. We also
call upon Israel and the Palestinian Authority to do their
part to improve the dire humanitarian situation in Gaza.
We encourage States Members of the United Nations
to step up their financial support in order to close the
current funding gaps of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), and to ensure the provision of basic
health-care services in Gaza.

UNRWA remains indispensable for meeting the
basic needs of Palestinian refugees. By providing
humanitarian assistance, health-care services and
education, UNRWA is key to maintaining stability in
the region. As the largest bilateral donor, Germany
remains firmly committed to UNRWA and continues
to significantly contribute to the Agency's budget. We
encourage others to similarly continue their political and
financial support for UNRWA's crucial work. However,
we also expect UNRWA to work arduously towards the
swift termination of ongoing internal investigations.

