Mr. Atieh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation joins you, Mr. President, in
welcoming Mr. Harri Holkeri, who is with us today. We
congratulate him on his appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. We also wish to thank him for his
comprehensive and useful briefing on developments in
the situation in Kosovo.

My delegation is pleased to hear Mr. Holkeri
confirm the essential priorities of the Mission, namely,
consolidating the rule of law, improving the security
situation, strengthening the rights of minorities and
returnees and promoting economic development. We
support the Special Representative's focus on the need
to improve the security situation in order to prevent
acts of violence that could lead to a setback for the
peace process and undermine the progress made thus
far. We encourage Mr. Holkeri to participate in the
preparations for the direct dialogue on practical matters
between Pristina and Belgrade. That dialogue is one of
the benchmarks required to fulfil the necessary
standards before Kosovo's status can be addressed.

We are satisfied with the process of transferring
non-reserved competencies to the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in accordance with
chapter 5 of the Constitutional Framework, so long as
those responsibilities are transferred in a gradual and
controlled manner and in cooperation with the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government. In that
regard, we point to the need to adopt measures at the
local level to improve the effectiveness of municipal
administrations and their capacity to respond to the
needs of citizens, as well as to overcome political
obstacles that may have an impact on the work of
municipal councils. In that connection, we underscore
the need to ensure that recruitment for the civil service
is characterized by transparency and represents the
ethnic balance of Kosovo's population. In addition, the
participation of women must be ensured in order to
guarantee the effectiveness of the public sector.

My delegation reaffirms the need to strengthen
the rule of law and to protect the rights of ethnic
minorities in Kosovo. There is also a need to combat
organized crime, monitor the borders and prevent
trafficking in weapons and drugs. We also emphasize
the need to ensure the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons under secure and safe conditions, as
well as to guarantee the freedom of movement. That is
an important concern to many minorities. In fact, the
feeling of heightened insecurity has a negative impact
on the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons to their homes and properties; this produces an
economic and social imbalance for the population of
the entire region.

My delegation would also like to reaffirm and
support the comments made by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2003/996), in which he says that
economic and social development are important for
strengthening Kosovo's stability and for attracting
regional and international investors who could invest in
many economic projects that could produce the
economic development desired by the people of
Kosovo.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
express its support for Mr. Holkeri. We are prepared to
cooperate with him and with the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo to ensure
the security and stability of the province and of the
Balkan region as a whole.

