Mr. Touray (Sierra Leone): I have the privilege
and honour to address the Security Council this
morning to express our thanks and appreciation for the
very effective and speedy way the Council has treated
some of the issues affecting my country, Sierra Leone.

We are grateful that the Council has deliberated
on this matter and that its voice was unanimous in
arriving at decisions affecting the sanctions issue and
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone. These
10-55432
decisions mark a very important milestone in the
ongoing recovery of my country from conflict. The
lifting of the sanctions imposed on Sierra Leone serves
as an important signal that we are indeed moving along
the right path in our post-conflict recovery process.

Although of course there are still some
bottlenecks to be resolved, we think that there will now
at least be a free-trade flow of goods. Some other
issues that were affecting the growth of the economy
will now be resolved, and problems relating to
insurance freight and some of the doubts that had been
entertained about dealing with us because of the
existence of the sanctions will now go away.

The Council's decision to lift the remaining
sanctions on Sierra Leone has created quite an
important enabling environment for the Government to
continue the implementation of the priorities it has laid
out for itself based on the Agenda for Change. The
10-55432
multiplier effects of peace consolidation and economic
development will of course undoubtedly continue.

I would also like to acknowledge and commend
the Council's very speedy response and action, and we
hope that this unanimity will continue. For our part, the
political will is there, and we will continue to make
sure that we do not disappoint expectations and that the
trust and confidence shown in Sierra Leone are not
misplaced. We will continue to do our part to make
sure that we follow the dictates of international norms
and pursue the right path. We thank Council members
for their magnanimity, and will never forget it.

