Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2013/535) and Special Representative Jan Kubis for
his briefing. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Tanin for his statement today.

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I
would also like to add a few remarks in my national
capacity.

Afghanistan is about to enter a crucial phase of its
history. From now until the end of 2014 it will witness
a series of important moments involving the closely
connected political and security aspects of its transition.
I am referring to the presidential elections of April
2014, the subsequent handover from President Karzai
to his successor, the winding-down of the International
Security Assistance Force and the defining of the forces
that will take over from it.

In terms of security, the beginning of the fifth
and last phase of the transition process, on the basis of
which the Afghan national security forces will assume
full control of the territory, was accompanied by a
fighting season that produced an unending series of

high-profile terrorist attacks and victims. This phase is
a source of concern, and we cannot let our guard down,
given the forthcoming critical transfer of responsibility
for nationwide security from NATO to Afghanistan.
Nevertheless, the Afghan armed forces have made clear
and steady progress in addressing the demanding daily
challenge of controlling the territory and ensuring the
country's security.

At the political level, where security continues
to be a major issue, the lead-up to the presidential
elections has now begun in a symbolic way with the
presentation of candidatures. We would like to express
our appreciation for the Kabul authorities' change
of pace in defining an institutional framework for
regulating the elections through the recently passed
election law. It is Italy's hope that until the new Head of
State is proclaimed, the Afghan authorities will take all
action necessary to guarantee an inclusive, transparent
and credible election process and to promote universal
rules respecting and representing every aspect of civil
society and the various political parties.

In the upcoming elections, United Nations support
for the Afghan authorities through the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will be
invaluable. UNAMA will of course play a crucial role
in helping to strengthen the legitimacy and integrity of
the elections. Equally important during the transition
period will be its support for Afghan institutions as
they gradually take on responsibility for the country's
civic and economic development. These and other
issues will be the focus of the debate to be held during
the meeting of the International Contact Group in New
York on September 20.

I would like to make another point, which is that
there can be no prospect of stabilization in Afghanistan
without national reconciliation. Italy affirms its support
for the peace process, recognizing Afghanistan's full
ownership of that process, and hopes that the transition
will not lead to any reversals of the gains that have been
made in the areas of democracy, civil rights and gender
equality, or to any concessions to terrorism.

In the regional context, Italy recognizes the
unquestionable progress that has been made through
the Istanbul Process, which we support, and wishes to
emphasize the importance of implementing the plans of
action adopted in Almaty in April. We look forward to
the outcome of the next meeting of senior officials in
New York. Lastly, we hope that the recent establishment
of a more cordial climate between Afghanistan and
Pakistan woll bring positive developments in the areas
of regional cooperation and the inter-Afghan dialogue.

In closing, Italy wishes to reiterate the message
of the Tokyo Conference. As we look forward to the
transformation decade, the continued support of
the international community for Afghanistan will
be linked to conditions concerning Afghanistan's
attainment of measurable results in areas such as the
democratic and electoral process, the fight against
corruption, administrative and economic governance
and the protection of human rights, particularly those
of women. Our assistance cannot ignore the principles
of reciprocity, conditionality and responsibility
that remain mainstays of the partnership between
Afghanistan and the international community on the
one hand and between Afghanistan and Italy on the
other.

I would like to take this opportunity to once again
express Italy's appreciation for the role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan, starting with UNAMA.

