Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's important debate.

I would like to begin by aligning myself with
the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union.

The Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations
identifies one of the aims of the United Nations as that
of establishing conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties and
other sources of international law can be maintained.
The Charter, the foundation stone of the Organization,
recognizes that the rule of law must be at the heart of
our shared efforts to create a peaceful world.

It is important that as we strive collectively to
abide by the Charter of the United Nations, we remain
vigilant in differentiating between the rule of law
and rule by law. The difference is human rights, the
universal freedoms and rights of individuals. Rule by
law can negate those rights, whereas the rule of law
operationalizes them, thereby ensuring their promotion
and protection in peace or war.

Ireland's commitment to an international order
based on the rule oflaw is enshrined in our Constitution
and reflected in Ireland's acceptance of the compulsory
jurisdiction ofthe International Court of Justice. Ireland
is party to the core international and European human
rights treaties and strongly supports strengthening
the multilateral human rights framework and the
importance of respect for international humanitarian
law in all circumstances.

However, legal norms without enforcement are
clearly insufficient. Ireland therefore supports, among
other measures, universal adherence to the Rome
Statute, which established the International Criminal
Court (ICC). We seek to ensure accountability for the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes of concern to
the international community, to deliver justice for the
victims and, ultimately, we seek to prevent such crimes
from being committed.

The year 2018 is particularly important, as it marks
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Rome
Statute as well as the coming into effect of the Court's
jurisdiction with respect to the crime of aggression.
Ireland is working to ensure ratification of the Kampala
amendment on the crime of aggression, which is a key
foreign policy priority.

Ongoing violations ofinternational law - including
international humanitarian law and human rights
law - in situations of conflict are of grave concern.
Those violations, which include attacks by both State
forces and non-State armed groups on health facilities
and personnel, are unacceptable. The regularity and
severity of those attacks risks normalizing such action
and disrupting the delivery of humanitarian aid to those
in most need. The deliberate denial of humanitarian aid
to vulnerable populations, or the use of humanitarian
access as a bargaining chip in peace negotiations, is
never acceptable.

The Security Council must play its role in referring
violations to the ICC, and the Council must work to
ensure that any referral is accompanied by ongoing
support to the Court, particularly with respect to
the execution of arrest warrants and the provision of
adequate financial support.

Ireland continues to support reform of the Security
Council veto and believes that, at a minimum, the
use of the veto must be restricted, in accordance with
the France-Mexico initiative and the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group code of conduct
regarding genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes.

Where the Security Council is unable to act, and
therefore unable to fulfil its primary responsibility
to work towards the purposes and principles of the
United Nations, other organs - including the General
Assembly 4 must act. In that context, Ireland also
wishes to reiterate its continuing political and financial
support for the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic to assist in
the investigation and prosecution of the most serious
crimes under international law committed in Syria.

At a time when serious violations of international
law and international humanitarian law are all too
common, and where the multilateral rules-based system
itselfis under threat, we call on all States to support the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, uphold international law and strictly abide
by the decisions of the Security Council and other
relevant organs.

