Mr. Cardi (Italy): The latest nuclear test by
North Korea represents, in our view, a grave and
reckless provocation that violates successive Security
Council resolutions. Our Minister for Foreign Affairs
immediately condemned this act in the strongest terms.

Since the early hours after the test, Prime Minister
Gentiloni has been in close contact with our main
European and international partners, confirming
that Italy will continue to do its part for a firm
and cohesive response at the international and the
European Union levels to pressure Pyongyang to desist
from its continued provocations. As our Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Alfano, stressed, by pursuing its
nuclear and ballistic programmes, Pyongyang poses
a clear threat to international peace and security and
is increasingly and seriously challenging the global
non-proliferation regime. North Korea is the only
country, as was recalled, that has tested a nuclear
device in the twenty-first century. Such a breach of the
international moratorium on nuclear tests highlights
once more the urgent need for the entry into force of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.

Also following an initiative by the Italian presidency,
this morning the leaders of the Group of Seven issued
a statement urging the full implementation of Security
Council resolutions, stating their readiness to adopt
further measures to ensure that North Korea reverts
to international legality and recalling the primary role
of the Council to that end. We therefore express our
full solidarity with the Governments of the region,
as well as their peoples, who are directly affected by
the consequences of Pyongyang's irresponsible acts,
and reaffirm that North Korea's nuclear and missile
programmes are a global threat that concerns us all.

The regime of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea continues to systematically defy the authority of
the Council and the will ofthe international community
as a whole. Its latest nuclear test poses a new level of
threat. It is imperative that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea immediately put a complete stop to
the development of its missile and nuclear programmes
in a verifiable and irreversible manner.

While underlining the importance that Italy
attaches to the continued unity of the Security Council
on this matter, we believe that under the current
circumstances a firm and determined response by
the Council is the right course of action. Therefore,
we encourage the Security Council to adopt further
measures in response to the latest nuclear test. We will
conduct our work constructively to that end, bearing in
mind that sanctions must remain a tool that is part of
a broader strategy aimed at a peaceful and long-term
solution of the issue of the Korean peninsula and the
region as a whole. In that vein, we are committed to
ensuring, as we affirmed in resolution 2371 (2017), that
the sanctions regime does not have a negative effect on
the humanitarian situation in the country.

Finally, as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), I will continue our
efforts to ensure the entire United Nations membership's
comprehensive and further implementation of the
sanctions regime. We will soon be organizing another
briefing open to the whole membership on resolution
2371 (2017), and I hereby appeal to all Member States
to attend it. An effective sanctions regime will continue
to be essential to ensuring that the leadership of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea calculates the
price of its challenge to the international community
and comes back to the negotiating table for credible
multilateral talks.

