Mr. Mohammad Kamal (Malaysia): First and
foremost, my delegation would like to thank Mrs.
Sadako Ogata for her comprehensive, lucid and candid
swan song briefing to the Council on the situation of
refugees. My delegation has always benefited
immensely from Mrs. Ogata's trenchant briefings, such
as the one we heard this afternoon, and on other
numerous occasions in this Council, particularly the
most recent one, on 13 January 2000, on the refugee
situation in Africa.

We are grateful for her overview on the refugee
situation and concur with her perspicacious analysis of
the problem, and we support her suggestions and
proposals, such as those that we have just heard this
afternoon on peace operations and peace-building. We
hope this Council can act upon these proposals.

In this regard, Malaysia supports the
strengthening of the emergency preparedness and
response capacity of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to cope
with refugee crises that need immediate action. We also
support its efforts to create a secure environment for
refugee-populated areas and humanitarian operations;
among other things, there is a need for the refugees and
combatants to be separated and the need to deploy
international civilian monitors and police to ensure the
safety and security of the refugees. The international
community, too, must pay more attention to the critical
post-conflict phase in which refugees need
international assistance to resettle upon their return.

We agree with Mrs. Ogata that effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration will
contribute to the creation of a safe environment for
refugees returning home. Hence, there is a need for the
Council to look once again at the issue of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, which was first
brought before the Council during Malaysia's
presidency in July last year.

Like others before me, my delegation would like
to pay a sincere tribute to Mrs. Ogata for her
outstanding services, dedication and unstinting
commitment over the past decade to the elevation of
the plight of refugees throughout the world, be it in
Africa, Asia or the Balkans. We deeply appreciate her
enormous contribution to millions of the world's most
unfortunate people. She and her staff have indeed
become a beacon of hope for those people.

We share the Secretary-General's sentiments that
we all owe an enormous debt to Mrs. Ogata and that we
have all got so used to working with her that she will
be very, very hard to replace. We wish her the very
best, good health and success in her future endeavours.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity also
to congratulate Mrs. Ogata's successor, Mr. Ruud
Lubbers, the former Prime Minister of the Netherlands,
and to wish him all the best in his future challenging
undertakings.

Finally, I should like to recall a statement made
by Mr. Samuel Johnson way back in 1759, in which he
said that "great works are performed not by strength,
but by perseverance". That is how we would like to
remember Mrs. Sadako Ogata.

