Mr. Ladsous: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to further brief the Security Council on
recent tensions on the border between the Sudan and
South Sudan, and recent reports of bombings in the
border areas. I will also say a few words on the report
of the creation of a new military coalition between the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North and
Darfur rebel groups.

UNMISS dispatched a verification mission to
Yida, Unity state, on Sunday, 13 November. A joint
team of civilian and military personnel, including
mine-action staff, confirmed that four bombs had been
dropped on 10 November. Three of these bombs
exploded and one did not. The fourth bomb landed on a
schoolyard but, fortunately, did not explode. According
to different eyewitness accounts of the incident, the
bombs were dropped by a white Antonov aircraft
coming from the Sudan.

The Government of the Sudan has denied that
these bombings took place on South Sudanese territory.
Luckily, no casualties or injuries were suffered during
this incident. The Nuba populations that had fled the
Yida refugee camp following the bombing are now
slowly returning. I am also in a position to confirm that
bombing took place in Guffa, in Maban county, Upper
Nile state, on 8 November. At least four bombs were
dropped.

Regarding reports of fighting in Kwek, in Manyo
county, Upper Nile state, on 11 November, UNMISS
could not verify the allegations of cross-border
incursions. It confirmed that fighting took place in the
northern part of Manyo county, however, and supported
the medical evacuation of nine seriously injured Sudan
People's Liberation Army soldiers from Renk to Juba.

(spoke in French)

As stated by the Secretary-General yesterday, the
escalation of rhetoric between the Government of the
Sudan and the Government of South Sudan,
particularly in regard to cross-border support to their
respective rebel groups and incursions into one
another's territory, is extremely worrying. The African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel chaired by
President Mbeki has called for a meeting of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism between the
Government of Sudan and the Government of South
Sudan on 18 November. As the Council is probably
aware, the Joint Political and Security Mechanism is a
Cabinet-level bilateral body agreed upon by the two
Heads of States to resolve disputes and to support the
consolidation of peaceful relations between the two
countries.

I would like to urge both Governments to seize
this opportunity to de-escalate the current situation and
move swiftly towards the establishment of the joint
border monitoring mechanism they agreed upon on
30 July. Only the two parties, working together, can
efficiently and effectively manage security at their
common border. As stated by the Secretary-General his
September report (S/2011/603) on Abyei, the United
Nations stands ready to support them in that respect.

The Panel will also resume post-Comprehensive
Peace Agreement negotiations at the end of the week in
Addis Ababa. In that connection as well, I would like
11-59366
to urge both Governments to demonstrate the necessary
flexibility and commitment and to agree swiftly on a
package of measures to resolve remaining differences
on financial transitional arrangements, Abyei and
border demarcation. Both meetings are critical to
reduce tensions, but the parties will also need to make
sure that any efforts aimed at providing support to
rebel groups one another's territory seizes immediately.

We also received reports this weekend of the
establishment of a new military alliance of Darfur rebel
movements and the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement-North, which is calling for the forceful
removal from power of the Government of the Sudan.
That represents a stage in a pattern of escalation that is
counter-productive. The United Nations continues to
stress that all parties to the different conflicts between
the Government of the Sudan and its peripheries need
to return to the negotiating table and resolve their
differences through political dialogue. There is no
military solution to the Sudan conflicts and all military
actions only endanger the lives of innocent civilians,
who deserve a return to peace and stability after so
many years of fighting.

