Mr. Thoms (Germany): I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his briefing today, and for
his excellent work. We commend him on his very
successful start at the head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also
thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime for his briefing today.

Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by observer of the European Union earlier in this debate.

This meeting takes place at a pivotal moment for
Afghanistan and its international friends and supporters.
Since our debate in September, Afghanistan has
experienced the first democratic change of Government
in its long and often painful history. President Ghani
and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah have formed
a National Unity Government that aims at building a
stable, prosperous, democratic and inclusive country.
We strongly believe that these goals serve the interests
of all Afghans and therefore they have our full support.

In a few days, NATO's International Security
Assistance Force mission will come to an end.
Afghanistan will then be fully responsible for the
internal and national security of their country. Of
course, sceptics remain; they ask whether Afghanistan
will be up to that task. While we are concerned about
the recent rise in terrorist acts in Kabul, we still believe
that, on the whole, Afghanistan's security forces have
already answered that question themselves - over
the past months, they were in the front lines and in
the summer they successfully secured two rounds of
presidential elections.

Despite those remarkable achievements, we agree
with Special Representative Haysom that the gains
made are still fragile. As of January 2015, based on
an invitation by the Afghan Government, NATO and
its partners will therefore continue to train and assist
Afghan security forces under the non-combat Resolute
Support Mission. Today, in fact just 10 minutes ago,
the German Parliament approved our own substantial
contribution to that Mission. We will provide up to
850 troops, to be based in Mazar-e-Sharif and Kabul,
making Germany the second-largest troop contributor
to Resolute Support. In this regard, let me commend
Security Council members, and particularly Australia
as the pen holder, on the recent adoption of resolution
2189 (2014), welcoming the establishment of the
Mission. The resolution sends out the clear political
message that the international community continues
to stand by Afghanistan and feels committed to its
stability and security even beyond 2014.

Securing a stable future for Afghanistan requires
that international civilian assistance does not come
to an abrupt end. At the London Conference on
Afghanistan on 4 December, therefore, Germany
renewed its commitment to maintaining its high level
of civilian assistance, €430 million per year up to
2016. This pledge builds on a quid pro quo approach
as well as on the sound and ambitious reform agenda
that President Ghani and Government Chief Executive
Officer Abdullah presented in London and in meetings
with Chancellor Merkel and Foreign Minister
Steinmeier on 5 December in Berlin. We commend the
two leaders' clear commitment to tackling corruption,
safeguarding human rights, strengthening the role of
women, mobilizing the private sector and stabilizing
Afghanistan's worrying fiscal situation. The swift
merit-based formation of a new cabinet of ministers
will play a key role. In this regard, we also continue
to strongly support UNAMA and all the United
Nations agencies in assisting the Afghan people and in
coordinating the international community's assistance.
We deem it important that UNAMA remain present,
not only in Kabul, but also throughout the country.

While looking at the challenges that certainly lie
ahead for Afghanistan, we should not forget what we
have achieved since the fall of the Taliban regime. Life
expectancy has increased from 45 to 60 years. Maternal
and child mortality rates have dropped tremendously.
More and more girls are attending schools. Some
200,000 students are enrolled at Afghan universities.
Roads have been built, and there is electricity and water
in all major cities. That is real progress.

Most importantly, however, Afghanistan has
developed a strong civil society that will not allow a
rollback of their hard-earned freedoms and rights.
Supporting these brave Afghan men and women
certainly deserves our continued attention and
commitment. Germany will continue to stand by the
Afghan Government and people as they write a new
chapter in their history.

