Mr. Bolton (United States of America): I would
like to welcome President-elect Preval to New York,
and I look forward to his visit in Washington
tomorrow.
Haiti has made great strides forward over the last
year. On 7 February, millions of Haitians went to the
polls. More than 60 per cent of registered voters cast
their ballots and voted for new, democratic leadership.
This was a great day for Haiti and for the many nations
that have supported Haiti's return to democracy.

President-elect Preval now has a clear
opportunity to lead the Haitian people into a brighter
future. We have heard his call for continued support
from the international community, and my Government
is committed to helping the Haitian people move down
that road to democracy. By the end of 2006, the United
States will have committed nearly half a billion dollars
to Haiti's reconstruction and return to democracy since
the Interim Cooperation Framework began in July
2004. Many other donors have been generous as well,
but Haiti will still need robust assistance for the next
decade to address its many challenges in achieving a
stable democracy and creating sustainable economic
growth. My Government looks forward to the next
pledging conference this summer, and I am confident
that that conference will show the international
community's continued generosity.

The Haitian people have great expectations of
their new leader, as does the international community.
We take Mr. Preval's assurances to heart that his
Government will be inclusive, broad-based and work to
respond to the aspirations of all Haiti's citizens. With
the presidential election completed and run-off
legislative elections scheduled for 21 April, Haitian
authorities, with support from the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the
Organization of American States (OAS), should
redouble their efforts to hold timely local and
municipal elections, which are critical to the
democratization process.

Essential government services at the local level
are a foundation of governance in Haiti and the starting
point for the selection of the Supreme Court and the
Permanent Electoral Council.

The logistical and financial issues that affected
the first round of elections should not hinder local
elections. The United States is prepared to do its part,
and we call on the international community to
contribute as well.

The United States salutes the contributions made
to MINUSTAH by a variety of partners in this
hemisphere and around the world, and we pay
particular tribute to the leadership of Brazil and
Canada. While the security situation has improved
significantly in recent months, MINUSTAH should
redouble its efforts to maintain a secure environment,
particularly in conflict-ridden neighbourhoods of Port-
au-Prince such as Cite Soleil.

Beyond immediate stabilization, however, the
Council is right to focus on the vital task of preparing
the Haitian Government to face security challenges on
its own. The United States reiterates its support for the
development and reform of the Haitian national police.
We call upon President-elect Preval's Government to
cooperate fully with MINUSTAH to vet and train both
new recruits and current officers. The
professionalization of the police force alone is not
enough; the justice system must also be strengthened.
All the challenges cannot be addressed overnight, but
we are already seeing promising signs. In particular, I
would like to commend the leadership of Haitian
national police Director-General Mario Andresol.

While addressing lawlessness, we should also
address the lack of basic services and insecurity. The
Bel Air model of stabilization - a civilian-military
effort between the Brazilian contingent of MINUSTAH
and the United States Agency for International
Development to provide jobs, training and public
works projects that improve the lives of Bel Air's
residents - can serve as a model for bringing security
and development to Haiti's most conflict-ridden areas.

The United States remains fully committed to
ensuring that the necessary work is accomplished to
eliminate obstacles along Haiti's path. We also
understand that it is ultimately the responsibility of the
Government and the people of Haiti to consolidate real
and lasting democratic reform.

