Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, at the outset, to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. It is my hope that your wisdom and
experience will inspire the Council to live up to its
great responsibilities. I would like also to express our
appreciation to the Italian delegation for its presidency
of the Council last month. Allow me also to extend my
thanks to Mr. Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing. I
6

stress also that the Lebanese delegation endorses the
statement made by the representative of Saudi Arabia
on behalf of the Group of Arab States.

I will start by listing the names of some of the
"terrorists" whom Israel has killed in the Gaza Strip:
Amir al-Yaziji, 8 years old; Sara Sliman Abu Ghazaal,
8 years old; Mahmoud Moussa Abu Ghazaal, 8 years
old; Fady Mansour Al-kafarna, 10 years old. This is not
an exhaustive list of those killed, but merely a few
killed during the last several days and months of the
latest Israeli aggression in Gaza. They have now joined
the roster of "terrorists" who have been killed by
Israel. They have joined Aiya Al-Asdar, 8 years old;
Mohammad Amin, 6 years old; Nasr Allah Abu Salima,
5 years old; and many others.

That is indeed but a sample of the victims of the
punishment imposed by Israel on the population of the
Gaza Strip on the pretext that the regime there is
hostile to it. And killing is only one part of the last two
years of continuous and escalating punishment
involving siege, isolation, starvation and
impoverishment, none of which makes a distinction
between those who are armed and those who are
civilians, or between the old and the young, or between
the healthy and the sick.

Once Israel had worn Gaza down with its
strangulating siege, by which it restricted the mobility
of individuals and goods, it declared Gaza a "hostile
entity" and prohibited the delivery of fuel, gas, medical
supplies and food to the territory. In so doing, Israel
plunged Gaza into darkness, and brought it to the brink
of a humanitarian catastrophe, despite the warnings of
this Organization.

It is unacceptable to the human conscience to see
scores of people dying because they cannot find
enough bread to eat, or because they are too ill or
unable to find cars to move them to hospitals - or
because if they are moved, the hospitals do not have
the capacity to provide proper treatment.

Even those who have been killed are not spared
punishment. The situation is so bad that the spokesman
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
Mr. Christopher Gunness, has said that the Palestinians
cannot even find the cement to make graves for the
dead.
08-21448
This is the policy of collective punishment
practised by Israel against the Palestinians of the Gaza
Strip through a clear decision. Israel threatens to
continue this policy despite the announcement of a
partial lifting of the siege. Yesterday, the Israeli Prime
Minister, Ehud Olmert, said, "We are trying to hit only
those involved in terrorism, but also signalling to the
population in Gaza that it cannot be free from
responsibility for the situation".

This policy constitutes a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law, in particular the regime
for the protection of civilians enshrined in the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949. Specifically, article 33 of
the Convention explicitly states that

"No protected person may be punished for
an offence he or she has not personally
committed. Collective penalties and likewise all
measures of intimidation or of terrorism are
prohibited.

"Pillage is prohibited.

"Reprisals against protected persons and
their property are prohibited."

The same rules are set forth in article 50 of The Hague
Rules of War and Occupation of 1907. Furthermore, in
its explanation of aspects of article 33, the
International Committee of the Red Cross condemned
collective punishment because it punishes both the
guilty and the innocent equally and because it
contradicts all humanitarian concepts and notions of
justice.

There are some who might say that Israel has the
right to defend itself or some justification for the
crimes it commits. But this right to self-defence, which
is established by international norms and conventions,
in particular the Charter of the United Nations, is a
right that cannot be used as a pretext to wage war or
exact revenge against innocent civilians. In any case, it
is a right that does not permit the excessive or
disproportionate use of force - which is what is taking
place in Gaza today.

It is no coincidence that Mr. John Dugard,
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, in a
statement he issued on 18 January from the United
Nations Office at Geneva, stated that
08-21448

"Recent action violates the strict prohibition on
collective punishment contained in the Fourth
Geneva Convention. It also violates one of the
basic principles of international humanitarian law
that military action must distinguish between
military targets and civilian targets... Those
responsible for such cowardly action are guilty of
serious war crimes and should be prosecuted and
punished for their crimes".

Some might say that Israel has ended its
occupation of the Gaza Strip. This is true: Israel has
withdrawn its forces from the Gaza Strip and
dismantled its settlements there. But it has kept its
stranglehold on the arteries of life in the Strip. It
controls the land, sea and airspace of the Gaza Strip,
and controls the daily life of its population. Thus, Gaza
can clearly and unambiguously be described as the
largest prison in the world.

It is true that Israel's crimes in Gaza did not start
with the siege. These are continuing, escalating crimes
against the population of the Gaza Strip. The majority
of the population are the victims of a policy of
displacement and expulsion which coincided with the
establishment of the State of Israel.

Let us recall that more than two thirds of the
population of the Gaza Strip - around 70 per cent -
is comprised of refugees with no clear address in their
own land, save those of the refugee camps of Jabalia,
Shati, Nuseirat, Deir el-Balah, Maghazi, Khan Younis,
Rafah and Bureij. All are addresses targeted by Israel,
just as the terrorist organizations Haganah, the Stern
Gang and the Irgun targeted the original addresses of
the camps in southern Palestine in 1948 with massacres
and campaigns of intimidations to force residents to
flee Palestine. Those addresses are today part of Israel,
as are Asdood, Fallujah, Yasoor, Kalkabbah, Beer Al-
Saba'a and hundreds of other villages and towns.

The crimes are continuing to escalate. We will not
pose the question: Until when? The duty of the
international community is to save the Gaza Strip and
its population immediately from all forms of collective
punishment imposed by Israel. That is the only option.
That is a decision we must take if we are to fulfil the
hope of achieving just and comprehensive peace in the
region, instead of burying it piece by piece with every
child buried.
