Mr. Baja (Philippines): This is the third
resolution - the third child born of the Security
Council's consideration of the situation in the Sudan,
in particular Darfur. At this late hour - in the twilight
of the Brazilian presidency - we cannot but recall a
story that originated in Wales, the home of the sponsor
of resolution 1593 (2005). There was a middle-aged
couple who had two stunningly beautiful teenage
daughters, but who decided to try one last time for the
son they had always wanted. After months of trying,
the wife became pregnant, and, sure enough, delivered
a healthy baby boy nine months later. The happy father
rushed to the nursery to see his new son. He took one
look at him, but was horrified to find that he was the
ugliest child he had ever seen. He went to his wife and
said that there was no way that he could have fathered
the child. "Look at the two beautiful daughters I
fathered", he cried. Then he gave her a stern look, and
asked, "Have you been fooling around?" The wife
smiled sweetly and said, "Not this time".

We voted for resolution 1593 (2005) in response
to the urgency and the gravity of the crimes which the
Security Council and the international community are
expected and obliged to address. This is a case of
choosing between the unborn and an infant whose
legitimacy is still being questioned. Any further
impasse - any further inaction - on the part of the
Council, two months after the report of the
Commission of Inquiry, would have reduced this
august body to a nadir of irrelevance with regard to
ending impunity and responding to the protection of
human rights and humanitarian law. It would have been
a simple case of copping out.

We do, however, share the concerns of some
delegations about the manner in which resolution 1593
(2005) was arrived at. Once again, fault lines in the
Council and potential veto threats prevented the
emergence of a strong, robust and clear signal from
this body - which the Council badly needs these days.
Perhaps that is the reason why the call for Security
Council reform grows louder as the days go by.

We also believe that the International Criminal
Court (ICC) may be a casualty of resolution 1593
(2005). Operative paragraph 6 of the resolution is
killing its credibility - softly, perhaps, but killing it
nevertheless. We may ask whether the Security Council
has the prerogative to mandate the limitation of the
jurisdiction of the ICC under the Rome Statute once
the exercise of its jurisdiction has advanced. Operative
paragraph 6 subtly subsumed the independence of the
ICC into the political and diplomatic vagaries of the
Security Council. Nevertheless, that eventuality may
well be worth the sacrifice if impunity is, indeed,
ended in Darfur; if human rights are, indeed, finally
protected and promoted; and if, indeed, the rule of law
there is upheld. Thus, we voted in favour of resolution
1593 (2005).

