Mrs. Junod (International Committee of the Red Cross): The International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) appreciates being able to take part in this debate
on the situation in Albania. We would like to thank you,
Sir, and the other members of the Security Council for
giving us this opportunity.

At the beginning of this year, the collapse of a series
of pyramid savings schemes brought ruin to thousands of
Albanians, especially in the South of the country. The
ensuing popular discontent culminated in violent rioting
in several southern towns at the end of February. This led
to the breakdown of law and order almost everywhere in
Albania. Military arsenals were ransacked, and the
population took up arms. Public buildings, warehouses
and property were systematically looted, and a state of
emergency was declared.

As a consequence of those few weeks of unrest,
State structures disintegrated, giving way to anarchy,
chaos and a lack of security. The economy ground to a
halt. Systems for the provision, circulation and
distribution of supplies throughout the country were
affected by the situation, and the price of staple foods
rose sharply.

The collapse of all national institutions had
humanitarian implications which had to be addressed.
That is what the ICRC has been trying to do, but its
efforts cannot be considered as sufficient in the medium
and long term. Nevertheless, there was no major
humanitarian disaster in Albania. The ICRC made that
clear to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and to the Security Council when taking

 

note of their intention to take action in the country at the
request of the Albanian coalition Government.

The ICRC has been urging the international
community to respond to the crisis, notably by restoring
law and order and by contributing to the reestablishment of
national administrative services and State and commercial
supply channels.

The dispatch of the multinational protection force
made it possible to stabilize the situation and to hold
legislative elections. However, Albania still faces law and
order problems and is still in the process of rebuilding a
functioning State administration. These tasks call for long-
term assistance which goes far beyond the capacity of any
humanitarian organization.

The ICRC has been working in Albania since the start
of the crisis. Together with the Albanian Red Cross, it
immediately carried out an assessment of the situation and
noted that most affected by the Albanian crisis were
medical and social welfare facilities, and the most destitute
families. Accordingly, the ICRC and the Albanian Red
Cross have set up specific assistance programmes to bring
aid to these two categories, which had hitherto received
State support.

On 17 March 1997, the ICRC launched an appeal for
15 million Swiss francs, or some $10 million. Within its
assistance programme, it distributed the following: 122
tonnes of food and 39 tonnes of medicine for medical and
social welfare facilities which receive no funds or
assistance from the State; over 70,000 family parcels to
especially needy families; and 70 tonnes of chlorine,
supplied to Albanian water authorities.

Moreover the ICRC launched, with the Albanian Red
Cross, a weapons-awareness programme to inform the
population in general, and young people in particular, about
the dangers involved in handling weapons of all kinds,
which are circulating in large numbers throughout Albania.
The International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies has also been taking part in this
operation, its task being to reorganize and strengthen
national society.
What is the situation at present? Today, more than a
month after the elections, Albania's main problem remains
the absence of law and order and the consequences of that
state of affairs. The newly elected authorities have stated
that restoring public order is their top priority. Despite all
its efforts, the Government is far from being in control of
the entire territory. Banditry of all types is rife, and a lack
of security prevails in most of the country - while, as
members know, the multinational protection force
withdrew on 11 August.

Albanian State institutions must therefore receive
support in their task of restoring public order and bringing
State and commercial supply systems back into operation.
Subsequently, once stability has been established, medium-

and long-term development programmes can and must be
set up.

Despite the endeavours of the authorities and of the
international community, in our view little or no
significant improvement in the situation can be expected
within the next few weeks. Under the current
circumstances the needs remain the same. The ICRC
therefore considers it relevant to continue its programmes,
corresponding to its appeal of 17 March.

