Mr. Singer (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): Before turning to the topic under discussion
today, we wish to echo the expressions of deep sorrow
in connection with the events that took place in Ethiopia
yesterday. Our deep condolences go to all nations and
United Nations agencies affected and to the colleagues,
family members and friends of the victims.

I wish to thank Mr. Yamamoto and Ms. Tapesh
for their informative briefings on the situation in
Afghanistan and to welcome the presence of Mr. Mohib,
who is representing the Government of Afghanistan.

There is a consensus today that the time has come
for peace in Afghanistan. Several key events have
given promising signs of this reality: the holding of
the parliamentary elections in October, the upcoming
presidential elections in July and the efforts of the
Afghan Government and the Taliban movement to reach
a political agreement. We cannot allow this window of
opportunity to close. A commitment must be made to
conduct a constructive dialogue between the Afghan
Government and the Taliban.

Furthermore, initiatives such as the Geneva
Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan, which laid
the groundwork for an Afghan-owned and Afghan-led
process; the convening this month by President Ghani
of the Loya Jirga, to be attended by a grand assembly of
prominent Afghans and all of the elite and influential
figures of the country; the recent Moscow-format
dialogues; and the talks between the United States
Special Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation,
Zalmay Khalilzad, and the Taliban delegation in Qatar
are vital to the process of achieving a sustainable peace.

The path to be followed involves the strengthening
of alliances within Afghanistan, which eventually will
lead to stronger institutions, an environment of respect
for the rule of law and human rights, economic growth
and a reduction in poverty. These conditions will make
it possible above all for the Afghan people to return to
their places of origin.
Regarding the results of the legislative elections,
we call for confidence-building and for the Electoral
Complaints Commission to take the necessary
measures and enact the legal and technical reforms
necessary to ensure that it can fulfil its mandate of
holding transparent and credible elections, with the
least disturbance possible. We call on the international
community and the United Nations to continue to
assist the Afghan electoral system in order to achieve
credible, acceptable presidential elections.

With regard to security, we are alarmed at the fact
that the conflict is continuing to affect the civilian
population and result in numerous civilian casualties.
Clashes between ethnic groups, as well as between
Government forces and insurgents, and high-profile
attacks are ongoing in the conflict. It is vital that
initiatives such as the mutual ceasefire observed in
June between the Taliban and the Government become
the standard, not the exception.

Another element of concern for the Dominican
Republic is the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan,
where more than 6 million people are currently in need
of humanitarian assistance. This is directly linked to
the prevailing level of conflict, the severe drought
and natural disasters. More than 13 million Afghans
are facing significant levels of food insecurity, and
more than 3 million are facing emergency levels of
food insecurity. This requires a plan that will make
it possible to overcome these conditions. We call on
the Government of Afghanistan and the agencies of
the United Nations system to continue to cooperate to
overcome this serious humanitarian situation.

On the other hand, despite the progress made,
women continue to face violence and violations of their
rights, especially those living in rural and Taliban-
controlled areas. We cannot achieve peace at the
expense of the rights and freedom of Afghan women,
who fought for many years to get where they are
today - a quota system ensures that 28 per cent of the
representatives of the Parliament are women; women
occupy prominent and leadership positions, such as Her
Excellency Ms. Adela Raz, first woman Ambassador of
Afghanistan to the United Nations; and a large number
of women work in both the public and private sectors.

That progress must be continued and efforts
redoubled to implement initiatives such as the
national priority programme on women's economic
empowerment. In that regard, we are concerned that
Afghanwomenhavenotbeenparticipatingmeaningfully
in the talks with the Taliban and decision-making peace
bodies. It is key for Afghan women to be included in
the negotiations, as well as young people and civil
society representatives. Any peace agreement between
the parties must be centred on the human rights of all
people, including those of women and children. As
First Lady Rula Ghani has said, women can be agents
of change and should be integrated into all projects.

Similarly, it is important forparties to the negotiation
process to support the independence and effectiveness
of the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
to prioritize support for, and allocation of, resources
to women human rights defenders and to assist in the
effective implementation of legal frameworks for the
protection of women from violence.

We also call on all parties to take measures to
prevent and end all grave violations against children.
In that regard, we ask the Government to take concrete
actions to ensure accountability and end impunity for
such violations, secure the necessary resources for the
implementation of the national action plan on women
and peace and security and the criminalization of
sexual violence based on gender, and adopt legislation
to prohibit the practice of bacha bazi.

Finally, we would like to emphasize that we are
likely at a decisive moment in reaching a negotiated
settlement to end the long and devastating conflict in
Afghanistan. We encourage the parties to continue their
efforts, create conditions that are conducive to lasting
peace and lay the foundations for the safe and dignified
return of the Afghans who had to abandon their roots.
The time has come to build confidence in a future of
peace and guaranteed rights for the Afghan people.

