Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French):
Allow me to start by thanking all the speakers for
their briefings - Mr. O'Brien, Ms. Zerrougui and
Ms. Bangura. They remind us, with their untiring
work, how many civilians, women and children, suffer
directly in Syria.
I would also like to warmly thank all those
who extended to my country their sympathy and
solidarity following the horrible attacks committed
on 13 November. On that day, France was struck at its
heart in Paris and in Saint-Denis by terrorist attacks
that were masterminded and planned in Syria. The toll,
as the Council knows, was heavy - at least 129 dead,
over 300 injured and many people who, right now as
we speak, are still hanging on between life and death.
France has received a great many gestures of solidarity
and friendship from the world over. Those gestures and
messages touch us deeply and illustrate the unanimous
support of the international community for my country.

France was not the only one to be lethally attacked
Friday evening; at least 19 different nationalities were
affected. Our thoughts are with the families of the
victims, both in France and throughout the world. Our
thoughts also go to all the families who have been
affected in recent months by a terrorism that knows no
colour or religion: Lebanon, Turkey, Denmark, Kuwait,
Saudi Arabia, Libya, Tunisia, Egypt and still other
countries.

I speak to the Council as the representative of
a country that is still standing, united and more
determined than ever. It is determined to combat
terrorism relentlessly and with respect for the law.
Liberty, equality, fraternity - the motto of the French
Republic - has never had more meaning. France is a
free country and an independent country. It is pluralistic
and strong in its diversity. That is the France that was
struck on 13 November.

The enemy is known, namely, Daesh. That
organization feeds on ethnic and religious divisions in
the region and is reinforced by hatred and the rejection
of the other. It oppresses and murders entire populations
in the Middle East on a daily basis and is methodically
and systematically destroying the unique cultural
wealth of the region, which is the common heritage of
humankind.

Faced with that situation, we must be guided by
two complementary objectives. First, there is a need
for a resolute and determined fight against terrorism
and Daesh. The entire international community must
be united in that fight. As the President of the Republic
said this morning, France will convene a meeting of
the Security Council to adopt a draft resolution aimed
at combating terrorism. President Hollande also called
for togetherness, within the framework of a great and
unique international coalition to combine our strength
and our means to destroy Daesh, which is our common
enemy. We must put an end to those who destroy in
such a determined, methodological, professional and
tenacious way.

With regard to the search for a political solution in
Syria, that is more necessary than ever. Syria has become
the largest factory of terrorists that the world has ever
known. The members of the Security Council and the
countries of the region must unite to urgently implement
a political transition in Syria in which Bashar Al-Assad
is not part of the solution. There is an urgent need to
achieve concrete progress in the humanitarian field and
to demand respect for international humanitarian law,
whether it be humanitarian access or the cessation of
all indiscriminate attacks against civilians. In Vienna,
France made a number of concrete proposals on that
subject aimed at alleviating the suffering of the civilian
population at a time when the situation on the ground,
which is already alarming, is further deteriorating. As
has been stated by others, the resolutions adopted by
the Council must be implemented without delay.

It is crucial that we stand united, once again, to
address those two goals.

The refugee crisis is one of the most direct
consequences of the humanitarian catastrophe. If
the current situation goes on, it will create a highly
destabilizing situation. It is more important than ever
to assist the countries along Syria's border, which have
welcomed the greatest number of Syrian refugees. I
wish to pay tribute to them.

In addition to the countries of the region, Europe is
on the front line. The inhabitants of Iraq and Syria, in
particular in territories controlled by Daesh, are fleeing
because they are being tortured. Welcoming them with
dignity is a moral obligation for Europe out of respect
for the fundamental freedoms and the principles of law
that are fundamental for Europe.

Despite the tragic events and the attempts at
destabilization, France will never renounce what it is,
namely, a free country. It will never renounce its values.
We will overcome this trial. We, the international
community, must stand united and defend together
these universal principles. France's determination is
absolute.

