Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We congratulate you, Mr. President, and our Chinese colleagues on assuming the duties of the presidency of the Security Council. You can always rely on the support of our delegation. We thank Belgium for its presidency of the Council in February. It was a short month, but a very busy and intensive one. We thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, for her briefing. We support the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), the work of which has provided useful assistance to reconciliation processes with respect for the country's sovereignty. We are closely monitoring developments in Iraq. On 1 March, as Council members knows, the prime minister-designate Mohammed Allawi withdrew his candidacy to form a Government. The President of the Republic, Barham Salih, must now, in consultation with leading political forces, determine a new candidate for Head of Government. We trust that this process will take place in a timely manner and in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. We understand that Iraq's leadership faces the difficult task of including and taking into account the entire spectrum of the political, social and ethno-religious landscape of the country. We are convinced that inclusive dialogue would help to overcome the internal disagreements in Iraq, which is fundamentally important to the country and the entire Middle East region. For our part, in our contacts with all the political forces in Iraq, we encourage them to join forces to address all issues on the domestic agenda and reach mutually acceptable agreements. The country continues to see mass_ protests demanding political and socioeconomic reforms. As we have heard from Iraqi officials, the authorities see these protests as a form of democratic self-expression and are committed to their obligation to ensure freedom of peaceful assembly. We note the reduction in the level of violence and we commend the forces of law and order. We call for all parties to continue to show restraint. At the same time, we believe it unacceptable for outside forces to use the protests as a lever to exercise pressure on the domestic situation. The authorities are drafting plans to implement reform, but without a stable, functioning Government, that will not be possible. The same goes for solving the broad range of problems that has built up over the years due to objective reasons. Iraq has to rebuild after the events of 2003 and the subsequent gruelling war against terrorists. It is important for the international community to support Baghdad in _ devising comprehensive measures to rebuild the economy and improve the social sphere.We welcome the ongoing dialogue aimed at rebuilding mutual understanding between Baghdad and Erbil. We are confident that further improvement in relations between them will help Iraq strengthen its security and effectively realize its economic potential, for the good of the entire Iraqi people. We note with concern that the terrorist threat in the country remains high. The situation is compounded by an intensification in the number of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant terrorists slipping over from Syria into Iraq. We are convinced that this challenge can be effectively countered only through the broadest possible coordination of counter-terrorism efforts. At the same time, we believe it necessary for all those involved in the fight against terrorism in Iraq to support the sovereignty of the Iraqi State and coordinate their actions with Baghdad. We are concerned about the possible negative impact of the artificially exacerbated situation in Iran on the domestic political situation in Iraq. Iraq cannot be dragged into a regional confrontation. We reiterate our consistent refrain that Iraq must not become an arena for the settling of geopolitical scores. The country has the right to build and develop normal relations with its neighbours and no one has the right to undermine those relations. We all witnessed the dangerous escalation at the beginning of the year, when the region found itself on the brink of conflict as a result of the illegal killing by the United States in Baghdad of the Iranian military commander Qasem Soleimani and Iraqi officials. That act, committed without Iraq's knowledge, undermined the stability and security of a sovereign State Member of the United Nations. We once again stress the need to launch dialogue mechanisms in the region instead of sanctions and threats. In this connection, we recall once again that the Secretary-General has a mandate to craft security and confidence-building measures in the region, in accordance with resolution 598 (1987). We stand ready to cooperate on that basis with all interested regional and international partners in the framework of our proposed concept for collective security in the Persian Gulf region and other constructive initiatives.
