Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to thank Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous, Deputy Foreign Minister Ludin and former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Staffan
de Mistura. We especially thank Mr. De Mistura for his
excellent work and for the cooperation we had from
him during our term in the Council.

It is encouraging to learn that the year-long
post-electoral disagreement has been overcome and
that the National Assembly is in session again. Steps
made towards the resolution of the Kabul Bank issue,
the nominations of the heads of the National
Directorate of Security and the Central Bank and a
member of the Independent Commission for the
Supervision of the Implementation of the Constitution
are signs of encouragement. However, during the
reporting period, the violence in Afghanistan increased
considerably, and was characterized by high-profile

assassinations. Unfortunately, that has had challenging
impacts on the wider reconciliation process. Local
stakeholders and the international community should
therefore continue to support the process which, in our
view, is of crucial importance for the future of the
country. The dedication that we heard today is certainly
encouraging.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is deeply concerned
about the continued suffering of civilians. We have
learned that civilian deaths increased by 5 per cent
during the reporting period as compared to 2010. We
therefore reiterate our position that reconciliation is the
only way for Afghanistan to stop the suffering of
civilians.

With regard to security developments, we
reiterate our strong concern that in 2011 the average
number of monthly security-related incidents has
increased by 21 per cent as compared to 2010. But we
are encouraged by the transition of security
responsibilities to Afghan control, particularly with the
efficiency of its second phase which, once
accomplished, will cover over half of Afghanistan's
population.

We fully share the view of many stakeholders in
Afghanistan that, in addition to the security gains, we
must pay strong attention to the socio-economic
aspects. We commend the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in its role in
ensuring the centrality of the Government in
development. The agreement reached during the
trilateral meeting between Turkey, Afghanistan and
Pakistan, which resulted in the creation of a
cooperative mechanism for investigating Professor
Rabbani's murder, is an encouraging development in
Afghanistan's relationship with two of its neighbours.

As we have always emphasized, regional
cooperation is of crucial importance for the stability of
the peace and prosperity of Afghanistan. We therefore
welcome and commend every step taken towards that
goal, including the organization by the Republic of
Turkey of the Istanbul Conference for Afghanistan,
which was held on 2 November. We hope that the
Istanbul Process will help to increase regional
cooperation and confidence-building. We strongly
support the organization and outcome of the
International Afghanistan Conference in Bonn on
5December, which focused on the commitment to
assist Afghanistan in and after the transition and to
reinforce the Kabul Process.

With regard to human rights, we condemn the
torture of conflict-related detainees in Afghan prisons.
It is of great concern that between 35 and 46 per cent
of prisoners have been tortured, as it implies that
torture is systematic. We commend UNAMA's work on
that important issue. We also commend the United
Nations for its continued support for the Afghan
Government in its implementation of the action plan on
the prevention of child recruitment and grave
violations committed against children.

With regard to the implementation of the Kabul
process and aid coherence, we are glad to learn that the
process has advanced and that the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Government of
Afghanistan have successfully concluded negotiations
on the IMF programme for Afghanistan, which we
hope will improve economic growth, human
development and public service delivery.

With regard to the development of humanitarian
assistance, we strongly support the addition of seven
new areas to the current set of priorities - for
example, capacity development, youth, population
issues, the reintegration of returnees and natural
resource management - in the United Nations
development assistance framework.

With that in mind, Bosnia and Herzegovina
reiterates its concern over the situation of internally
displaced persons in the country. We call upon the
international community and Afghan authorities to
provide vulnerable populations with the necessary
support to facilitate their integration.

Finally, we would like to express our gratitude to
former Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Staffan de Mistura and to the staff of UNAMA for their
valuable work aimed at building peace and stability in
Afghanistan. Bosnia and Herzegovina will always
stand by the Afghan people and is ready to continue to
provide its concrete and tangible support to peace and
stability in the country by participating in international
efforts to that end.

