Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their briefings. We welcome our colleague the Permanent Representative of Yemen to the Security Council and look forward to his statement regarding developments in his homeland. South Africa reiterates its support to the Special Envoy in his quest for a peaceful solution to the situation in Yemen despite the escalating violence that persists amid the unyielding coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. My delegation would like to reiterate that the dire humanitarian situation in Yemen, aggravated by the COVID-19 pandemic, is inextricably linked to the political impasse. As such, my intervention will focus on those two elements, namely, the humanitarian and the political situation. With regard to the humanitarian situation, South Africa continues to express its concern regarding the devastating impact on the people of Yemen, in particular women, children, the elderly, internally displaced persons and those with disabilities, South Africa also expresses its concern over the suspension by the Houthis of all United Nations humanitarian flights into Sana'a and the response to the blockade by the coalition's commercial vessels in Al-Hudaydah, an entry point for more than 70 per cent of Yemeni imports of commercial goods. We urge the parties to collaborate with the Office of the Special Envoy to seek an urgent solution to ensure the continued flow of commercial imports of food into Yemen through Al-Hudaydah port. We note that, despite ongoing humanitarian assistance, 14 million Yemenis are food insecure, of which nearly 10 million are acutely food insecure. The humanitarian situation in Yemen is extremely fragile, and any disruption in the pipeline of critical supplies has the potential to bring millions of people closer to starvation and death. Currently, only 25 per cent of humanitarian requirements have been funded in 2020, as Mr. Lowcock just informed the Council. United Nations agencies are now forced to reduce or close more programmes. We therefore urgently call donors to adhere to their pledges made at recent pledging conferences to avoid Yemen's slipping into famine. South Africa calls on all parties to the conflict to agree to a unified set of measures to contain the spread of COVID-19, improve the delivery of humanitarian aid and provide impetus to the overall political negotiations to end the war in Yemen and alleviate the suffering of Yemeni people. We have consistently highlighted the importance for all parties to abide by their obligations and responsibilities under international humanitarian law and international human rights law and to take all the measures necessary to end and prevent violations against civilians. On the political impasse, South Africa is concerned about the recent drone strikes by Houthis against targets in Saudi Arabia at the Abha International Airport, Najran and Riyadh. At the same time, the escalating military tension and continued clashes in Yemen's embattled Ma'rib and neighbouring Al-Jawf are also of grave concern to South Africa. We urge all parties to the conflict to immediately cease hostilities in line with the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and resolution 2532 (2020), as well as to agree on confidence-building measures, such as the payment of civil servant salaries, the reopening of the Sana'a airport and the lifting of commercial import restrictions. We reiterate our position that a military response is not a viable solution and call on all parties to approach the resumption of the political negotiations with a spirit of compromise, while placing the interests of Yemenis at the centre of a negotiated political settlement. We appeal to all parties to avoid the stance of gaining absolute positions. South Africa calls on all parties to engage in good faith and without preconditions with Special Envoy Martin Griffiths in order to reach a comprehensive negotiated settlement to end the conflict, and that this be done in parallel to efforts to agree on a joint declaration to implement the Stockholm and Riyadh agreements. South Africa also urges the Houthis to adhere to the agreement to provide access to United Nations inspectors to access and assess the FSO SAFER oil tanker to avoid a man-made disaster in the Red Sea. We therefore hope that looming threat will be dealt with on a purely technical basis and without politicization. In conclusion, South Africa reiterates that the only solution to the conflict in Yemen will be an inclusive Yemeni-led, Yemeni-owned political settlement that delivers on the hopes of the Yemeni people for a strong economic and political future. In this context, we also call for the full and meaningful participation of women in all aspects of an inclusive political process.
