Mr. De Souza Monteiro (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate on an issue
of crucial importance. I would also like to express our
appreciation to the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, for her
presentation of the Secretary-General's annual report
on the issue (S/2019/509). We welcome the briefing by
the Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Henrietta Fore,
and we also express our appreciation to Ms. Mariatu
Kamara and Mr. Majok Peter Awan for sharing their
experiences in relation to this important subject.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
shows alarming numbers of violations against children
in armed conflicts. This seems to be part ofa broader and
worrisome trend in which reports of blatant disrespect
for international humanitarian law are abundant. Brazil
reiterates its strong condemnation of the targeting and
use of children in armed conflict and reiterates the
responsibility of all parties to protect them from the

direct consequences of war.

In situations of armed conflict, respect for
international humanitarian law is a precondition to
protect children from violations, including those
outlined in the Secretary-General's report, namely,
killing, maiming, sexual violence, recruitment and
abduction. The current challenges in this area are not
the result of a lack of norms, but rather from gaps in
implementation. Therefore, our efforts should first and
foremost be aimed at guaranteeing that all States ensure
respect for international humanitarian law on the part
of all parties.

When violations occur, accountability ensues.
As a founder of the International Criminal Court,
Brazil supports its work to promote accountability for
the perpetrators and reparations for the victims. We
believe the Court's recent decision to condemn Bosco
Ntaganda sent a powerful message to those who commit
crimes against children in armed conflict. Brazil hopes
that the ruling will help to prevent reoccurrence and
contribute to a culture against the involvement of
children in hostilities.

Although the Secretary-Generals' report correctly
focuses on the six grave violations against children, it
is clear that the negative impact of armed conflict on
children goes beyond that. War affects the well-being
of children as well as their healthy development and
access to education. To quote the recent report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
in Yemen,

"Children did not start the war [in Yemen],
but they are paying the highest price."
(S/2019/453,para. 68)

That is why conflict prevention should also be at
the forefront of our debate. The damage that armed
conflict causes children might be mitigated, but it has
not been eliminated. In order to protect children, we
need to promote and sustain peace. Brazil endorsed
the Safe Schools Declaration, which represents an
important political commitment to ensuring children's
education, even during hostilities. Continuing to attend
school may offer a sense of routine and stability, thereby
alleviating the suffering and chaos caused by war. The
Declaration reinforces the idea that schools should be
safe havens not targets for armed attacks or places for
military use.

Brazil commends the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba,
for launching the ACT to Protect campaign. We
underline our support for measures directed not only
at ending violations, but also at preventing them and
providing adequate services for victims. In this regard,
it is always worth recalling that children against whom
these violations are perpetrated are victims and should
be treated primarily as such.

In conclusion, we reiterate Brazil's steadfast
support for the protection of children in armed conflict
While recognizing that the Council is divided on a
range of issues, we consider that protecting children
from war should be one common denominator capable
of galvanizing political will towards peace and respect
for international law.

