I would like to thank all of the briefers for their extremely valuable analyses to aid our understanding of the situation in Somalia. I will make three points today. First, I would like to turn to the elections. While the recent electoral agreements demonstrate a welcome dynamic of rapprochement between the Somali Federal Government and the federal member states, we regret that the principle of one-person, one-vote was not retained and that not all Somalis will be able to take part directly in the next elections. Our priority must nevertheless be to ensure the credibility of that electoral process - meaning that the elections must therefore be held within the planned time frame - as well as its inclusiveness, as mentioned by many of today's speakers. The full participation of women will be important, especially in this year of commemoration of the women and peace and security agenda. We also call for the participation of young people, in line with resolution 2535 (2020). My second point concerns the humanitarian and security situation. France remains extremely concerned about that situation. Al-Shabaab is continuing its deadly action against civilian populations, whose fate, as we know, is already being aggravated by the coronavirus disease pandemic and by the ravages of climate change, whether it be the locust crisis or the extremely severe weather conditions. In that context, France calls for humanitarian access to be guaranteed for populations in need. We condemn the attacks against humanitarian and health workers and the obstruction of humanitarian access. We also call for the full implementation of the conclusions of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, which were adopted in August. Al-Shabaab is also targeting Somali security forces and all those who support them, starting with the African Union Mission in Somalia. France underscores that the Mission will have to drastically evolve after 2021 in order to enable a handover to the Somali security forces. In that regard, France fully supports Lieutenant General dos Santos Cruz and his team, who have been mandated by the Security Council to carry out an independent assessment. We call on all actors to act constructively to ensure that the assessment can take on board all points of view and deliver its report in a timely manner, on 10 January 2021. The fight against Al-Shabaab cannot be viewed as a security issue alone, as has been pointed out by other speakers as well. I welcome the adoption of resolution 2551 (2020), which renews the sanctions regime and strengthens in particular the fight against the financing of Al-Shabaab. The fight against terrorism will be effective only if it forms part of supporting the country's governance and economic recovery. That is a major task - a long-term task in which the United Nations, the African Union and the European Union are engaged, and one that we must pursue. In that regard, we support the continued efforts to strengthen the rule of law and establish democracy in Somalia. The adoption of the constitutional review, respect for human rights and the fight against impunity are absolutely essential for building lasting peace. In that regard, I welcome the Somali Government's recent appointment of a special prosecutor to investigate the attacks against journalists. In conclusion, the first bulwark against terrorism is the resilience of societies. And from that point of view, France joins the many observers who have expressed their concern about the legislative developments in Somalia with regard to sexual violence and early or forced marriages. That is an extremely significant and worrisome setback in relation to the international and regional commitments to which Somalia is party, and can only weaken society.
