Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti) (spoke in French): At the outset, I join the representatives who spoke before me in congratulating the delegation of the People's Republic of China on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of March. Djibouti is grateful for the holding of this important debate and the excellent concept note (S/2020/161, annex). Our thanks go to Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed and Mr. Abdoulaye Mar Dieye for their briefings. Djibouti reiterates in the strongest of terms its condemnation of the assassination attempt on the person of the Prime Minister of the Sudan, Mr. Abdalla Adam Hamdok. The scourge of terrorist and extremist groups in Africa has been growing steadily since the early 1990s. The continent is in particular extremely concerned about the escalation of terrorist acts. They year 2019 was particularly deadly, with an alarming number of victims who fell victim to terrorists' bullets. To date, we do not have reliable statistics, but only estimates. We would benefit from a statistical analysis of the attack patterns of terrorist groups, the nature of the terrorist groups concerned and the responses that have been used so far, based on innovative analytical strategies. The thirty-third Summit of Heads of State and Government of the African Union, held in Addis Ababa on 9 and 10 February, declared 2020 as the year during which the continent would commit to silencing the guns. There have been positive developments in that regard, the most recent of which hail from South Sudan, where the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity was just formed in line with the deadlines decided by the various Southern Sudanese stakeholders. However, the terrorist threat constitutes the greatest threat to the implementation of the continental strategy, as it calls into question the encouraging progress made in the areas of crisis and conflict management. Of even greater concern, the ever-increasing flow of foreign terrorist fighters coming from other regions of the world to bolster small groups already on the African continent has enabled the latter to strengthen their capacity to adapt and change, as well as diversify their sources of funding. African forces deployed on the ground are faced with fighting an asymmetrical war against non-State actors that are enjoying an increasing amount of resources. We are urgently in need of finding appropriate solutionsto the untenable situation involving underequipped African peacekeeping forces, which nevertheless must ensure control and security of vast swaths of territory. The exponential increase in those groups' use of improvised explosive devices, mass casualty terrorism and targeted assassinations should also be highlighted. Faced with that situation, the thirty-third Summit of Heads of State and Government of the African Union endorsed a landmark decision emanating from the recommendation of the African Union Peace and Security Council under the presidency of the Djibouti for the month of February. The Heads of State decided to deploy, in cooperation with the Ministers of Defence of the Group of Five for the Sahel, an African operational force made up of 3,000 soldiers in the Sahel region. Africa has concerted its efforts and is committed to jointly responding to the terrorist groups in order to destroy them once and for all. Africa, however, is asking for the full and unequivocal support of the international community, in particular the members of the Security Council. Allow me to therefore take this opportunity to call once again, on behalf of the African Union Peace on the Security Council, in accordance with its mandate, for the taking of new measures commensurate with the seriousness of the threat in the Sahel region and the Lake Chad basin. Beginning in the 1990s, the region of East Africa, in which my country is located, was one of the first to suffer the unbridled ideological onslaught and attacks perpetrated by extremist and terrorist groups, such as Al-Qaida and Al-Shabaab, which have now pledged allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. In having understood the dimensions of the lethal role played by groups that promote extremist ideologies, the Republic of Djibouti, since the early 2000s, has contributed to regional, continental and international efforts to combat the scourge of terrorism and maritime piracy in the Gulf of Aden. In order to deal with this ever-evolving threat, the Djibouti authorities have continued to ensure maintaining the highest degree of vigilance based on a three-part dynamic involving a theological dialogue to promote the dissemination of religious ideals as a shield against extremist speech; massive investment in priority social sectors; and, lastly, the strengthening of the arsenal of legal tools and preventive mechanisms. Accordingly, the need to be able to constantly adapt and the high level of vigilance that this urgent challenge requires calls for substantial financial and technological resources. In order to eradicate terrorism and extremist groups, we believe that developing countries, particularly African countries, should benefit more from sustainable financial support and a suitable level of technology transfer. We propose four courses of action. First, we call for the fulfilment of development aid commitments to meaningfully meet the targets of the Sustainable Development Goals, as the first victims of terrorist and extremist groups' ideological indoctrination are often those who are intellectually or socially vulnerable and exploited in order to serve the sinister plans of terrorist groups. Young people continue to be a primary target. It is no coincidence that the main terrorist group in Somalia is called Al-Shabaab, which means "the youth" in Arabic. In the war against terrorism, sharing experiences, coordination and response are the key elements for which we must take joint political decisions. It would therefore be fitting to consider opening an outpost of the United Nations Office of Counter- Terrorism at African Union headquarters. Finally, it is essential to ensure predictable funding for peacekeeping operations. In conclusion, if we are not careful, the African continent could become a revolving door for transnational terrorism. This threat, which affects us all at the highest level, is becoming increasingly complex, dynamic and structured, and is ever-changing. It is only through better organization that we will be able to launch a sustainable and effective response. That is why we must mount a coordinated response. Time is against us and there is a lot at stake.
