Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation abstained in the voting on resolution 2504 (2020), proposed by the co-penholders, for the sole purpose of not blocking cross-border assistance to the Syrian province of Idlib, which is the only one that still really needs that method of delivering supplies. I would recall that from the very first day of negotiations, we expressed our commitment to that goal and, in that context, we did not oppose maintaining the Turkish crossing points. It remains unclear to us as to why throughout this entire period several delegations categorically refused to engage in negotiations on our alternative draft resolution (S/2020/25). We have still not heard what the draft resolution did not address in terms of substance. Essentially, we have now adopted the same outline. No matter how often we say that humanitarian assistance should remain outside political battles, we still continue to play political games around humanitarian assistance that are very dangerous and shameless, since the "figures of exchange" are in fact the inhabitants of Idlib. Indeed, it was their very well-being that our colleagues appear to have risked in the pursuit of political goals. It is difficult to understand how all this is in line with concern for the people of Idlib, as so extensively declared at other meetings. Meanwhile, I propose that we consider what kind of resolution we have just adopted so that no one will have different interpretations. The document extends the mandate for six months only for the crossing points from Turkey to Idlib province. The Jordanian border crossing at Al-Ramtha has not been used since the summer of 2018 and the Iraqi one at Al-Yarubiyah since last year. In north-eastern Syria humanitarian supplies are being delivered through Government-controlled areas. That is reflected in the report of the Secretary- General S/2019/949. It is true that people prefer to remain silent about that. I would like to say to my Estonian colleague that it is not Russia's task to find reliable ways to deliver assistance to the Syrian people. That is the task of the United Nations in coordination with the Syrian authorities. It should long have taken care of that issue in the region. In accordance with the guiding principles of humanitarian assistance, the United Nations must, I underline must, do that in coordination with the Syrian authorities at their request and with their consent. It must do that. The resolution clearly stipulates that this is an urgent temporary measure designed to assist those who cannot be reached through existing routes. It also mandates the enhanced monitoring of supply deliveries to those in need. We believe that monitoring cannot be effectively carried out unless United Nations personnel have access to the area of operations. That is not just our whim, but rather a key provision of resolution 2165 (2014) that has never been observed throughout the five years of the mechanism's existence - for some reason, everyone prefers not to talk about that. Specialized reports of the Secretary-General also avoid that issue. That is not right. And, since the resolution calls for another such report to be prepared, we would very much like to see there information about what has been done to ensure direct access for the United Nations to the area of operations, both in public work and in contacts with groups represented in Idlib. The second important short-term task, in our view, is to mark vehicles that deliver humanitarian assistance. How to do it and what insignia to use is not so important. However, those vehicles should be easy to differentiate from commercial and other traffic. First, this is a basic security requirement during armed conflict. Secondly, this is an issue that has to do with transparency of the operation. And, thirdly, this is an important confidence-building measure; whatever one might say, confidence with the Syrian authorities needs to be restored. We are convinced that, without creating an atmosphere of acceptance, no_ international organization will be able to establish stable and effective operations in the country. Again, this is not our whim, but what General Assembly resolutions on humanitarian assistance directly prescribe. Those documents stipulate that the central authorities of the host country should play the leading role in initiating, providing and coordinating assistance on their territory. We should always bear that in mind when we return to the question of cross-border assistance - a principal issue. We welcome the fact that this resolution includes a reference to the guiding principles of humanitarian assistance set out in Assembly resolution 46/182. We have once again pointed out some problematic aspects of this mechanism. Alas, no prospects for resolving them are discernible thus far. We hope that this trend will be reversed, otherwise we will face the same set of problems when we address this issue again in the summer. This task can be achieved only once we get back to the basic guiding principles for providing humanitarian assistance, namely, coordination with the Government of the host country.
