Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): At the outset, I wish to
express my delegation's appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this Security Council
meeting on the implementation of resolution 1308
(2000). Pakistan, as the leading troop-contributing
country, attaches great importance to the Council's
deliberations today.

We thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Mr. Peter Piot, Executive Director of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), for their
comprehensive briefings. The two presentations have
given the Council insight into the normative and
operational implementation of resolution 1308 (2000)
and the developments that have taken place since its
adoption. That accords the Council an opportunity to
review and advance the implementation of the
resolution.

The adoption of resolution 1308 (2000) was a
significant development in the context of the work of
the Security Council, in that it was a recognition that
the HIV/AIDS pandemic is also exacerbated by
conditions of violence and instability. The Council
acknowledged the existence of a nexus between the
proliferation of armed conflicts and the spread of
HIV/AIDS. The movement of people resulting from
conflicts fuels the spread of the disease. That
underlines the need for the Council to ensure prompt
and effective responses to crisis situations. Conflict
prevention and resolution should therefore be the first
line of defence against the spread of the epidemic in
conflict situations.

At the same time, the resolution reflected the
possible role of peacekeeping personnel in the spread
of HIV/AIDS. Perhaps it would be pertinent to know
the number of peacekeepers who have caused the
infection or have contracted it in the course of their
assignments. We wonder whether a computation has
been made to determine the proportion of the spread of
the epidemic caused by peacekeeping missions vis-a-
vis the overall global spate of the pandemic. A note of
caution: we should not demonize peacekeepers in the
absence of clear data, as that may project a misleading
picture of the problem.

The conduct of United Nations personnel,
particularly peacekeeping troops, should always be
unblemished and beyond reproach. Deploying
peacekeeping personnel who may be carriers of
sexually transmitted infections is unacceptable; their
risky behaviour with civilians under their protection is
more objectionable. United Nations personnel who
endanger the lives of civilians debase the noble
traditions of humanitarian work and the United Nations
itself, bringing both to disrepute. Troop-contributing
countries should take severe disciplinary measures to
prevent such a situation from occurring. There should
be zero tolerance of those who, instead of protecting
their charges, expose them to life-threatening dangers.

We expect the United Nations and the troop-
contributing countries to set the highest possible
standards for the conduct of the troops deployed under
the United Nations flag. Every effort must be made to
ensure that peacekeepers conduct themselves according
to appropriate codes of conduct and that they adopt the
best possible behaviour to protect and care for
themselves and the populations with whom they may
interact.

The principles of the code of conduct for
humanitarian personnel developed by the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee and UNAIDS strongly discourage
sexual relationships between humanitarian workers and
beneficiaries. The role of uniformed personnel and
peacekeeping forces in preventing the spread of the
disease in conflict areas is extremely important.
Resolution 1308 (2000) recognized that personnel,
before their deployment in peacekeeping operations,
should undergo education, voluntary and confidential
testing, and counselling and treatment. To that end, it is
essential to improve the capacity of peacekeepers to
become effective advocates and actors with regard to
awareness and prevention of HIV/AIDS transmission.

Pakistan, as the leading troop-contributing
country, is fully aware of the heavy responsibility we
undertake when we deploy our troops in peacekeeping
missions. We are generally proud of our record, which
has remained unblemished in the dozens of United
Nations peacekeeping missions we have served. Our
soldiers' behaviour in the field is enshrined essentially
in the noble traditions of their religion, which teaches
them respect for women, the elderly and children.
Their training - besides giving them mastery in the art
of war - instils in them a sense of self-discipline.
Still, before we deploy our troops in United Nations
missions, every soldier is tested for HIV/AIDS and is
provided with effective orientation and training on
HIV/AIDS. Happily, Pakistan is not the only country
with such scrupulous standards; most of the other
troop-contributing countries enjoy similar reputations.

Finally, resolution 1308 (2000) recognized the
importance of a coordinated response to the pandemic.
In that regard, we welcome the joint efforts of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UNAIDS
in addressing HIV/AIDS in conflict areas. We assure
them of our full support in implementation of the
resolution.

