Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Away from
any media cameras, the suffering of the people of
Somalia too often fails to get the attention from the
international community that it should. At the African
Union summit last weekend, African leaders asked the
Security Council to take action. So this debate is timely
in considering our next steps. My delegation is grateful
to you, Mr. President, for organizing it today. I thank
Under-Secretaries-General Pascoe and Malcorra for
their briefings today. I also thank our colleague the
Permanent Representative of Somalia for his
contribution.

As the briefings have underlined, progress has
been made by the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) to establish itself in Mogadishu, and the United
Nations has moved quickly to deliver the support
package for the African Union Mission in Somalia

(AMISOM) that the Council requested and approved.
However, fighting in Somalia has increased over recent
weeks, and the humanitarian situation has further
deteriorated. We have seen a spate of attacks against
the Transitional Federal Government and the civilian
population by armed groups, apparently set on
undermining the Djibouti Agreement, the reconciliation
process and Somalia's stability.

There are four main areas where the United
Kingdom believes action is needed on Somalia, which
should be the focus of the Council's attention over the
coming period.

First is to tackle the humanitarian crisis. More
than 3 million people are now in need of assistance.
That is a staggering figure. I understand that the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees estimates that over 150,000 people have been
displaced from Mogadishu just since 7 May. The
international community must continue to support the
TFG in delivering basic security, food and health care.

Second is the political track. Ultimately, we need
Somali solutions to Somali problems. The Djibouti
Agreement provides the basis for that. The
international community has to continue to support the
TFG and President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed,
including by living up to the pledges we all made in
Brussels in April. The TFG must continue its efforts at
reconciliation and in providing security to the
population of Somalia.

Thirdly, we need to do all we can to bring to an
end the attacks against the TFG, the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the civilian
population by armed groups, and to provide a secure
environment in which the Federal Government can
work.

AMISOM. has played a critical role in supporting
President Sharif's Government and in securing key
installations in Mogadishu. The United Kingdom pays
tribute to the Governments of Uganda and Burundi for
their continuing commitment to that difficult operation.
AMISOM. needs further strengthening, and further
contributions are needed. The United Kingdom has
donated £10 million to the United Nations Trust Fund
for AMISOM, as well as £5 million directly to the
African Union for the Somalia operation. We
encourage others to also contribute. As I have said, we
welcome the excellent work by the Department of
Field Support, as described by Under-Secretary-

General Malcorra, to ensure the rapid delivery of the
United Nations logistical support package to
AMISOM.

The Council should also seek to halt the illegal
flow of weapons and ammunition entering the country
and being provided to rebel groups. We should demand
that both internal and external actors responsible for
carrying out and supporting attacks on TF G and
AMISOM. forces immediately cease their actions. In
line with the request from the African Union, the
Security Council should stand ready to take action
against any individuals, entities or Governments shown
to be arming or supporting those who are carrying out
those attacks. The United Kingdom looks forward to
receiving shortly the report of the sanctions Monitoring
Group and any other evidence submitted to the Somalia
sanctions Committee.

The long-term solution to Somalia's security
remains the training of the Somali security forces. The
United Nations Development Programme has done
some good work in training the police, but there is still
much to do to strengthen the Joint Security Forces.
Several United Nations Member States are providing
training, and the United Kingdom welcomes that. We
should all consider how we can help.

The fourth issue is piracy. The Security Council
needs to continue to work to ensure security on
Somalia's seas as well as on land. We must tackle both
piracy and its root causes. We welcome the work of the
international Contact Group on Piracy. On the
operational front, the United Kingdom is providing the
command and headquarters of the European Union's
naval mission.

The Council should stand behind the call made by
African Union leaders last the weekend for an end to
the recent fighting in Somalia and for all groups to
respect and cooperate with the Transitional Federal
Government. Following consultations with other
delegations, including Uganda in particular, the United
Kingdom yesterday circulated a draft presidential
statement backing the African Union's call. The
statement also calls for greater international support to
AMISOM. and makes it clear that the Council will
consider the imposition of sanctions on anyone
engaged in undermining the stability of Somalia.
Reaction to our draft has been very positive. Right
now, we are working to iron out some minor changes
that colleagues have asked. I hope that we might be in
a position to adopt the draft presidential statement at
the end of our debate this morning.

After a period of progress earlier this year
following the formation of a new Government under a
new President, the security and humanitarian situation
in Somalia is once again worsening. The Security
Council and the international community have to do
what they can to provide practical support to both the
TFG and AMISOM. so we can help to bring about the
stability and security that the people of Somalia
deserve.

