I would first like to highlight the great work carried out by your delegation, Sir, during your presidency of the Security Council for this month of October. I thank you, in particular, for having convened this open debate to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, which reaffirmed the valuable role of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, negotiations, consolidation and peacekeeping. In that respect, the Ecuadorian State has a solid legal framework that guarantees the validity, exercise and enforceability of women's rights, which in turn are based on two fundamental pillars: the Constitution and the international instruments ratified by the State. The Constitution establishes that the armed forces are an institution for the protection of citizens' rights, freedoms and guarantees. That framework includes a gender perspective in the defence policy agenda and promotes policies for gender parity. Through those instruments, Ecuador also implements resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1889 (2009). Furthermore, our national development plan recognizes the equal participation of women and men in public and private life and incorporates a gender perspective in a cross-cutting manner. On numerous occasions, the Council, the General Assembly, the Secretary- General and Member States have expressed their views on the relevance and invaluable contribution of women to the promotion of peace and security. At the end of this first year of the decade of action, we must give a definitive boost to the Organization's efforts in this area, including the ongoing review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. Ecuador actively supports the objectives of resolution 1325 (2000), such as increasing the participation of women and incorporating a gender perspective into all the peace and security efforts of the United Nations. Ecuador also supports and promotes the implementation of special measures - by all parties to conflicts - to protect women and girls from violence in crisis and post-conflict situations. In recent years, following the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we have witnessed important progress at both the international and the local levels. The participation of women in the Ecuadorian Armed Forces has quadrupled since the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). In recent years, we have also encouraged greater participation of women soldiers in peacekeeping missions. On 28 August, we had the honour of co-sponsoring resolution 2538 (2020), which calls on the Secretary-General to continue to implement the System-Wide Strategy on Gender Parity and Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy 2018-2028. Ecuador is very concerned that the crisis generated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has highlighted vulnerabilities and inequalities. It will take time to know for certain the full impact of the crisis, but their general effects are already clear: huge losses of lives and livelihoods, and deepening poverty and hunger. The consequences of COVID-19 will be profound and lasting, and they risk reversing decades of progress. This has a disproportionate impact on women. We will not be able to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development if we do not preserve and consolidate the gains we have made. We must also ensure international solidarity to promote recovery through policies that are gender-sensitive and ecologically sustainable, and promote peaceful, safe and resilient societies. This year, we also commemorate the seventy-second anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter of the United Nations and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women. But what better way to commemorate those milestones than by implementing them effectively? In that context, Ecuador reiterates its commitment to continuing to promote gender equality and the empowerment of women, as well as their participation in peacebuilding efforts and in processes to enhance international security.
