Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Chile for organizing this open debate of
the Security Council on a topic of great importance
and timeliness, especially given the fact that 2015
marks the seventieth anniversary of the founding of
the United Nations and the international community
is preparing the post-2015 development agenda. A
holistic approach to addressing peace and security,
development and human rights issue is particularly
necessary because we live in an increasingly globalized
world characterized by the interdependence of States
and societies that influence one another in the political,
economic and security spheres, among others, thereby
requiring coherent and coordinated efforts on the part
of the international community.

The achievement of the development goals can be
achieved only in the framework of stable and peaceful
societies that respect human rights. Morocco remains
convinced that the promotion and protection of human
rights, the rule of law and sustainable development are
closely linked and mutually beneficial. The stability
development of States and their respect for human
rights are indivisible, for without peace there can be
no development, and that without development lasting
peace remains an elusive, if not impossible goal.

The active participation of all citizens in their
society, the fight against discrimination and inequality,
and the promotion democratic and legal practices and
rules remain essential elements in achieving sustainable
development. Notably, the enjoyment of human rights,
and in particular the right to development, and to live
in peaceful conditions require the empowerment of all
people through inclusive growth that creates decent
jobs and social policies that guarantee human dignity to
the entire population, shielded from poverty and want.

Unquestionably, countries affected by conflict
achieve the least amount of progress towards achieving
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and other
internationally agreed development goals. Nowadays,
most conflicts erupt within States. Exclusion, political
or economic marginalization and a lack of effective
mechanisms that promote and protect human rights are
factors that favour political instability within States
and threaten regional and international peace and
security. For poor countries and those emerging from
conflict, international cooperation remains vital. It is
essential that international cooperation seek to help
these countries in rebuilding their economies and in
strengthening their human and institutional capacities
in order to address the economic and social causes of
conflicts.
Strong national institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights are of critical importance to
complementing development strategies at national and
local levels. Development and good governance at the
local level, guaranteeing the adequate participation of
the population, allow us to better target the poor and
the underprivileged. Local development policies also
promote the better use of resources and accountability.
Youth unemployment is often cited as a potential risk
that may lead to insecurity and instability. Having
a job does not only mean the availability of income,
but also implies above all respect for the dignity of
the individual, reinforcing social cohesion. For these
reasons, we believe that the creation of jobs and the
delivery of effective responses to the needs of young
people should be the focus of any future development
programme. The Kingdom of Morocco also recognizes
the need for equal rights and opportunities for women
and men in political and economic decision-making,
and for empowering women in all spheres of society in
order to unleash their potential as agents of change and
drivers of sustainable development.

Today, terrorism is a constant and major threat not
only to stability and security within States, but also to
peace and regional and international security. Morocco
advocates an integrated approach to fighting terrorism,
based on the consistent complementarity of three
pillars: strengthened security governance; the fight
against poverty, exclusion and social inequality; and the
promotion of the values ofreligious tolerance. Morocco
remains convinced that the security approach, which
is an essential element in the fight against terrorism,
cannot alone effectively address the rise of extremism,
terrorism and obscurantism. It must be reinforced with
economic and social inclusion and appropriate religious
and secular education. Regional and international
cooperation at all levels is also of crucial importance
both to effective action against terrorism and to
addressing its root causes. Development and human
rights can be successful only if they are supported by
international governance that is also equitable, is in the
best interests of developing countries and respects their
political and economic choices, as long as those choices
are made in the best interest of their populations and
are based on the principles of democracy, the rule of
law and human rights.

International cooperation and solidarity and the
coordination of States' efforts are crucial elements
for achieving development, peace and security goals
around the world. In the address delivered on his behalf
to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, His
Majesty King Mohammed VI of Morocco stated that:

"The world stands at a crossroads today. Either
the international community supports developing
countries in their quest to achieve progress and
ensure security and stability, or we shall all face
the consequences of more conflicts and greater
fanaticism, violence and terrorism - all of which
feed on feelings of injustice and exclusion - and no
part of the world will be safe." (A/69/PVII, p. 26)

Cooperation and understanding between countries
at the regional level is therefore a powerful tool
for combining efforts in order to best respond to
the challenges of regional development, peace and
security. Regional cooperation plays a crucial role in
policy coordination, whether at the political, economic,
security or other levels, with the goal of achieving better
results in terms of economic and social development and
shared prosperity, the promotion of peaceful relations
between countries and the fight against threats to peace
and security, especially the threat of terrorism.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
importance of a comprehensive and coherent approach
to achieving the Organization's objectives for peace and
security, development and human rights while placing
human beings at the heart of its concerns.

