Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on
having convened, in such a timely manner, this open
debate on a very important issue.

There is general agreement within the
international community about the relevance of
security sector reform - in its widest meaning - in
countries emerging from conflict. That is a key factor
in facilitating the transition from the establishment and
maintenance of peace to the reconstruction and
consolidation of institutions necessary for sustainable
development.

Security sector reform is closely related to, and
must be coordinated with, other priorities in the area of
post-conflict stabilization and reconstruction, such as
reforming the justice system, promoting the rule of law
and ensuring respect for and the defence of human
rights.

The United Nations system - through its various
organs, departments, agencies, funds and programmes -
is involved in and committed to many activities relating
to security sector reform, in particular through peace
operations and development programmes. In that context,
we believe that it is important to have a broad,
comprehensive strategy that covers all aspects of the
security sector - one that can act as a useful tool for all
United Nations institutions that work in related areas and
that can be integrated into recovery programmes drawn
up by the Peacebuilding Commission.

Participation in security sector reform by the
country concerned is essential, since this is one of the
most sensitive sectors of any State. Any reform
programme or strategy must therefore be drawn up and
carried out in coordination with local authorities. As
my delegation stated here in the Council on 31 January
during the open debate on peacebuilding (see S/PV.5627), the active participation of Governments
and local representatives in the entire reform process
allows for the better identification of priorities when a
strategy is being drawn up. Furthermore, due
commitment at the outset ensures long-term
implementation.

Given that security sector reform is a long-term
process, it is appropriate to recall the key responsibility of
the Security Council at the beginning of the process -

that is, when the mandate of a peace operation is
established. That is when the immediate priorities need to
be identified and provision made in the mandate for them
to be addressed - initially by the peacekeeping operation
itself. In that way, the foundations of the reform and
restructuring of the security sector can be laid during the
peace operation.

Later, in the period following the transition
towards final institutional reconstruction, the role of
the Peacebuilding Commission in continuing the
reform will be fundamental, promoting international
assistance and working together with local authorities.
Thus there should be continuous coordination between
the Commission and the Council throughout the entire
security sector reform process, so that they can work
together in an integrated manner.

My delegation agrees that there is a need to
promote the creation, within the United Nations
system, of a broad, comprehensive strategy that covers
all aspects of the security sector, based on lessons
learned and best practices, so as to ensure the
necessary capacity to support security sector reform
programmes undertaken in countries that are emerging
from conflict.

Finally, we support the draft presidential
statement to be adopted later.

