Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I, too, should
like to thank Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing.

Chad is deeply concerned at the deterioration of
the security situation in Ukraine, especially in the
region of Donetsk and Luhansk. Despite the untiring
calls made by the international community for restraint
and calm, a violent attack on the port of Mariupol in
the Donetsk region took place on Saturday, 24 January,
resulting in at least 30 civilians killed and more than
100 injured. On 13 January, we saw the shelling ofa bus
near Volnovakha that claimed the lives of 12 civilians,
the majority of whom were women.

The situation is a serious one. Given the lack of
political will when it comes to putting an end to the
violence, and the significant increase in the number
of civilian victims, Chad is fearful of a resumption of
the fighting, whose primary victims will, as always, be
civilians.

Developments in terms of the violence in
Ukraine very often lead to violations of international
humanitarian law, and the international community
cannot remain impassively on the sidelines. Those who
are responsible must be brought to justice.

With more than 5,000 deaths, 10,300 injured and
more than 1 million displaced persons, the Ukrainian
tragedy has gone on long enough. In that regard, Chad
calls on all the parties to remain calm and show restraint
and urges the Government and separatists to engage in
a direct and inclusive national dialogue with a view
to national reconciliation. Moreover, Chad believes
that the solution to the Ukrainian crisis is political,
and that it will largely depend upon the willingness of
the parties concerned to commit to a true negotiations
process to achieve lasting peace. Chad encourages the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
to pursue its investigations with a view to assigning
responsibility for the Ukrainian crisis, which has lasted
far too long and caused many victims.

In line with the Normandy format and Milan
meetings and the mediation provided by the trilateral
contact group, Chad urges on the countries involved
and the Secretary-General, through his good offices, to
relaunch the peace process in Ukraine.

To conclude, we urge friendly countries with
influence on the parties to bring the necessary pressure
to bear with a View to achieving a lasting solution to
the crisis on the basis of the Minsk agreements and
declaration, with full respect for the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Ukraine.

