Mr. Haneda (Japan): Mr. President, I would like
to express, on behalf of the Government of Japan, our
appreciation for your leadership in convening this
debate. I would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Louise Frechette, and the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), Mr. Amara Essy, for their statements. In
particular, we appreciate Mr. Essy's briefing on the
OAU strategy for addressing the current situation of
Africa as well as on the OAU's process of transition
into the African Union.

Despite the tremendous efforts they have made so
far, African countries are still confronted by numerous
obstacles which can pose a threat to peace and stability
in their own lands. Japan recognizes that internal
peace, security and stability are prerequisites for
achieving sustainable development in any society or
economy, and that good governance plays a critical role
in that regard.

From that perspective, Japan welcomes the
decision on the transition from the OAU to the African
Union, which was adopted at the OAU Summit held in
Zambia last July. As the decision emphasizes, the
major role of the African Union will be the promotion
of peace, security and stability as well as good
governance throughout the African continent, based on
democratic principles and institutions and on popular
participation. Thus, the success of the African Union
will depend largely upon its ability to maintain peace
and security throughout the continent. Japan is
confident that under the able leadership of Mr. Essy the
important task of transforming the OAU into the
African Union will be successfully achieved. We will
spare no effort to support him in that task.

While the decision on the African Union and the
Union's Constitutive Act provide a new framework
agreement for the governance of its member countries,
the document on the New Partnership for Africa's
Development, also adopted at the July OAU Summit,
provides policy orientation for the activities of the
African Union. Japan recognizes that the adoption of
the New Partnership has significance for the
sustainable development of Africa.
First, the fact that various African development
plans which had been submitted by several African
leaders were coordinated and amalgamated into the
New Partnership is a demonstration by Africans of
their ownership of the peace-building and development
process.

Secondly, the major thrusts of the New
Partnership - to strengthen the ability of African
countries to prevent, manage and resolve conflicts and
to anchor democratic governance on solid economic
foundations - constitute an approach that is essential
if African countries are to participate fully in the global
economy.

For these reasons, Japan believes that NEPAD,
with its important policy framework for the peace and
sustainable development of African countries, and the
African Union, as its implementing organ, deserve the
strong support of the international community.

Japan has hosted two Tokyo International
Conferences on African Development (TICAD) since
1993, with a view to mainstreaming African issues on
the agenda of the international community and to
supporting the initiatives of African countries
themselves to resolve those issues so that they can
participate fully in the global economy. Last December,
Japan hosted a ministerial-level meeting in Tokyo in
preparation for TICAD III, to be held in 2003. The
meeting focused on how TICAD might strengthen its
coordination with NEPAD, and adopted the chair's
statement, which cites several important areas for
cooperation. The first relates to strengthening the
foundation for development through the promotion of
peace and good governance; the second to investing in
people, with a focus on human resources development,
education and the health sector; and the third to
reducing poverty through economic growth.

In addition, South-South cooperation -
particularly between Asia and Africa, as well as among
African countries - regional cooperation and
cooperation in the area of information and
communication technology were also recognized as
important approaches to be taken in promoting African
development.

Looking ahead to TICAD III, Japan will continue
to strengthen its cooperation with African countries
and, will, in close cooperation with Secretary General
Essy, support the African Union and NEPAD,

