Mr. Salam (Lebanon): At the outset, we would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
comprehensive briefing and to stress again the leading
role that we believe the United Nations should play in
the resolution of the Middle East conflict.

It is clear that the prevailing sentiment in the
Arab world is one of deep frustration following the
failure of this Council earlier this year to express itself
on the critical issue of Israeli settlements, even though
the draft resolution (S/2011/24) that my delegation had
presented to the Council had been sponsored by an
unprecedented number of States. It is a critical issue
indeed, not only because settlements are illegal and
obstruct peace, but also because they undermine the
two-State solution and continue to sow the seeds of
hatred that will yield more and more violence in the
absence of peace.

Arabs are not only frustrated with the failure of
the Council earlier this year to pronounce itself on the
illegality of all Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, but they are also outraged that,
two years after the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009),
Israel continues its illegal and immoral blockade of the
Gaza Strip and its repeated attacks against its civilian
population. It is the duty of the Council to compel
Israel to abide by its responsibilities under
international law and international humanitarian law, as
well as Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, to protect the civilians of Gaza and those
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory.

What we are witnessing today is how the Israeli
Government continues to choose the expansion of
settlements over peace. In doing so, it is also
deliberately choosing to block the United States-lead
peace efforts, rather than to help them succeed. Above
all, it is knowingly choosing to continue to defy
international law and the will of the international
community, as expressed by all the main organs of the
United Nations, namely, this Council, the General
Assembly and the International Court of justice.
Settlement-building is certainly not a trivial issue,
as the Prime Minister of Israel said. In fact, in addition
to evictions and house demolitions, residency
revocations and land confiscations, settlement-building
is part of a campaign that is eating up Palestinian land
and seeks to change the identity and legal status of East
Jerusalem.

We are extremely concerned at and disappointed
by the postponement of the Quartet meeting initially
scheduled for 14 March, and later rescheduled for
15 April but again postponed. In spite of our strong
reservations at the manner in which Israel dealt with
the previously planned separate meetings of the
Quartet with the parties, we continue to support the
Quartet and believe that it must adopt and clearly spell
out the well-known parameters for the resolution of the
conflict, in particular the 1967 lines as the basis of the
Palestinian State.

The Quartet should further set a clear timetable
up to August 2011 for negotiations on the final status
issues and ensure that the goal of a free and
independent Palestinian State with full membership in
the United Nations is realized by September of this
year.

In contrast, such interim approaches as the idea
of a provisional arrangement, short of a two-State
solution and even without Palestinian agreement, are
now clearly inconclusive and completely unacceptable
20 years after the Madrid Peace Conference, 18 years
after the Oslo interim accords and eight years after the
Road Map.

On the question of Palestinian statehood, let me,
like Mr. Pascoe, underline that in its report to the
meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians in Brussels on 13 April, entitled
"Palestinian State-building: a decisive period", the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process concluded that

"in the limited territory under its control and
within the constraints on the ground imposed by
unresolved political issues, the Palestinian
Authority has accelerated progress in improving
its governmental functions".

In the areas enumerated by Mr. Pascoe where the
United Nations is most engaged, the same report
confirmed that "governmental functions are now
sufficient for a functioning Government of a State".

However, the report adds:

"Despite the progress achieved, the key
constraints to the existence and successful

functioning of the institutions of a potential State
of Palestine arise primarily from the persistence
of occupation and the unresolved issues in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict [M]easures of
occupation which stifle Palestinian life [need to
be] fundamentally rolled back It is vitally
important that the State-building and political
processes be brought into alignment by
September 2011."

In turn, the World Bank, in its 13 April economic
monitoring report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee,
reiterates:

"The World Bank has noted in previous
reports to meetings of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee (AHLC) that if the Palestinian
Authority (PA) maintains its performance in
institution-building and delivery of public
services, it is well positioned for the establishment
of a State at any point in the near future."

The report concludes:

"Since the last AHLC meeting, the PA has
continued to strengthen its institutions, delivering
public services and promoting reforms that many
existing States struggle with."

Finally, let me quote from the International
Monetary Fund staff report "Macroeconomic and
Fiscal Framework for the West Bank and Gaza",
submitted to the same Brussels meeting. It considers
that:

"The Palestinian Authority (PA) is now able
to conduct the sound economic policies expected
of a future well-functioning Palestinian State,
given its solid track record in reforms and
institution-building in the public finance and
financial areas. Steady reforms in the public
finance management system have enabled the PA
to tightly control expenditures, apply rigorous
budget preparation and execution practices, and
establish fiscal transparency and accountability in
line with international standards."
In that regard, a Security Council trip to the
Middle East would not only assert the role of this
Council in the peace process and its responsibility
towards international peace and security, but also offer
all members of the Council the opportunity to have a
first-hand and on-the-ground assessment of the
Government functions carried out by the Palestinian
institutions and to judge how sufficient they have
become for a functioning Government of a State.

The Arab world is witnessing an unprecedented
momentum for change. People across the region are
now voicing their aspirations to freedom, dignity and a
better life. However, let us keep in mind that the
greatest source of frustration in our region remains the
unresolved Arab-Israeli conflict and the historic
injustice to the Palestinian people.

A lasting peace in our part of the world needs to
be a comprehensive and just peace. Accordingly, it will
also require that Israel fully withdraw from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967 and
from the remaining occupied parts of southern
Lebanon.

