Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian): I am honoured to address the Security
Council today on behalf of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO) in order to lay out the
common position of the States members of that
international regional organization: the Republic of
Armenia, the Republic of Belarus, the Kyrgyz
Republic, the Russian Federation, the Republic of
Tajikistan and the Republic of Kazakhstan.

I wish at the outset to echo the words of high
commendation and gratitude addressed to the former
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
Ambassador Arias, and to his successor in that post,
the acting Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation, Mr. Alexander Konuzin, for the dynamic
and multifaceted work being done by the CTC at this
crucial stage of its reform.

International terrorism remains a primary and
constant threat to security and stability throughout the
world. Countering it requires the consolidation and
coordination of global efforts. The countries of the
CSTO intend to make an important contribution to
strengthening the anti-terrorist coalition and to regional
and international security on the basis of the generally
recognized norms and principles of international law,
with the lead coordinating role being played by the
United Nations. In that connection, the CSTO supports
the strengthening and revitalization of the CTC's work,
pursuant to the provisions of resolution 1535 (2004).

In our unanimous view, the report introduced
today by the Chairman of the CTC on the Committee's
work over the past three months and its programme of
work for the coming 90-day period confirm the fact
that the process of reforming the CTC is gaining
ground and moving in the right direction. The main
task in that context remains the effective monitoring of
the implementation by member States of resolution
1373 (2001). It is crucial in that respect that the
Committee seek more actively to develop new
approaches to coordinating technical assistance to
States while closely linking it to the strengthening of
interaction with international and regional
organizations.

We express our support for the work already
under way to prepare countries' technical needs
assessments and to organize CTC field missions to
interested countries, with their consent. Such work
should enhance direct dialogue and cooperation
between the CTC and States with the aim of ensuring
fuller and more effective implementation of the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001) and that the
provision of technical assistance will be as targeted as
possible and accurately reflect the requests and needs
of States. We are convinced that the participation of the
appropriate international organizations in such
missions will help the task at hand to succeed. For its
part, the CSTO is prepared to consider the possibility
of participating in that work in the context of
developing interaction and cooperation with the CTC.

In the context of combating the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, the States members of
the CSTO support the measures set forth in resolution
1540 (2004). Members of the CSTO are at the forefront
of the struggle against international terrorism and are
particularly sensitive to the magnitude of that threat.
Our desire to pool efforts so as effectively to counter
new threats and challenges - in particular those posed
by terrorism, extremism, the traffic in illegal drugs and
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction - is
becoming an increasingly significant factor in
deepening the integration processes within the
organization.

Recently, much has been done on a practical level
to increase the operation of the political instruments
available to our organization. Its member States have
already taken steps to implement planned measures to
combat the external drug threat. Recommendations
have been drafted to unify counter-terrorism
legislation. Work has been finalized to establish a joint
rapid-deployment force that will help to meet the
common security challenges faced by our CSTO
partners. The policy of reviving efforts to resolve new
challenges in the area of international security through
close interaction with the United Nations and other
international and regional organizations - including
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization - was further
reaffirmed in the political statement issued by the
States members of the CSTO adopted at their meeting
of 18 June in Astana, the capital of Kazakhstan.

We believe that such interaction should be
mutually complementary. One important practical
outcome of that meeting was the adoption of guidelines
regarding priority areas for the organization's activities
in 2004 and 2005, including measures to increase
cooperation in countering international terrorism,
militant extremism and the illegal distribution of drugs,
taking national interests into account.

We hope that, in the light of such challenges, the
CTC will in the near future propose effective
mechanisms for the exchange of information, for
disseminating the most recent experiences and for
organizing technical assistance in the context of
coordinating the practical counter-terrorism efforts of
international organizations.

