Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom is outraged that Russia has vetoed this draft
resolution today. Russia's action tarnishes the memory
of all those who died in the Srebrenica genocide. Russia
will have to justify its decision to the families of the
more than 8,000 people murdered in the worst atrocity
in Europe since the Second World War.

The draft resolution did not point fingers of
blame, score political points or seek to reopen painful
divisions. It did not link the crimes of Srebrenica to the
Serb people. It recognized that there were victims on
all sides, and it aimed to send a clear message that the
Council supports reconciliation in Bosnia.

But reconciliation must be based on a shared
acceptance of the fact that genocide occurred at
Srebrenica. This is a legal fact, not a politicaljudgement.
On this there is no compromise. So it is profoundly
regrettable that Russia has chosen to side with those
who, by their actions, are preventing reconciliation
from moving forward those who are unwilling to
accept the facts today.

 

Some said that in submitting this draft resolution,
we risked ethnic division in the Balkans. The emotional
responses in the region in the past weeks show that until
past actions are acknowledged and accepted, we cannot
move forward. As Adisada Dudic said so poignantly at
the commemorative event last week, "Denial does not
make the facts go away. It does not change the past.
And it certainly does not erase memory".

It is denial, and not this draft resolution, that will
cause division. Denial is the final insult to the victims.
It undermines the prospects for a secure, peaceful
future for Bosnia and Herzegovina - a future that all
of its citizens deserve. Because, even two decades on,
the horrors some choose to deny are still ongoing for
families in Bosnia. The remains of hundreds of the
victims of the genocide - fathers, sons, mothers and
daughters - have yet to be found. The suffering of
their loved ones, and their search for truth, continues
to this day. Russia's actions will only exacerbate their
grief.

Despite this veto, we must all continue our support
for a peaceful, stable and prosperous future for Bosnia,
a future based on an acceptance of the past.

Today was an opportunity for the Council to reflect
on its responsibility to prevent genocide, both in 1995
and today and in future. This responsibility is made
clear in our promise to save future generations from
the scourge of war. And yet, 50 years after the end of
the Second World War, 50 years after the signing of
the United Nations Charter, we broke our promise and
allowed genocide to return to Europe, to a small town
in eastern Bosnia, to a United Nations-designated safe
haven.

Kofi Annan said that the tragedy of Srebrenica
would forever haunt the history of the United Nations.
Russia's veto shows that it is hard to lay those ghosts
to rest. We must nevertheless continue to reflect on the
lessons we have learned as individuals, as countries
and as an Organization.

Twenty years on from Srebrenica, we now have an
even greater set of tools to predict and prevent conflict
and genocide. The High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Special Advisers on the Prevention of
Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect play vital
roles. The Secretary-General's Human Rights Up
Front initiative and the new framework of analysis
for atrocity crimes are welcome developments. And
beyond the United Nations, we now have even greater
access to information of impending conflict. We can
see the signs of any slide toward genocide, through
non-governmental organizations, human rights
monitors and social media.

But early warning is not early action. We knew of
the risks at Srebrenica. We saw the reports of ethnic
cleansing, the signs of mass graves. We heard the
reports from journalists in the field, and yet we did not
act. The consequences of our inaction reverberate to
this day.

Today, the risks of genocide and mass atrocities
still lie beneath the surface, in South Sudan, in Syria,
in the spread of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
We cannot afford to repeat the mistakes of 20 years ago.
We must act where we have early warning. We must
find greater unity in the Council and use all of the
tools at our disposal to do so. Russia's veto of this draft
resolution shows just how difficult it can be to find this
unity. But we must persevere, for it is the only way to
make "never again" a reality.

