Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Mr. President, my
delegation is pleased to see you, the Foreign Minister
of Ireland, presiding over today's meeting of the
Security Council, as this marks another milestone in
the period leading up to the independence of East
Timor. We join in welcoming the Chief Minister of the
Council of Ministers of the Second Transitional
Government of East Timor and his team, and assure
them of Jamaica's continued solidarity with the people
of East Timor.

Let me also thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for
his leadership of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and for his
comprehensive briefing. In addition, we thank the
Associate Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the Vice-
President of the World Bank for the contributions their
organizations are making to East Timor's development.

Following the success of elections in East Timor
on 30 August, and UNTAET's progress in
implementing the mandate given to it in resolution
1272 (1999), it is important for the Council to take
another look at the future role of the United Nations
and the way ahead for the people of East Timor. In so
doing, we are mindful of and agree wholeheartedly
with the words of the Secretary-General:
"The essential requirement in the case of East
Timor is to ensure that the enormous sacrifices of
the East Timorese, the substantial investments of
the international community, and the cooperation
of the parties required to bring about a successful
transition to independence are not squandered for
lack of international attention and support for the
new State". (S/2001/394, para. 43)

As Ambassador Mahbubani has indicated, the
Council has been discussing for several months the
transition from peacekeeping to peace-building. We
now have a concrete case before us, East Timor, and it
is important for us to demonstrate that we will move
from words to action. We must therefore work quickly
to address the problems that still exist and to build on
the gains achieved over the past two years. We must
continue to lay the groundwork for the establishment of
an effective administration by emphasizing capacity-
building and the training of the East Timorese for self-
government and independence.

We are pleased with UNTAET's continued focus
on accelerated devolution of authority. The Constituent
Assembly has been sworn in and has begun its work on
the Constitution. A Second Transitional Government
has been established. Along with the devolution of
authority to the executive, the recruitment and training
of civil servants have improved. A functioning public
administration staffed by East Timorese is evolving.

We also note that three times as many refugees
returned to East Timor in September as in August. We
must also work to ensure the safety of those in West
Timor. In both instances, the cooperation of the
Indonesian Government remains important. We are
therefore disappointed that talks on the security phase
imposed by the Office of the United Nations Security
Coordinator have not borne much fruit and that there is
no agreement on the memorandum of understanding.
The Indonesian Government's plans to cease providing
humanitarian assistance to refugees give greater
urgency to these talks, and we hope that future
discussions will be conducted in a spirit of compromise
and understanding.

We welcome the cooperation between UNTAET's
military component and the Indonesian armed forces,
as well as the agreement to improve security
cooperation. We would like to commend the Indonesian
Government for its efforts in this regard, and reiterate
that the continued promotion of good relations between
the two Governments is essential to East Timor's future.
We must also consider the dangers posed to a
sustainable and lasting peace by debilitating poverty
and underdevelopment. My delegation therefore
attaches great importance to continued progress in East
Timor's economic and social development. The
Secretary-General's report notes that the decrease in
United Nations personnel and expenditure will
adversely affect the territory's economic growth. We
agree that poverty-reduction initiatives and structural
reforms are a good start. We therefore welcome the
continued efforts of the UNDP and the World Bank to
assist in the areas of poverty alleviation and
reconstruction. But we must also assist the people of
East Timor in creating an enabling environment for
sustained economic growth and sustainable
development. Coordination and proper planning to
ensure simultaneous development in the areas of health
and education, as well as in the agricultural sector, will
ensure that overall development is promoted.

It is clear that the accomplishments of UNTAET
since the 1999 referendum are substantial, and that it
has been successfully implementing many parts of the
mandate given to it in resolution 1272 (1999).
Nevertheless, it is clear also that the people of East
Timor will require further support. The Secretary-
General points out in his report that the primary focus
of the successor mission will be to ensure the security
of East Timor and the viability and stability of its
government structures. It is in this context that we fully
support the Secretary-General's recommendations for
an international presence after independence.

I wish to make a few comments on the issues
raised in the Secretary-General's report.

First, the military component must work
effectively with the judicial system to achieve the
maintenance of law and order. Both have implications
for reconciliation and refugee return. We support a
military component that is able to address internal and
external threats to East Timor, and we look forward to
the further development of the East Timor Police
Service and the East Timor Defence Force. Further
downgrading of the military component should take
place only with the parallel development of the
capacity of local law enforcement and defence
authorities. Certainly, there will be a need for constant
review as developments require.

Secondly, with regard to the civilian component,
the Secretary-General has pointed to a significant lack
of local expertise needed to perform core functions
essential to the stability and functioning of the
Government, and we have heard these addressed by
previous speakers. In the light of the importance of
these 100 core functions, we support the
recommendation that they be funded from assessed
contributions.

However, paragraph 80 of the Secretary-
General's report points out:

"Owing to the unprecedented scope of the
UNTAET mandate, and the need to build the
administration from the ground up, further
external assistance beyond these core functions
will unquestionably be required to ensure broader
government services." (S/2001/983)

The paragraph also notes that there will be need
for funding from voluntary contributions and that, in
addition to the 100 core functions, we will need 135
functions which are crucial to the effectiveness of the
new State.

We therefore join the Secretary-General in his
appeal to donors to contribute generously in order to
meet these needs.

Thirdly, we are concerned that the justice system
is still at a nascent stage, and we agree that it will
require close attention. We therefore support a greater
emphasis on the justice system and on human rights,
and we encourage greater support in the Territory's
civil administration in particular.

Fourthly, we commend UNTAET for its attention
to gender issues. We are gratified at the recent election
of a number of women to the Constituent Assembly,
and we feel it is important for the future of East Timor
to continue to make provisions to deal with the role of
women in society. We strongly support the view that
gender initiatives should continue to form an integral
part of the civilian component, and it is probably very
propitious that we were able to adopt the presidential
statement today on women and peace and security.

Fifthly, consistent with the importance that we
attach to the process of reconciliation, we support the
Secretary-General's plans for the Serious Crimes Unit.
My delegation believes that the prosecution of those
responsible for war crimes and other heinous acts is
essential to the maintenance of, and respect for, law
and order, and that this will have a positive impact on
reconciliation.

In the same vein, we hope that the Indonesian
Supreme Court will soon undertake a review of the
verdicts handed down to those responsible for the
deaths of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees staff members on 6 September 2000.
The Secretary-General's report has identified a
number of crucial areas in the structure of the East
Timor Government that will require our continued
support. If we are to be consistent in our approach and
our commitment to the people of East Timor, the
international community must ensure that adequate and
assured financial support is provided where needed.

But based on the past experience of UNTAET, it
is clear that we cannot rely substantially on voluntary
contributions. The Secretary-General's report indicates
that voluntary contributions are already stretched thin
in East Timor and that even the two primary trust funds
are not yet fully resourced. Furthermore, as we have
heard this morning, United Nations agencies are
experiencing serious substantial constraints.

We would wish to emphasize that we have gone
so far based on the determination, the commitment and
the sacrifice of the people of East Timor and their
leaders, the guidance of UNTAET and the close
involvement of the Council and the international
community. As East Timor joins the international
community, we must not breach the trust which the
people of East Timor have placed in us. We owe it to
them not only to welcome them into the international
community but also to ensure their future.

