Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank Mr. Kim
Won-soo for his briefing. Let me take this opportunity
to express my appreciation to him for his commitment
and dedicated service as Under-Secretary-General
and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs
since June 2015. I would also like to congratulate his
successor, Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu.

The report of the use of chemical weapons in Idlib
yesterday is indeed very shocking. What we have seen
in videos and pictures is simply heartbreaking. Earlier,
the representative of Uruguay expressed so eloquently
what we also felt at this gruesome sight. We express
our profound sympathy for the victims of the attack.
As we have stated before, we are concerned about
continued reports of the use of chemical weapons in
Syria, including the eight incidents that have been
recorded since the beginning of the year. We strongly
condemn any use of chemical weapons by any State or
non-State actor.

The use of chemicals as weapons is unacceptable
and unjustifiable under any circumstances. We agree
with what the Secretary-General stated in his letter
dated 27 March 2017:

"The continuing use of toxic chemicals as
weapons, as well as the use of chemical weapons
in the Syrian Arab Republic, imperils the long-
established norm against such weapons. Their
use is intolerable and impunity must be stopped
by identifying and holding those responsible to
account." (S/2017/260, p.I)

We hope the reported attack in Idlib will be
investigated by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Fact-finding Mission in
the Syrian Arab Republic as effectively as possible. In
this regard, we welcome the statement of the OPCW
that indicated that the fact-finding mission is in the
process of gathering and analysing information from
all available sources. More importantly, after a proper
investigation process, the perpetrators of the attack
should be identified by the OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) based on reliable
evidence in order to ensure accountability. It is very
critical that whatever action is taken by the Security
Council is and appears to be based on credible evidence
about which no well-meaning and objectively disposed
person could have doubts.

The continued reports of chemical attacks in Syria
give us additional justification for fully supporting
the work of the Joint Investigative Mechanism.
That is why it is so critical that the JIM. resume its
work as expeditiously as possible. Without its full
operationalization, the Council would be unable to
ensure accountability, which we believe is imperative
for holding perpetrators to account and deterring
the further use of chemical weapons. It is therefore
essential to provide all necessary support for the JIM
so that it could resume and conduct this investigation in
a professional, independent and impartial manner.

It is not only a matter of ensuring justice to the
victims of chemical-weapons attacks in Syria, but it is
also about preserving the non-proliferation architecture
that is a critical pillar for maintaining global peace and
security. The proliferation of chemical weapons and their
use including by terrorists is a source of grave concern
and poses a serious threat to peace and stability in the
region and beyond. Such a threat could be sustainably
addressed if political and diplomatic solutions are
given primacy. Only an inclusive political process
could ultimately address the Syrian crisis and stop the
horrible attacks, including what we saw yesterday, from
continuing to cause unspeakable suffering to the people
of Syria. Without underestimating the challenges that
lie ahead, we note the limited progress made in the fifth
round of intra-Syrian talks, which concluded a few days
ago. We look forward to the briefing by Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura next week.

In conclusion, we are inclined to look favourably at

the draft resolution proposed by the United Kingdom,
the United States and France. It is our conviction that,
the more united the Council is with respect to the actions
that it takes on the matter, the easier the international
community will find it to control the menace of the use
of chemical weapons. That is why we look forward to
finding common ground to ensure that there is unity
within the Council so that investigations are conducted
as speedily and as effectively as possible.

