Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): 1 thank Mr. Ivica
Daeic', First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs Hashim Thaci of
Kosovo for their statements. I also thank Mr. Farid
Zarif, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for his briefing. Let me
express our appreciation for his dedicated service at
the helm of UNMIK and wish him every success in his
new appointment as Special Representative for Liberia.
I also wish our colleague Zahir Tanin of Afghanistan
every success in his new job as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Kosovo.

We reiterate our support for the continued
efforts of the European Union (EU) in facilitating
the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue. Some concrete steps
have already been taken in implementing the 19 April
2013 First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations, including on the integration
of judiciary and civil protection personnel. Issues of
energy, telecoms, the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo,
freedom of movement and the Mitrovica bridge continue
to be the focus of the discussions in the framework of
the dialogue.

We welcome the progress achieved on the texts
on the establishment of the association/community of
Serb-maj ority municipalities and on the implementation
arrangements in the field of telecoms, and encourage
the parties to demonstrate political will and engage
constructively in reaching final political agreement
on these and on other remaining matters, so necessary
for the normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina. Such normalization would first and
foremost benefit the peoples of Kosovo and Serbia,
with the mutual recognition of diplomas, the insurance
of vehicles and freedom of movement being just a few
of the concrete advantages that this would bring. We
welcome the the memorandum of understanding on the
mutual recognition of vehicle insurance policies, signed
on the margins of the most recent EU-facilitated high-
level meeting. The practical cooperation between the
mayors of Mitrovicaon steps taken to facilitate returns
is yet another sign of progress.

Like other delegations today, we welcome the
adoption by the Assembly of Kosovo and signature by
the President of the constitutional amendments and the
law on the specialist court and the specialist prosecutor's
office to try cases arising from the findings of the
Special Investigative Task Force. We encourage the
establishment of the specialist court with a mechanism
for witness protection and hope to ensure that it will
become operational at the earliest possibility.

We reiterate our support for the European integration
efforts of both Kosovo and Serbia. The path of integration
requires the constant and dedicated implementation of
reforms. The EU's long-standing engagement is a clear
demonstration of its firm commitment to the countries
of the region. We expect a swift signature of the EU
Stabilization and Association Agreement with Kosovo.
It would strengthen EU-Kosovo relations and continue
to provide a solid framework for the necessary social
and economic reforms. We welcome the measures
taken by the Kosovar authorities to address the issue
of violent extremism and note that these efforts could
be reinforced through strengthened cooperation among
the countries of the region. While the security situation
has remained calm, we note the continued role played
by the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo in ensuring security and
consolidating the rule of law.

Finally, acknowledging progress in the
normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina and the stability in Kosovo, like our colleague
from the United Kingdom, we reiterate our view that
such progress should lead to reducing the frequency of
UNMIK debates in the Council, also given the large
and growing number of truly critical peace and security
situations the Council has to tackle every day.

