Ms. Boucher (Canada) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to join other speakers in thanking
Cote d'Ivoire for having organized this open debate, as
well as yesterday's debate, which was presided over by
President Ouattara (see S/PV.8413). I can think of no
more critical subject to discuss in this Chamber.

The prevention of violent conflict is at the heart of
both the Charter of the United Nations and of the rules-
based international order that we have built together.
Together, we have achieved considerable success in
preventing and resolving conflicts. This is especially
clear in the case of West Africa. Fifteen years ago, the
Council was seized of crises such as the civil wars in
Liberia, Cote d'Ivoire and Sierra Leone. Today, the last
peacekeepers have withdrawn, and those three countries
are no longer on the Council's agenda. This is a story
of determination and perseverance, as demonstrated
by the Economic Community of West African States
and the African Union and its member States. It is a
story of partnership. As the response to the crisis in
the Gambia demonstrated, when action among regional
and international partners is closely coordinated, such
partnerships deliver results.

Canada recognizes the important contributions and
key leadership of African States, the African Union
(AU) and subregional organizations in improving
the effectiveness of United Nations peace operations
and peacebuilding more generally. We welcome the
development of regional and subregional early-warning
mechanisms across the continent. We welcome also
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security and
encourage its full implementation.

We are committed to contributing to capacity-
building in African countries and to working together
to develop African-led solutions to increase the impact
of efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts. Furthermore,
we believe that, beyond the annual joint consultative
meeting of the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the United Nations Security Council,
further opportunities exist to strengthen cooperation
between the Councils, including through joint field
visits.

Together, we can accomplish more. This is why
we encourage efforts to find more predictable, flexible
and sustainable financing mechanisms for African-led
peace operations, and we hope to see concrete progress
on developing such mechanisms.

(spoke in English)

Fundamentally, preventing conflict and sustaining
peace is about building trust between Governments
and their peoples. Such trust cannot be established
haphazardly. Only by fostering inclusive institutions
that bring in and amplify diverse voices - including
those of women, young people and indigenous, ethnic
and religious minorities - can meaningful and
sustainable peace take hold.
Peace cannot be imposed from the outside, and
it cannot be built overnight. But the United Nations,
its Member States and regional organizations have a
critical role to play in helping Governments respond
to the needs of their populations and protect their
human rights, and in helping populations to hold their
Governments to account.

On the ground, in Mali, Canada is assisting
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, working with the Institut
malien de recherche-action pour la paix and Interpeace,
to better understand the conflict dynamics and sources
of resilience in Ansongo, Bourem and Gao. This
process has involved consultation with local authorities,
women's groups, youth groups and security and defence
forces with a view to finding consensus-based solutions
to the priorities for peace as they define them. Better
understanding between communities builds trust; trust
builds confidence; and trusting, confident communities
build peace together.

Finally, in order for the international community
itself to remain a trusted partner in conflict prevention,
our own systems need to reform to ensure greater
accountability, transparency, predictability and
coherence.

Canada strongly supports the Secretary-General's
vision on conflict prevention and sustaining peace. We
welcome his plans to restructure the United Nations
peace and security architecture, his 2018 report on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2018/43) and the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. The United Nations-
World Bank Pathways for Peace report sets forward a
compelling, evidence-based case for these reforms, and
we endorse without reservation its recommendations to
reduce fragmentation.

As a stalwart defender of multilateral approaches
to addressing conflict, Canada is committed to
working together, with the Council, to ensure that our
institutions and approaches embody the very best that
the international community has to offer. Should we be
elected to serve on the Security Council for the 2021-
2022 term, Council members can be sure that Canada
will continue to work tirelessly towards this goal.

