Mr. Perovie (Montenegro): We thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened today's debate
on children and armed conflict, and we commend
Malaysia's strong commitment to the issue during its
term on the Council. I would also like to thank today's
briefers for their presentations and their important
work on the issue.

Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European
Union. I would like, however, to highlight some points
of particular importance to my country.

We are witnessing the dramatic consequences
of the violence affecting 230 million children in the
world owing to the evolving character of contemporary
conflicts. Heinous crimes are being committed, with
an alarming rise in abductions, especially the mass
abductions of children that have taken place in Syria,
Iraq, Nigeria and South Sudan. The issue of children
and armed conflict is a global one that requires an
urgent and collective response, and the adoption of
today's resolution 2225 (2015) is a step forward in
advancing the agenda of children and armed conflict.

This year marks the first anniversary of the
"Children, Not Soldiers" campaign, which is aimed
at ending the recruitment and use of children by
Government armed forces in conflict by 2016. That is an
ambitious undertaking that requires working together
and sharing our expertise and resources in order to end
child recruitment in the next two years. The example
of Chad proves that action plans can work. We call on
all parties, States and non-State actors that have not
concluded action plans to follow the example of Chad,
and we call on those that have signed to honour their
commitments in full. In that regard, we would like to
stress that Member States must enable United Nations
personnel to gain access to areas controlled by armed
non-State actors in order to end violations there, as well
as to conclude and implement action plans.

We see the increasing and worrying trend of attacks
on schools and their use for military purposes, as well
as the abduction and detention of children, which we
find alarming. At the same time, we must be aware
that the consequences of such attacks go beyond the
destruction of schools. They concern the future of an
entire generation, a future without hope that will only
sow the seeds of further conflict. We therefore welcome
the emphasis in resolution 2143 (2014) on concerns
regarding the military use of schools, and would like
to take this opportunity to call on all parties to armed
conflict to refrain from such use. In that regard, we
also welcome the adoption today of resolution 2225
(2015) and the addition of abduction as a new trigger
for the listing of parties to conflict in the annexes to
the Secretary-General's report on children and armed
conflict (see S/2015/409). Such addition will enhance
our ability to hold perpetrators to account.

More, however, needs to be done. The International
Criminal Court (ICC) and national judicial authorities
have an important role to play in responding to
violations as they occur. It is also Vital that the Security
Council make use whenever possible of the option of
referring situations to the ICC, and that the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict should further
consider means of increasing pressure on persistent
perpetrators of human rights violations and putting an
end to impunity.

With regard to United Nations peacekeeping
and political missions and the indispensable role
they play, Montenegro would like to advocate for the
incorporation of a strong child-protection component
in the missions' mandates. Such incorporation would
require that peacekeepers and military and security
personnel receive specialized pre-deployment training
on child protection.

Montenegro remains committed to our noble joint
objectives and to rising to the challenge of providing
the world's children with a safer future.

