Mr. Owada (Japan): Let me begin by stating the
fundamental position of Japan that it is Japan's sincere
wish to see Iraq immediately and unconditionally comply
with all the relevant resolutions of the Security Council so
that Iraq can resume normal relations with the
international community. It is for this reason that Japan,
after the Iraqi decision on 29 October to impose
conditions on its cooperation with the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM), has made a series of
diplomatic efforts in Tokyo, in Paris and in New York to
persuade Iraq to comply fully with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. But Iraq has not responded positively
to these efforts by Japan.

Other countries, both within and outside the Council,
as well as the Secretary-General through the dispatch of
his three envoys, have also endeavoured to persuade Iraq
to rescind its decision. It is most regrettable that Iraq has
to this day not rescinded its decision of 29 October.

The Security Council pronounced its unequivocal
and united position through the presidential statement of
29 October 1997 [S/PRST/ 1997/49] that the Iraqi decision
of 29 October is unacceptable. It demanded that Iraq
cooperate fully with UNSCOM. in accordance with the
relevant resolutions, and without any conditions or
restrictions.

The exclusion of UNSCOM. personnel of a certain
nationality from field activities is totally unacceptable
from the standpoint of ensuring the effective execution of
UNSCOM's mandate and in the light of Article 100 of

 

the Charter of the United Nations. Also, Iraq's position on
the aircraft operating on behalf of UNSCOM. cannot be
accepted. What is more, the letter dated 5 November 1997
from the Executive Chairman of UN SCOM. [8/1997/851]
states that Iraq had moved dual-use equipment subject to
monitoring by UNSCOM. without the required prior
notification and had apparently tampered with UNSCOM's
monitoring cameras. As indicated by the Executive
Chairman of UNSCOM, Ambassador Butler, such acts
might prejudice the future long-term monitoring capabilities
of the Special Commission and of the International Atomic
Energy Agency. This is a cause for grave concern on our
part.

The Security Council must address the issue of the
Iraqi decision to impose conditions on its cooperation with
UNSCOM. with the utmost seriousness, in particular
because the issue concerns the programme of the
elimination of weapons of mass destruction from Iraqi soil
and directly affects peace and security in the region.

In the course of the recent repeated cases of Iraqi non-
cooperation with UNSCOM, which has continued since
June, Iraq has been given ample time to accept the
Council's just and unequivocal demand that it cooperate
immediately and unconditionally with UN SCOM. Iraq had
been offered a chance to rescind its decision of 29 October
when the Secretary-General dispatched three envoys to
Baghdad last week.

Despite these efforts, Iraq continues to refuse to
resume full cooperation with UNSCOM. Instead, Iraqi
authorities are suggesting unacceptable preconditions for its
resumption of cooperation with UNSCOM. and for its
compliance with the relevant resolutions. Such Iraqi actions
are a challenge to the authority of the Security Council, as
well as to the international community.

Under these circumstances, the Security Council,
acting in unity and with firmness, is going to declare that
this Iraqi position is unacceptable. The Council demands
that the Iraqi Government cooperate immediately and
unconditionally with UNSCOM.

Japan joins all the other members of the Council in
support of this draft resolution.

In conclusion, Japan calls on the Government of Iraq
to accede to this united voice of the international
community.

