Mr. Radomski (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
today's briefers for their very informative briefings. I
would also like to thank the South African presidency
for organizing this debate, which addresses the
core element of the Security Council mission - the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Poland recognizes the importance and centrality
of preventive diplomacy in conflict prevention and
resolution, especially with regard to the United Nations
peacekeeping missions on the African continent. As
it has already been noted during today's meeting,
preventive diplomacy is and has been utilized by the
United Nations system at large. However, it has not
always been regarded as a central pillar of the work
of the Security Council. Nevertheless, we believe that
tackling the complexity arising from the evolving
nature of conflicts requires a wide range of activities,
which should address the conflicts in a comprehensive
way, while using all of the available instruments and
embracing all actors on different stages, from local
communities to the highest political level.

With regard to the processes themselves, Poland
believes that it is essential for the work to be framed
within the three main pillars ofthe Organization - first,
in peace and security processes, with the meaningful
participation of women and minorities; secondly,
sustainable development, which goes hand in hand with
building resilience; and, thirdly, consistent respect for
human rights and the rule of law. In addition, we believe
that it is crucial to extend the cooperation in conflict
prevention to the private sector in order to align the
core business community with the strategic goals of
the international community. In that respect, when
thinking of such practical options as resource-pooling
in conflict prevention, we should consider leveraging
more private resources for development, possibly in the
form of blended, private-public financing. Promoting
good economic performance and a propitious
macroeconomic climate will significantly help to
combat tensions on the social and political fronts, boost
investment and ensure stability for the long term.
Poland believes that all stakeholders should
continue to invest in new methods of generating
financial resources and innovative tools for gathering
information and analysing data to better determine the
most urgent risks and threats to peace and security and
where the assistance of the international community
is most needed. Let me underline the importance of
enhanced cooperation among the United Nations, the
African Union (AU) and other regional and subregional
organizations in conflict prevention and mediation, as
outlined in the Joint United Nations-African Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security and
in the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative. In
that context, we refer to Chapter VIII, Article 52, of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Constitutive Act
of the African Union, which highlight the importance
of regional bodies in the peaceful settlement of disputes
and the primacy of preventive diplomacy as a first step
towards conflict prevention and resolution.

While we reflect today on conflict prevention and
resolution, let me stress the importance of mediation.
In that regard, I would like to refer to the words
of European Union High Representative Federica
Mogherini, who said recently in New York that there
is a need for a new generation of mediators, especially
those who understand technology and can use it for
the greater good. Furthermore, we are pleased to see
that, thanks to Finland and Turkey, the initiative of
the Group of Friends of Mediation, is thriving and
expanding every year.

In conclusion, let me once again emphasize that
conflict prevention and mediation are core principles
of the United Nations Charter and should be more
prominently reflected in the work of the Security
Council. I believe that today's meeting contributes to
this goal.

