Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): It is of
the greatest importance that the Council today, in this
public and open debate, is addressing the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories. This is not simply
another meeting of the Council on the question; it is a
meeting that is taking place at a critical moment
characterized by a serious deterioration in the situation
on the ground in the occupied territories and in
relations between Palestinians and Israelis. In fact, we
are witnessing a deterioration unprecedented since the
Oslo agreements. Today, instead of a peace process
between Palestinians and Israelis, we are witnessing a
process of war that is causing enormous damage and
may engulf the region in flames.

It is appropriate to recall today that, against the
backdrop of an Israeli occupation that has continued
for several decades, the Government of Ariel Sharon
initiated a systematic policy of aggression against the
Palestinian people, destroying their property, imposing
economic blockades on their towns and villages and
collective punishment through the repeated use of
excessive and sustained force with all the weapons in
the Israeli arsenal, and using force on a daily basis
against unarmed Palestinian civilians.

The path chosen by the Government of Mr.
Sharon has undone all that has been accomplished over
the past 10 years. His policy of calling into question
commitments and obligations undertaken by Israeli in
agreements concluded with the Palestinians is a source
of concern and conflict. There is no doubt that since he
took power, Mr. Sharon has, unfortunately, turned his
back on peace efforts and on the peace process that
provided the framework and was the agreed way to
advance peace.

The worst thing about this situation is that
Mr. Sharon has now moved on to what could be called
Act II of his destructive enterprise: his methodical
policy of ruthlessness and destruction of everything
that symbolizes the Palestinians and the Palestinian
Authority. The Israeli Government's decision to cut off
all contact with President Arafat is the clearest example
of this.

Since the concept of the right to a Palestinian
State has finally, at long last, been recognized by the
entire international community - I am referring, I am
sure the Council will understand, to the recent
statements made by President Bush and Secretary of
State Colin Powell - Prime Minister Sharon has now
opted to undermine everything symbolic of this State in
order to keep it from being reborn and from existing.
The Israeli Prime Minister's enterprise is also aimed at
undermining the very notion of the peace process.

Clearly, it is urgent for the international
community, and in particular for the Security Council,
to take determined and resolute action to stop this
serious deterioration in the situation as soon as possible
so that at this late stage, we can be spared a further
explosion, which, as we all know, will serve neither
peace nor security for either of the parties concerned.

The situation is clear. There is an Israeli
occupation, recognized and designated as such by
Security Council resolutions. This occupation, which
has pushed the frustrations of the Palestinians to their
ultimate limits, must end. The appropriate way to end
these misfortunes is through a negotiated settlement,
arrived at through negotiations between the two parties
within the framework of the peace process. This is the
only way that peace can be restored. In 2000 both
parties had taken a step towards that objective. They
must return to the path of negotiation.

The policy of the Israeli Government is the very
denial of peace. One cannot carry out daily physical
aggression against an entire people, and aggression
against their rights, and at the same time forbid them to
demand what is rightly theirs. This is where the central
problem in the Palestinian issue lies. It is high time for
this situation to change and for the Palestinian people,
like other peoples in the region, to exercise their right
to freedom and dignity in an independent State with
Al Quds as its capital.

For a year the Security Council has faced a
pressing demand for action to break the deadlock and
encourage momentum for a return to the peace
negotiations. Clearly, that momentum has not been
generated by the parties themselves. Support from the
international community is required to that end, and it
is the Security Council and the United Nations that all
are looking to today. In the course of numerous
previous exercises, the Council has been unable to play
its rightful role. It is high time for it to be able to play
that role for the sake of peace and stability in the
region. The Council cannot allow itself to ignore what
is taking place in Palestine. Its course of action is to
support the efforts carried out by various international
actors.

Tunisia, a moderate peace- and justice-loving
country that has supported the peace process since it
began in Madrid, today renews this appeal to the
Council to act without delay.

