Mrs. Kafanabo (United Republic of Tanzania): At
the outset, let me thank your delegation, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate. We also thank Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his
informative briefing. This debate comes at an
opportune time, as it is taking place 60 years after the
adoption of the Geneva Conventions, which provide
for the protection of civilians in time of conflict.

It is distressing that there are still many conflict
situations in many parts of the world where civilians are
in dire need of protection and where their human rights
and dignity are grossly violated. On 10 December 2008,
we commemorated in the General Assembly 60 years of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In doing
so, we reaffirmed the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and stated, inter alia, that we have a duty to step
up our efforts to promote and protect all human rights
and to prevent, stop and redress all human rights
violations. That is a duty we have to fulfil as we
deliberate the protection of civilians in conflict.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
not an option for warring parties - it is mandatory.
While parties to a conflict are duty-bound to protect
civilians, in particular the most vulnerable groups, such
as women and children, what we are witnessing on the
ground is very different. Civilians, and in particular
women and children, have become direct targets in
wars. Women and children are subject to atrocities such
as rape, sexual and gender-based violence, forced
labour and all forms of violence. We condemn all
parties that perpetuate all forms of violence and
violations of human rights against civilian populations.
Indeed, the protection of civilians is a matter of human
rights obligations in all its manifestations, for victims
are robbed of their dignity irrespective of who they are
or who they support in a conflict.

It is unacceptable that civilians should be left to
suffer as conflicts rage on. We must act to end
impunity, in our national capacities and collectively.
National and international legal systems need to be
strengthened to ensure that justice takes its course for
those who abuse and violate human rights and that
victims are adequately compensated. We therefore urge
warring parties to respect international law, in
particular international humanitarian and refugee law,
and allow free access for humanitarian aid and workers
and ensure their protection.

The responsibility to guarantee international
peace and security is a matter for all Members of the
United Nations, individually and in our regional and
subregional organizations. In that endeavour, we are all
responsible, not only for our acts for or against peace
and security, but also for acts of those in areas of our
jurisdiction. The United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations all have a role to play.

I will illustrate this using the African region as an
example. We have the Peer Review Mechanism in
tandem with the New Partnership for Africa's
Development; we have various pacts and protocols at
the level of African subregions, such as the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development, under which a
protocol on the protection of refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and their property rights was
elaborated. Similarly, a protocol on the prevention and
punishment of the crime of genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and all forms of
discrimination has been elaborated. I believe that
subregional organizations elsewhere have similar
instruments. The United Nations needs to collaborate
with regional institutions in order to strengthen these
instruments.

It is of great importance to support all efforts
geared towards protecting civilians in armed conflict.
The best protection for civilians is to end conflicts. It is
thus of greater importance to address the causes of
conflict in the first place. As the Secretary-General
once said, without peace there cannot be development,
and without development there cannot be peace. In that
regard, we call upon the international community to
work with the United Nations to cause development to
prevail at sustainable levels.

Safety for civilians in camps for refugees and
IDPs would go a long way towards dissuading civilians
and children from following the path of war. Besides
bad governance and lack of democracy, ignorance,
disease and poverty are also factors driving of civilians
and children to joining armed parties, be they militias
or disputed Governments. Further, we call upon the
States Members of the United Nations to elaborate
further on the concept of the responsibility to protect,
as well as on human security as additional response
mechanisms in the protection of civilians and in ending
conflicts.

I wish to conclude by reiterating the commitment
of the Government of Tanzania to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and its willingness to work
with the international community in this regard.

