Ms. Power (United States ofAmerica): I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his reports. Madam
President, you are voting with your feet by being here and
presiding over today's meeting. The United Kingdom's
leadership on this issue and continued emphasis on the
link between security and development is extremely
important. I would also like to thank Mr. Skoog for
his briefing, and to welcome Ms. Bouchamaoui to
the Council and congratulate her on her Nobel Prize,
which we do not often get to do in the Security Council.
Much more important than the Prize, however, is her
resilience and stubborn determination, and that of
the Tunisian people, to build a stable and prosperous
democracy. The one thing they do not have to worry
about is the possibility of the world turning its back on
them. We are completely with them and in awe of what
they have done so far, and we will be their enduring
partner, through thick and thin, as they move forward.
We know how difficult that is, and it is important not
only for Tunisia but also for the entire region and the
world as a whole.

Before I begin, I also want to offer my deepest
condolences to Ambassador Delattre and the people of
France. His great nation is America's oldest ally. We
share history, values and ideals. We have stood together
time and again, and today we do so with a heavy
heart but with more determination than ever. We are
ready to help in any way we can. We also extend our
condolences to the families of those lost in the apparent
bomb attack on the Russian plane, as well as to the
victims and the families ofthose victims of the horrific
attacks in Lebanon and Iraq. We are dealing with a
brutal movement, and it must be stopped in its tracks.

Every week we meet in this Chamber and debate
how best to respond to an ever-evolving set of threats
to international peace and security. Last week we
convened on Somalia (see S/PV.7554), a country where
we are supporting both security operations against
violent terrorists and parallel efforts to assist a political
transition. We met on Syria, where a revolution that
began against a repressive regime has mutated into
that regime's indiscriminate killing of masses of
civilians on a daily basis. That, of course, is a war with
ramifications that touch all of us and that has enabled
the rise of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. We
also adopted a resolution on Burundi (resolution 2248 (2015)), where at least 280,000 people have fled their
homes, with many seeking shelter in neighbouring
countries.

In 1941, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt
introduced the idea of the four freedoms - freedom
of speech, freedom of worship, freedom from want
and freedom from fear. All of them are intertwined,
and to pretend otherwise is perilous. We - all the
States Members of the United Nations - must dedicate
ourselves to tackling the causes of fear and want in our
societies. We must build strong institutions that respect
human rights and are accountable to our peoples and
their needs. As the crises in the headlines remind
us - and, indeed, as last week's horrific events in
Paris, Beirut and Baghdad underscore - today the
threats to international peace and security are diverse.
Our approach to countering them must be similarly
multifaceted. That requires not just the effective use of
every tool in our toolbox but also a complete picture of
the threats and the factors driving them.

Today the Council has a welcome opportunity
to discuss one root cause that is too often
overlooked - underdevelopment. As President Obama
has said,

"[I]t is the lack of development, when people have
no education and no jobs and no hope, when they
feel that their basic human dignity is being violated,
that helps to fuel so much of the tension, the conflict
and the instability in our world." (A/70/PV.11, p. 2)

That causal connection is recognized in the Sustainable
Development Goals adopted by the General Assembly
in September (resolution 70/1), in which Goal 16
explicitly notes that an absence of development
endangers peace and security. Of course, the reverse
is also true. Development is not a panacea that will
eliminate all threats. We all know that there are certain
people who become terrorists despite being very well
off and coming from lives of privilege. But in many
contexts, and particularly in the places where we
deploy peacekeepers and political teams, development
challenges, including a lack of economic opportunity,
poor governance and human-rights abuses, are
themselves the kerosene that fuels instability. It is the
job of development agencies to directly address many
of those drivers, but I would like to briefly describe
three ways in which the Council can also help.

First, the Council must encourage and enable
the recognition of development concerns and their
integration into security assessments, peacekeeping
strategies and peacebuilding programmes. That will
enable us to have a more nuanced understanding of
the dynamics shaping the conditions on the ground
and thereby improve the design of our interventions.
We cannot just play "whack-a-mole" once a conflict is
already brewing. To that end, the United States supports
the Secretariat's efforts to break down "stovepipes"
across the United Nations system in order to enable us
to make more holistic and nuanced assessments and
responses. And, as proposed through the Human Rights
Up Front initiative, we should also seek operational
changes within the United Nations system that promote
system-wide analysis and early warning in situations of
concern. Such early warnings will enable more timely
action aimed at preventing or responding to large-scale
violations ofhuman rights. I believe that that is what we
are now seeking to do in Burundi and have been over
the course of the past year.

Secondly, we must ensure that peacekeeping
is accompanied by peacebuilding. The success of
peacebuilding programmes is of direct interest to the
Council, because it will help determine whether or
not a country lapses back into conflict and right back
onto the Council's agenda. Recent events in Burundi
have underscored just how conflict-affected countries
can progress with peacebuilding and development but
then slip back into crisis, causing such heartbreak
for so many. The 2015 peacebuilding architecture
review (S/2015/490) offers a valuable opportunity for
strengthening the peacebuilding architecture of the
United Nations and ensuring that it integrates political,
security, development, human rights and rule-of-law
activities. We all know that we need to work through
how to make the relationship between the Security
Council and the peacebuilding architecture more
effective.

Thirdly and lastly, we must be realistic in our
planning. As we design peacekeeping missions, we must
ensure that they not only address all facets of whatever
conflict is currently before us, but also that they are
equipped to maintain security while critical progress
is being made in development. Consider Sierra Leone,
where the United Nations maintained a presence whose
form evolved alongside the country's transition from
civil war to immediate post-conflict peacebuilding
to development. That transition continues, but it has
already produced a stronger Government and a more
resilient community that was able to withstand and
eventually defeat Ebola. The case of Sierra Leone
reminds us that not long ago there would have been
those who questioned the relevance of a disease, an
epidemic such as Ebola, to the Council's work. We
have since seen how directly something like that can
threaten regional and international security. In this
new era, we cannot choose the drivers of conflict and
insecurity that we wish to address. We must instead
seek to identify and better understand all of them, in
order to more effectively fulfil our mandate. Today's
debate represents an important step in this direction.

