Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to thank the High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Ms. Mogherini, for her briefing.

As an important partner in cooperation with the
United Nations and the Security Council, the European
Union (EU) has been actively involved in strengthening
multilateralism and enhancing the role of the United
Nations. It has been deeply engaged in the resolution of
hotspot issues in regions in Europe, the Middle East and
Africa, and has played an important role in maintaining
regional peace and stability. China expresses its
appreciation in that connection.

We live in a world in which countries are becoming
more interdependent and our future is becoming more
intertwined. China supports the United Nations and the
Security Council in deepening their cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations, such as the EU,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

First, the United Nations and the EU should join
hands in upholding multilateralism. In today's world,
unilateralism and protectionism are on the rise and the
international order and the global system of governance
are under attack. Multilateralism is needed now
more than ever before. Parties must work together to
safeguard the international system and the collective
security mechanism, with the United Nations at their
core, and enhance the role and standing of the United
Nations in international affairs.

Secondly, the United Nations and the EU must
uphold the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter by respecting the sovereignty of States and the
development path chosen independently by the countries
concerned. They must further resolve disputes through
diplomatic means, such as dialogue, good offices and
mediation, inter alia, and respect the leading role of
relevant countries and regional organizations, such as
the African Union, in relevant relevant issuespolitical
settlement processes.

Thirdly, there is space for cooperation between the
United Nations and the EU in promoting sustainable
development. As a party with advantages in economic
development, the EU has a lot to offer in terms of helping
and supporting developing countries in achieving the
goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
by strengthening North-South cooperation, in line with
the needs of the developing countries and working in
synergy with the United Nations.

China highly values its relationship with the EU. We
support EU integration and welcome a united, stable and
prosperous Europe. China is ready to continue to work
with the EU through platforms of cooperation, such as
the Belt and Road Initiative, to make new headway in
the China-EU partnership for peace, growth, reform
and civilization, thereby making new contributions to
world peace, stability and prosperity.

