Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): Allow me, on behalf of the delegation of
Burkina Faso, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Council for this month,
and to pay a well-deserved tribute to the delegation of
Uganda for the effectiveness with which it steered the
work of the Council in July.

I would also like to thank you and your
delegation for having organized this debate and for
having submitted the New Horizon non-paper, which
has been extremely useful in preparing for this debate.
We have an opportunity to pursue our consideration of
the important issue of peacekeeping operations and the
ways and means to ensure that they are better managed.

We thank Mr. Le Roy, Ms. Malcorra and General
Agwai for their very enriching briefings and their
contributions to the ongoing reflection process.

My delegation endorses the statement to be made
by the representative of the Kingdom of Morocco on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

As a troop-contributing country, Burkina Faso is
closely following the reflection under way on how to
improve peacekeeping operations performance in the
context of new and pressing requirements, for which,
unfortunately, resources are lacking.

The effectiveness and potential success of
operations require above all clear, feasible mandates
adapted to the realities on the ground. To that end,
United Nations forces must be equipped with broad
deterrence capacities and pay greater attention to the
rules of engagement, logistics and mission planning.
That cannot be done without the support of all
stakeholders - donor countries, troop-contributing
countries, the Security Council, the Secretariat and
host countries.

Similarly, the specific issue of financing remains
critical. Nevertheless, no decision on deploying a new
mission or adjusting the mandate of an existing
mission should be subordinate exclusively to its
estimated budget. Decisions need to be guided by the
sole concern of preserving international peace and
security.

The Security Council and the General Assembly,
specifically via the Fifth Committee, each need to
exercise their authorities in accordance with the
Charter. Along these lines, and like others, we believe
that the response to the financial challenges of
peacekeeping operations should not be the automatic
closing of certain missions that remain necessary to
restoring peace. This means that only an objective
evaluation should guide our decisions in this area.

Related to the drafting of mandates and the
success of peacekeeping operations is the question of
strengthening triangular cooperation among troop-
contributing countries, the Security Council and the
Secretariat.

We note and welcome the dynamic nature of that
cooperation, which has led, inter alia, to a variety of
initiatives in the Security Council, the Secretariat and
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations that
allow the three entities regularly to exchange views on
the various aspects of peacekeeping operations. While
we hope that this strengthening will continue, the
United Nations needs better and more deeply to engage
and involve regional and subregional organizations,
which also have a role to play in the success of
operations.

We need hardly recall that the African Union and
the African subregional organizations should be special
partners of the United Nations because, unfortunately,
Africa is host to a number of peacekeeping operations.
General Agwai's testimony on the challenges facing
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur deserves the greatest attention and should
inspire the work of the Council and all players
involved in the process of strengthening the
operationalization of peacekeeping operations.

Another issue of note is the support of
peacekeeping operations for the political process.
Peacekeeping operations should not be alternatives to
the peace process. If their support role is to be more
effective, we must strive to ensure effective
cooperation among all key players, particularly
mediators, special representatives and heads of
mission. Moreover, troops must be better informed of
agreements to resolve conflicts and commitments made
by the different parties. That would be a decisive factor
in the conduct of a mission and clearly help to ensure a
more flexible transition to peacebuilding and post-
conflict reconstruction.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict has
always been a major challenge to the United Nations.
Because it remains critical, it requires greater attention.
In that context, yesterday's adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 1882 (2009) is to be commended.

With respect to the ongoing brainstorming
process, my delegation believes that it remains possible
to benefit from all the recommendations contained in
the Brahimi report (S/2000/809), other reports and
resolutions of the Security Council, despite the fact
that circumstances have changed over time and certain
realities on the ground have required us to adapt. At the
same time, if the most recent initiatives are to be true
agents of change, they must enjoy the broadest possible
support of Member States. In that regard, the ongoing
and inclusive communications between the members of
the Security Council, the Secretariat, the troop-
contributing countries and all bodies relevant to
peacekeeping operations, as established by the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations chaired
by Japan, can be excellent sources of inspiration. We
believe that with such an approach and within the most
appropriate frameworks, all current initiatives on
peacekeeping operations, including the Secretariat's
New Horizon initiative, could be considered more
fruitfully and enjoy consensus in the future.

We therefore encourage all players to continue to
follow the path of ongoing coordination, which is the
only way to strengthen trust and ensure the greater
effectiveness of United Nations involvement in the
field.

