Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): First of all, I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for
his presentation of the report of the Secretary-General,
which reflects the developments in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo during the last two months. I
would also like to welcome the Foreign Minister of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Le'onard She
Okitundu, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Olara Otunnu. I would like to thank Mr. Otunnu for
a very convincing briefing on the plight of children in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and especially
for his recommendations to the Security Council on a
programme of action aimed at remedying the situation.

While taking into account some recent progress
made in preserving the ceasefire, the disengagement of
forces, enhancing the inter-Congolese dialogue and
deploying the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) -
which was undoubtedly promoted by the visit of the
Security Council mission to the region last month -
we are not certain about the irreversibility of the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which is quite closely linked to the political situation in
some neighbouring countries.

The precarious situation is still dependent on
many political, military and social problems whose
solution depends on the willingness of the parties to
implement their commitments under the Lusaka peace
Agreement. In this regard, it is extremely important for
the parties concerned to realize that only a
comprehensive solution to the problems, accompanied
by their readiness to engage in constructive dialogue
and to compromise, can bring about real results leading
to a meaningful settlement of the conflict. We again
call upon all the parties to leave behind needless
ambitions and engage in practical implementation of
the Lusaka accord.

In this connection, we would like to express our
concern over the fact that some parties still have not
provided information on the numbers, disposition and
armaments of their forces in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Further progress in transforming the
revised concept of operations into a genuine plan is
directly dependent on that information.

We still cannot identify as satisfactory the level
of cooperation between MONUC and the leaders of the
Front de liberation du Congo (FLC) and the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratic (RCD- Goma). That lack of cooperation also runs counter to
the spirit of arrangements under the Lusaka Agreement.
We urge all the parties to ensure an adequate level of
cooperation with MONUC, both in the implementation
of the disarmament, demobilization, resettlement,
reintegration and repatriation programme and in the
disengagement of forces and providing United Nations
personnel necessary access to all positions.

The problem of the demilitarization of Kisangani
remains acute. It must be resolved without delay, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1304
(2000).

As for the commencement of phase III of the
operation, we fully share the Secretary-General's view,
and we stress the necessity of a balanced approach to
its planning, taking into account the numerous and
complex tasks MONUC will face during the
transitional period. We consider appropriate the
decision to expand substantially the civilian
components of MONUC, including a new civilian
police unit, and to increase its logistical capabilities.

In that regard, we support the recommendation by
the Secretary-General to extend the MONUC mandate
until 15 June 2002. That would demonstrate the
Security Council's commitment to the peace process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the
stabilization of the situation in the subregion. At the
same time, we would like to make the point that
MONUC is not the main key to the settlement of the
conflict. The desire and willingness of the belligerents
themselves to put an end to this conflict should remain
the principal factor in this regard.

As for the use of children as combatants, we
stress again that this practice is inadmissible, and
urgently call upon the recruiters to stop using children
for this purpose and to help them reunite with their
families.

To normalize the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo it is also expedient not to lose
sight of the economic aspect of the problem. In this
regard, we think it necessary to expedite the
establishment of a Congo River Basin commission that
would promote navigation on the river and thus
contribute to the revitalization of trade along the
country's main artery, the inland waterway system.
This is also extremely important for MONUC in terms
of shipping supplies to its contingents.

Against the background of the positive
developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in the whole region, which were specifically
triggered by the Security Council mission to the Great
Lakes region, we would like to point out to the
importance of regional cooperation, especially
meetings between the leaders of the countries involved
in the conflict. This is especially urgent in the light of
the information about the eastward movement of
elements of armed groups crossing into Rwanda,
Burundi and Tanzania. We are deeply concerned about
these latest developments.

Finally, we would like to express our support for
the Security Council draft resolution that is to be
adopted later this week. We believe that draft to be a
serious signal to the parties in terms of preserving the
window of opportunity for the settlement of the
conflict and for the stabilization of the situation in the
subregion.

