Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I join others in
thanking Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his
comprehensive briefing. I also wish to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, His Excellency Mr. Stephanus Abraham
Blok, who is presiding over today's meeting.

Kazakhstan remains committed to all Security
Council resolutions aimed at solving humanitarian
issues in Syria. We believe that it is most important to
preserve all possible humanitarian-access modalities,
including cross-border assistance, which are
indispensable in bringing humanitarian aid to millions
ofpeople in Syria.

Implementing resolution 2401 (2018) is a collective
responsibility, with each Council member and State
Member of the United Nations playing a significant
role. We must all continue to do everything we can
to ensure full implementation across Syria. We look
forward to continued reporting on the implementation
of resolution 2401 (2018) to the Council through the
regular Syria briefings and reports of the Secretary-
General, as stipulated in the resolution.

Urgent attention must be focused on long-term
humanitarian assistance, with the assurance of safe
humanitarian access by the United Nations and other
aid agencies, and evacuation of the wounded. We
commend the sterling contribution of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World
Health Organization and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
for their provision of increased medical supplies and
life-saving services, including surgical procedures. In
that regard, we welcome the increase in humanitarian
convoys gaining access to besieged areas in Syria in
March, compared to previous months.

It is necessary to take note of the worrisome
humanitarian situation in Syria, as fighting in different
parts of the country are causing massive displacement.
We endorse the appeal of the United Nations to help
stem the catastrophic situation for tens of thousands of
people, from both eastern Ghouta and Afrin. We look
forward to the next round of talks, to be held in mid-May
in our capital, Astana, where the stepping up of efforts
to ensure observance of the relevant agreements will
be addressed.

We also believe that the dialogue between Under-
Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and the Government
of Syria should be ongoing. We reiterate that all
obligations under international humanitarian law
must be respected by all parties. A further United
Nations needs-assessment mission to these troubled
areas, similar to that which Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock led recently, may be required very soon. The
Syrian authorities must cooperate fully with the United
Nations and relevant humanitarian organizations in
facilitating the unhindered provision of humanitarian
assistance and thereby mitigating the suffering.

Lastly, we are of the view that the crisis in Syria
can be resolved only through an inclusive and Syrian-
led political process, based on the Geneva communique
of 30 June 2012 (S/20l2/522, annex), subsequent
Security Council resolutions and relevant statements of
the International Syria Support Group.

