Mr. Onanga-Anyanga (Spoke in French): Allow me
to congratulate you, Sir, on your excellent presidency
of the Council during the month of April. I would like
to thank you for the opportunity to brief the Security
Council, for the first time, on the implementation of
resolution 2046 (2012), on the outstanding issues
between South Sudan and the Sudan, on the one hand,
and in the states of Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile,
on the other hand.

I would like to begin by thanking the national
authorities and representatives of the States in the Horn
of Africa for their warm welcome. I am also grateful to
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, with whom I intend to continue the
strategic partnership between our two institutions
with the full support of the Security Council and all
stakeholders in the region, particularly the Gulf and
Red Sea States.

(Spoke in English)

Both the Sudan and South Sudan are at a crossroads,
with critical political processes under way. They face the
challenges surrounding the effective implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and the
uncertainties of the delicate political transformations
occurring in the Sudan. Indeed, since the briefing by my
predecessor in October 2018, the Sudan has witnessed
dramatic changes following the demonstrations that
started in December 2018. The protests culminated in
the removal of President Al-Bashir on 11 April. The
Sudan is now reflecting, as the Sudanese stakeholders
still need to agree on transitional and institutional
arrangements. The current situation in the Sudan does
not preclude a consolidation of the recent improvement
of bilateral relations between the Sudan and South
Sudan. However, the new authorities in the Sudan may
need some time to resume active engagement in such
bilateral relations, including concerning the border, the
Two Areas and Abyei.

The gains in the relations between the Sudan and
South Sudan should not be lost. During the reporting
period, those gains were enabled notably by the
Government of the Sudan in facilitating the signing
and subsequent implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement in South Sudan in September 2018. In
return, President Kiir accepted President Al-Bashir's
request to assist in the resolution ofthe conflict between
the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement-North (SPLM-North). Since then,
Juba has hosted meetings of the SPLM-North, initially
to help unify the different factions of the movement.
Following the outbreak of unrest in the Sudan last
December, talks between the factions were suspended
and no date has been set for their resumption.

With the ouster of President Al-Bashir, there
is concern that the absence of one of the principal
guarantors of the revitalized peace agreement
on South Sudan may have a negative impact on
its implementation. There also seem to be concerns
that the peace efforts in South Kordofan and Blue
Nile states may be affected. Taking into consideration
these concerns, both countries should be encouraged to
stay the course. The Sudan should continue to provide
support for the implementation of the revitalized Peace
Agreement, and South Sudan should continue to play
a constructive role in the resolution of the conflicts in
the Sudan.

The notable mutual gains achieved in the
reporting period include the intensification of bilateral
cooperation in the oil sector after the Sudan helped
South Sudan to resume oil production in its southern
oilfields in the greater Upper Nile region. This has
resulted in increased oil production. In the same vein,
the two countries have agreed on the Sudan assisting
South Sudan in resuming oil production in the northern
oilfields of the same region. Production, which is
expected to come onstream at the end of April, is
projected to ensure an additional 70,000 barrels per day.
South Sudan's petroleum Minister announced that the
upheavals in the Sudan had not affected his country's
oil sector.
The Sudan and South Sudan have continued to
engage on bilateral security issues, though with little
substantive progress to report. This is reflected in the
progress on the final status of Abyei. Both countries
have, rather, focused on other bilateral issues they
consider more pressing. We have a de facto status quo
situation. In the absence of a joint Administration and
the lack of progress on Abyei's final status, the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
remains central to the prevention and resolution of
intercommunal conflicts and the reduction of tensions
over Abyei.

In the next few weeks, I intend to encourage the
authorities in Khartoum and Juba to build on the gains
achieved and take a fresh look at the Abyei issue, with a
focus on the implementation of temporary arrangements
for the administration of Abyei and engagement on its
final status.

Let me now turn to the conflict in South Kordofan
and Blue Nile states and the process led by the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel (AUHIP).
While the SPLM-North issued, in December 2018,
a statement supporting the protest movement, its
leadership remains cautious about the military
takeover and what it perceives as a Khartoum-centric
process. Yet the political transition in the Sudan may
offer an opportunity to build new institutions that
are better equipped to address the root causes of the
Sudanese conflicts.

Immediately after the ouster of President Bashir,
the Transitional Military Council declared an indefinite
unilateral ceasefire across all of the Sudan, which was
reciprocated by the SPLM-North in South Kordofan
and Blue Nile states until 31 July. The Transitional
Military Council also called on armed groups to join the
political transition. The signatories to the Declaration of
Freedom and Change, which include the political forces
behind the protest movement, have stressed that the
resolution of conflicts in the Sudan should be a priority
of the transitional Government once it is established.
In the reporting period, despite the AUHIP's
efforts, there has been no progress on the resolution
of the conflict in South Kordofan and Blue Nile
states. From 9 to 12 December, the AUHIP convened
a meeting among the signatories of the 2016 road map
agreement. While the AUHIP initially planned to
discuss with the signatories the possible participation
of the opposition parties in the constitution-drafting
process and the elections expected to take place in
2020, this did not materialize. Three signatories to
the road map - namely, the National Umma Party,
the Justice and Equality Movement and the Sudan
Liberation Movement-Minni Minnawi - insisted on
the participation of non-signatories in the meeting, on
the grounds that they represent the Sudan Call alliance
rather than their respective organizations.

The SPLM-North delegation refused to meet with
the Government of the Sudan to discuss the Movement's
possible participation in the constitutional dialogue.
SPLM-North stated that it was not willing to engage
Government officials on this issue unless Khartoum
accepted its precondition to hold the constitutional
dialogue outside the Sudan, a request that was rejected
by the then Government of the Sudan. SPLM-North
reiterated that a negotiation process on the two Areas
should start with political talks followed by security
arrangements and, finally, by a permanent ceasefire.

The leader of SPLM-North is still claiming that
the people represented by his organization are entitled
to the terms of the comprehensive Peace Agreement
negotiated for the South, a non-starter for the previous
Government of the Sudan. That means that three
key contentious issues still need to be addressed by
future negotiations between SPLM-North and the new
Sudanese authorities, including on whether SPLM-
North can claim the right to self-determination in South
Kordofan and Blue Nile states, the extent to which the
application of Islamic law can be suspended in those
areas, and the possibility for SPLM-North to keep
its armed forces in a post-conflict setting. While the
place of Islamic law in the Sudanese political system
may be revisited in the ongoing political transition, the
readiness of the new authorities in Khartoum to depart
from the position of their predecessors regarding self-
determination and the unity of the armed forces remains
to be seen.

In closing, I wish to state that the political transition
in the Sudan may offer an opportunity to redefine
the relations between the centre and its peripheries
in a way that puts an end to discrimination based on
ethnicity, religion and territorial belonging. Building
on the unilateral cessation of hostilities declared by
both the Sudanese authorities and SPLM-North, and in
close coordination with AUHIP, we will encourage the
parties to engage on the resolution of the conflicts in
the Sudan on the basis of a new political dispensation.

