Ms. Sison (United States ofAmerica): The adoption
of resolution 2367 (2017) comes at a milestone in Iraq's
fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). As Member States, we join the Iraqi people in
celebrating the liberation of Mosul earlier this week.
The Iraqi security forces have dealt ISIL a devastating
loss, and the United States and the coalition will support
Iraq as that momentum continues through the liberation
ofthe remaining Iraqi territory still under ISIL control.

Over the course of negotiations, Council members
recognized that the need for reconciliation, at both the
national and the local levels, would grow more acute
as the ultimate defeat of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham drew nearer. The United States salutes the
role of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq
(UNAMI) in engaging the Government of Iraq, the
Kurdistan Regional Government and other stakeholders
on national reconciliation. We would also urge UNAMI
to invigorate its ongoing efforts, in coordination
with Iraqi authorities, to increase transparency in the
protection of Iraq's most vulnerable groups, such as
internally displaced persons in transit, and encourage
Iraq to hold accountable those who committed atrocities
against such groups.

I would like to highlight an important addition
to this year's mandate, that is, the first-ever external
review of a special political mission's staffing and
resources, whereby the Secretariat will engage a third-
party consultancy to identify efficiencies and delineate
responsibilities between UNAMI and the United
Nations country team. While this is a new tool for the
Security Council, that unbiased third-party review
should set a gold standard for improving efficiency and
accountability in the field, and will enable UNAMI to
more effectively deliver on its mandate.

The United States is proud to join the rest of
the Council in supporting UNAMI's work towards
durable and sustainable peace for Iraq. We thank all
of our counterparts on the Council for their productive

engagement, discourse and consensus on this Mission.

The meeting rose at 4.50 pm.
