Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you and
your delegation, Mr. President, for organizing his
important debate on conflict prevention and for the
comprehensive concept note you circulated among
States Members (S/2014/572, annex).

Let me first acknowledge the dedication of the
United Kingdom to conflict prevention in the Council.
I recall that during the United Kingdom's previous
presidency in June 2013 the President convened a
meeting on conflict prevention (see S/PV.6982) with a
focus on the effective management of natural resources.
I take this opportunity to reiterate our support for
today's resolution 2171 (2014), which was introduced by
the United Kingdom and sponsered by a large majority
of Council members, including Rwanda.

I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing. His presence here today once again highlights
his commitment to conflict prevetion as being at the core
of the work of his Office. I also thank United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights Navanethem
Pillay for her last briefing to the Council under that
capacity. I wish her well in her future endeavours.
The concept note for this open debate provided by
the presidency pertinently highlights the need for the
Security Council to shift from a culture of reaction
to one of prevention. With the numerous tragic and
pressing conflicts that persist in the world today, if
the Council is to remain relevant, it is inevitable that it
improve its record in fully understanding early warning
signs of conflict and responding through early action.

Although conlict prevention has become the
centrepiece of the work of the United Nations in the
wake of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda,
increasing intra-State conflicts, mainly on the African
continent and in the Middle East, demonstrate that
the concept of conflict prevention has become more
of a theoretical concept than a practical reality. The
activities of the Security Council in past years have
shown more interest in crisis management than in
conflict prevention, as the latter is considered, as a
thematic debate, only once or twice per year.

That is not to suggest, however, that the United
Nations has remained idle in efforts to prevent the
emergence or relapse of conflict. Indeed, there has been
a huge increase in the level of international preventive
diplomacy, diplomatic peace-making, peacebuilding
and peacekeeping operations - for most part by the
United Nations and, more recently, in partnership with
regional organizations.

I would like here to pay tribute to the Secretary-
General for his tireless efforts at conflict prevention,
including by preparing important framework documents
and by exercising his good offices around the world.
As the Secretary-General stated, however, good news
is not news, and most of his efforts have been fruitful.

The United Nations should be equipped to fully
understand that different situations require flexibility
as circumstances change and it should deploy a range of
possible measures - both long-term structural changes
and short-term operational changes - to deal with early
warning signs ofa situation that might lead to conflict.

We believe that the primacy of prevention resides
in understanding the root causes of conflict, including
the political, economic and cultural dimensions of each
particular conflict, and that we must take effective
measures to address them. Early-warning and response
capabilities are a critical requirement for effective
early prevention. That is a conversation that Rwanda
brought to the Security Council when, during our first
presidency, in April 2013, we organized a briefing on
preventing conflicts in Africa through addressing root
causes (see S/PV.6946), which led to the adoption of a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/4).

As the Council is aware, one ofthe biggest challenges
in the United Nations system has been the Secretariat's
capacity in conflict prevention, as pointed out in the
recommendations of the 2000 Brahimi Panel on United
Nations Peace Operations. The adoption of the 2005
World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1), which embraces the concept of the responsibility
to protect and calls for the international community
to support the United Nations in establishing an
early-warning capability, was a positive step forward.
Nonetheless, early-warning mechanisms are rarely used
to respond to recurring crises, let alone to prevent them.
We therefore call on the Security Council, especially its
permanent members, to increasingly use and support
the work of the Office of the Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide and that of the Special Adviser
on the Responsibility to Protect.

The Secretary-General's Rights Up Front initiative
should be supported and implemented so that the
Organization can respond effectively and correctively
curb the escalation of crises. Protecting human rights
is one of the most effective conflict-prevention tools.
Success in promoting and protecting rights and ensuring
accountability for violations are effective means for
de-escalating conflict and forestalling the human and
financial costs of humanitarian crises. That is why the
international community, including the United Nations,
should support Member States in strengthening the
rule of law and capacity-building for accountability
mechanisms, including judicial institutions.

The evolving role of regional and subregional
organizations in conflict prevention should not be
underestimated. We recognize the important role of
the African Union and its subregional organizations in
preventing and mitigating conflicts on our continent. We
also recognize the important role of the Peacebuilding
Commission and its country-specific configurations in
addressing the recurring relapse into conflict. It is also
important to acknowledge the role of other organizations
in supporting and complementing the United Nations
in peacekeeping, mediation, facilitating the delivery
of humanitarian assistance or in joint efforts in post-
conflict reconstruction.

In conclusion, I would appeal to the Security
Council to explore ways to address conflict prevention
not through an annual thematic debate, which has
little impact on the ground, but through country-
specific debates. We believe that a more frequent use
of Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations and
a more focused use of the horizon-scanning sessions
and country-specific meetings of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa
can help us respond to that call.

