Ms. Lucas: I have the honour of addressing the
Council on behalf of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC).

In its previous considerations of the Secretary-
General's reports on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304) and women's
participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466), the
Security Council sought the continued engagement of
the Peacebuilding Commission as the Secretary-
General embarked on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in both reports. At the
same time, the reports anticipated the completion of the
2010 review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, which generated a number of important
recommendations aimed at further strengthening the
Commission's role in and impact on the evolving
United Nations peacebuilding agenda. The Council
welcomed the review and encouraged the
implementation of relevant recommendations.

In response, the PBC adopted an action oriented
road map for actions, focusing on reinforcing the
Commission's impact in the field. Therefore and with
an expanded agenda of six countries and its ongoing
efforts to adapt its tools of engagement with the
countries on its agenda, the PBC is increasingly
becoming a central political platform to promote a
shared and coherent United Nations peacebuilding
agenda.

From the Commission's particular experience of
concrete peacebuilding work on the ground, I would
like to highlight how the PBC's activities are
complementary to the Security Council's work and
how the Council can benefit from the Commission's
experience and advice to the countries under its
consideration and beyond.

Being a creation of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, and with some of its members
designated by the Economic and Social Council, the
PBC has a unique convening power that allows it to
bring together interested and committed Member
States, as well as competent and relevant actors from
inside and outside the United Nations system. In the
years since its inception, the PBC has been able to help
build a knowledge base in matters of post-conflict
peacebuilding, including on issues of interest to the
Security Council, whether regarding the link between
peacebuilding and peacekeeping, the preparation of
elections in the countries on its agenda, or concerning
issues of regional relevance such as the fight against
organized crime and drugs in West Africa.

In this regard, the country-specific configurations
for Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone
organized a joint meeting this June, together with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to deepen
their knowledge of the problem and seek common
solutions to a problem affecting all four countries. The
PBC, especially through its country configurations in
collaboration with the Working Group on Lessons
Learned, stands ready to present more regular reports
documenting its findings to the Council and to deepen
discussions with the Council on issues on the Council's
agenda, such as resolutions or statements regarding the

PBC agenda countries that have a significant impact on
the situation on the ground. Another way to deepen the
relationship is to have the country-specific
configuration Chairs participate in the Security Council
Working Groups when they deal with the country
concerned, such as the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.

The PBC is developing a body of experience with
United Nations engagement in a range of settings with
a variety of field presences, from full-fledged
peacekeeping missions, such as in Liberia, to
integrated peacebuilding offices, such as in Sierra
Leone or the Central African Republic, to Resident
Coordinator-led United Nations presence, such as in
Guinea. That engagement, and the lessons learned from
it, could be used to enhance policy processes that are
also of direct interest to the Council.

In addition to the follow-up of the 2009 report by
the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict , a similar reporting
structure could also be applied to the civilian capacity
review, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) and the Peacebuilding Support Office (PBSO)
early peacebuilding strategy or the follow-up to the
World Bank's 2011 World Development Report. The
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
has written to Under-Secretary-General Malcorra,
suggesting that she take the Central African Republic
and other PBC agenda countries as pilot countries for
the civilian capacity review.

The PBC can help to provide an integrated and
holistic perspective for taking into account the
interdependence between security and development, as
well as the social and economic situation on the ground
in the countries on its agenda. It has the mandate and
the composition to address development issues in a
country in transition, in particular when a
peacekeeping mission withdraws. Peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, as has often been affirmed in this
Chamber, and as is reaffirmed in the new DPKO and
PBSO early peacebuilding strategy, should not be seen
as sequential activities. Peacebuilding activities are
essential to establishing the basis for sustainable peace
and should start at the earliest stages of United Nations
engagement, regardless of the form of the United
Nations presence.

Country-specific configurations are capable of
providing continued political attention to situations not
constantly on the Council's agenda. In the case of
Sierra Leone, the PBC played a supporting role with
respect to monitoring the aftermath of the March 2009
violence and will be called upon again over the course
of the coming year as the elections process moves
forward. That is being done in a spirit of partnership,
national ownership and mutual accountability for
results, which permits the establishment of a
relationship going beyond what the Council, with its
very busy agenda, is able to sustain.

By bridging the different points of the continuum
between conflict, early recovery, transition and
development, the PBC country-specific configurations
can play an essential role for strategic coordination.
With its mandate from the General Assembly and the
Security Council, and given its composition and tools,
the PBC can encourage and pursue coherence and
coordination among the various actors of the United
Nations system as well as bilateral actors, including on
the ground, and improve relations between
Headquarters and the field, all the while respecting the
sovereignty and ownership of the process by the
country concerned.

In Guinea-Bissau and the Central African
Republic, known as "aid orphans", the work of the
PBC country-specific configuration has helped to
increase the number of partners engaged with the
country, both in terms of bilateral and multilateral
cooperation. The Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries, for example, have
developed a stronger cooperation with Guinea-Bissau,
especially with regard to security sector reform and
issues that require a regional approach, such as drug-
trafficking.

In the case of the Central African Republic, the
World Bank, the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community have
deepened their cooperation with the Central African
Republic. African countries have also stepped up their
bilateral cooperation with Guinea-Bissau and the
Central African Republic.

In Sierra Leone, the PBC has explicitly aligned
its work on the second Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP), the "Agenda for Change". In Burundi,
the PBC facilitated the timely support to the national
authorities in the second PRSP process by providing an
expert in order to ensure that strategic planning was
done in a more conflict-sensitive manner.

In addition to more coherence and harmonization,
the country-specific configurations are also playing an
increasingly important role in terms of resource
mobilization. The Central African Republic
configuration managed to mobilize resources for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and for
the elections. It organized a high-level event in the
margins of the 2010 Summit on the Millennium
Development Goals with the World Bank and a round
table in Brussels with the Central African Republic
Government and support from the World Bank, the
United Nations Development Programme and the
African Development Bank to raise awareness for the
priorities in the draft second PRSP.

In the case of Guinea-Bissau, the country-specific
configuration has been providing enhanced support to
the country in its efforts to address major economic
imbalances, as well as advocacy for the recognition
that Guinea-Bissau had reached the completion point
of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative. The
World Bank, the African Development Bank and the
International Monetary Fund have all taken steps to
increase resources in key sectors. As the Chair of the
Guinea configuration, I am working with partners on
solutions to fund the retirement of some 4,000 military
personnel from the Guinean army to kick-start the
security sector reform that is a crucial element of
Guinea's peacebuilding agenda.

However, we have to recognize that we need to
do more in terms of mobilization of partners and
resources to increase the relevance of the PBC for the
countries on its agenda. Efforts are being undertaken
through the working group on lessons learned to pursue
more effective resource mobilization and to improve
coordination among various actors in order to achieve
a more efficient engagement of the PBC.

As mentioned earlier, the PBC has started to
build partnerships with regional and subregional
bodies, most notably the African regional economic
communities, ECOWAS in the context of Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone, the East
African Community in the context of Burundi, and the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community in the context of the Central African
Republic. The same applies to the international
financial institutions, like the African Development
Bank, which we as the PBC Chairs Group will visit in
Tunis at the beginning of November. We are happy to
share the results of our consultations with those bodies
with the Security Council and to contribute to
deepening and strengthening the partnerships between
the Council and those increasingly important regional
actors.

Finally, the PBC has a clear role in bringing
about the conditions that allow for the withdrawal of
peacekeeping missions, as well as the graduation of
countries off the PBC agenda. In new contexts, like
Guinea, the PBC's work to accompany the process of
consolidating peace and democracy is also a way to
help the country to stay out of conflict and thus off the
Security Council's agenda and to contribute more
broadly to the stabilization of the subregion. In the
context of Siena Leone, the PBC will have an
important role to play in ensuring that the United
Nations long and costly investment in the country is
not subject to unnecessary political and financial
shocks when the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone withdraws and
the United Nations moves to a Resident Coordinator-
led presence focusing on development.

As foreseen by the founding resolution 1645
(2005), the Security Council

"recommends that the Commission terminate its
consideration of a country-specific situation when
foundations for sustainable peace and
development are established or upon the request
by national authorities of the country under
consideration". (resolution 1645 (2005), para.
22)

In the context of Burundi, first discussions have
begun on a further change in approach of the PBC
engagement and on a path towards leaving the PBC
agenda, although several members of the configuration
think that would be premature. The upcoming visit of
the Chair of the country configuration to Burundi will
provide an opportunity to further pursue those
discussions.

