Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Once again this
year, perhaps more than ever, the trend continues and
the evidence is clear: children are among the first
victims of armed conflict. Take for example the spiral
ofviolence since December that has affected the Central
African Republic and South Sudan, with a devastating
impact on the population, especially children, that we
are still to assess. More than 8,000 children in Central
Africa are now in the hands of all sorts of armed groups,
including the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), which is
raging in the south-east of the country. In South Sudan,
we have witnessed a dramatic setback and an alarming
increase in the recruitment of children by armed groups
of all stripes. The continuing conflict in the heart of
Darfur and the growing insecurity in northern Mali
affect primarily women and children, who lack access
to the necessary protection and assistance. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we continue to see

the kidnapping and recruitment of children by armed
groups, as well as sexual violence.

Therefore, we at the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations remain determined to continue our efforts
to protect them, under the double arch of responsibility
and partnership. Responsibility means setting an
example by making children a priority. Partnership
implies coordinating our efforts to maximize existing
competencies and to draw on the competencies and
resources of all parties. Partnerships and coordinated
action with international child-protection partners.
including the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF
and other international and non-governmental
organizations, enable us to contribute to a
comprehensive response to the plight of children. That
response includes monitoring, reporting, humanitarian
assistance, physical protection, political action and
psychosocial services, as well as demobilization,
community reintegration, education and employment.

Our partnerships with Member States, particularly
with the troop- and police-contributing countries,
allow the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
lead by example and to uphold the exemplary conduct
and action of our troops, our police - both men and
women 4 and our civilian colleagues. I will return to
that point in a moment.

Most importantly, we have sought to create
partnerships with States in which our peacekeeping
operations are deployed in order to ensure that they
fulfil their fundamental responsibility to protect
children. Earlier this year, Special Representative
Leila Zerrougui, in concert with UNICEF, made
State responsibility a priority by launching the global
Children, not Soldiers campaign. My Department
will spare no effort to promote that campaign in the
areas where we maintain a presence, and to support
the Governments and security forces of Afghanistan,
Sudan, South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, among others, in order to ensure that there
are no more child soldiers by 2016.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example, where the Government has adopted an action
plan to free children associated with its armed forces,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and United Nations partners are now supporting the
establishment of joint technical working groups with
provincial authorities. I would like to commend the
Government's efforts to promote that campaign on
national radio and television. In South Sudan, the
Ministry of Defence recently appointed some 20 new
child protection officers to address the rise in child
recruitment across the country. We recently contributed
to their training programme in support of that positive
initiative.

Beyond the campaign itself, Governments must
also set an example by providing support for access,
monitoring, assistance and involvement with armed
groups. That remains a challenge, for example, in the
Sudan or Mali, but the child protection advisers of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) have been able to establish contact
with Minni Minawi of the Sudan Liberation Army and
the Musa Hilal group, both of whom have issued orders
this year prohibiting the recruitment and use of children
in their ranks. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
has initiated contact with certain parties known to have
recruited child soldiers in northern Mali.

In negotiating peace agreements or ceasefires,
States must also lead by example, making child-
protection provisions a non-negotiable part of all
agreements. To that end, the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan is working closely with the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
to integrate child-specific provisions in the ceasefire
agreement in South Sudan. In Algiers, at this very
moment, MINUSMA is sending the same message
to the negotiating parties to make sure that they do
likewise.

Robust action must also be launched against armed
groups that are holding child soldiers. For instance, the
joint rescue operation led by the Armed Forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO,
which was launched on 7 August, has so far enabled 41
civilians, including 34 children, to be extracted from
the hands of the rebel Allied Democratic Forces.

To successfully carry out such operations, our
peacekeepers are required to show courage and uphold
the highest standards of conduct and integrity. They
need to understand the ways in which robust military
action, which is indispensable for the protection of
civilians, can be adapted to the specific needs of
girls and boys. To that end, in April we completed the
development of specialized child-protection training
modules for soldiers. The modules explain how to
interact with children while keeping their best interests
in mind. They also remind our peacekeepers of their
responsibility to protect teachers and schools. Most
importantly, they seek to leverage the presence and
comparative advantage of our Blue Helmets by giving
them the tools to understand how to report the most
serious violations and how to support child-protection
advisers in their contacts with armed actors, with
particular concern for securing the release of children
from their ranks.

After being piloted in Malaysia and Uruguay in
2013, the training modules have now been shared with
all troop-contributing countries, and this year the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations organized
training courses for trainers from our largest troop-
contributing countries, which were held in Austria and
Sweden. I would like to take this opportunity to thank
the Member States that funded the development of the
modules and hosted those courses. The project would
not have been possible without their support.

The countries that sent military instructors to those
courses need to generate appropriate follow-up in order
to strengthen child-protection training for their troops.
They must also appoint military child-protection
officers to all units on the ground. They might also
make sure that there is a higher percentage of female
peacekeepers so as to facilitate our troops' interactions
with girls who fall victim to conflicts. In order to
complete our training curriculums, we have now begun
to develop specialized modules for the United Nations
police force, with a focus on capacity-building for
host State police, as well as on wider judicial reform,
correction systems, andjuvenile justice issues.

Before concluding, I would like to say a word on
the Central African Republic and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), since we are
due to take over that mission from the African Union in
under a week. I will obviously be there, and I would
like to reassure the Security Council and partners
that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations is
taking all necessary measures, as we do with all our
missions, to minimize any risk that our peacekeepers
might unwittingly inflict on the local populations. The
United Nations human rights screening policy requires
our troop- and police-contributing countries to certify
that the women and men sent as peacekeepers have not,
or are not alleged to have, committed past violations.

With respect to MINUSCA in particular, we have
taken targeted measures that go well beyond the scope
of the screening policy so as to ensure that all our troops
abide by the highest standards and do not include children
in their ranks. Those measures include engagement
with the Governments concerned, proactive human-
rights screening of individual commanders by United
Nations personnel and ongoing physical screening for
under-aged personnel, as well as the sensitization and
training of troops. For instance, a mobile training team
has just returned from Bangui, where it had spent a
month in Central Africa providing targeted training
to all troops of the African-led International Support
Mission for the Central African Republic on United
Nations standards, including conduct and discipline,
the protection of civilians, human rights, protection of
children, countering sexual violence and so forth. The
team utilized our new modules on child protection, and
another team in the near future will provide training on
all these matters to additional troops currently being
deployed.

Generally speaking, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations continues to work in
close coordination with Special Representatives
Zerrougui Bangura to ensure that all of our troop- and
police-contributing countries are in compliance with
international legal standards, including, needless to
say, the relevant Security Council' resolutions.

Therefore, rest assured, Madam President, that
these issues lie at the very heart of our mandates and
that we are naturally focusing on them. Children - girls
and boys - are trusting, but their trust is so easily
betrayed. To earn it, we are required to show a high
degree of responsibility. We must set an example. We
must put an end to their suffering, and to do so we will
need to continue to enhance our cooperation with all
our partners.

The Council's continued support is therefore
absolutely necessary to ensure that we are able to deploy
child-protection advisers to all priority areas and to
ensure that our Blue Helmets are motivated, equipped
and trained to assume that mission. And that is all the
more necessary now, as we have numerous challenges
before us because of all the children who have our trust,
and our mandate is to protect those children.

