Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu,
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, for her briefing today and
for submitting the sixty-first monthly report of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) to the security Council pursuant to resolution
2118 (2013).

As we begin the month of November, allow me
to start by reminding the Security Council that this
month last year the Council had the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism at its disposal,
which was able to identify in a professional, objective
and independent manner those who used chemical
weapons in Syria. For some time, the Syrian chemical
dossier counted as one of the Security Council's most
prominent successes. Through its unity, the Council
was able to underline the international community's
determination and resolve to ensure the non-recurrence
of chemical-weapon crimes and ensure accountability.
One year after the end of the Mechanism's mandate, we
find ourselves unable to agree on a new mechanism and
compelled to resort to means outside the purview of the
Security Council so as to administer justice and ensure
accountability relating to chemical-weapons crimes.

The State of Kuwait therefore supported the French
initiative to ensure accountability for those who used
chemical weapons and supported numerous countries
to hold a special session of the Conference of the States
Parties to the OPCW on 26 and 27 June in The Hague.
The Conference sought to identify parties responsible
for the use of chemical weapons in Syria through the
OPCW. That was a very important step supported by
the State of Kuwait. We look forward to seeing the
OPCW adopt the necessary measures to shoulder that
responsibility. At the same time, we stress that the
Security Council must shoulder its responsibilities
under the Charter of the United Nations to counter all
threats to international peace and security, including
crimes involving chemical weapons.

Once again, we restate our readiness to work with all
members of the Security Council to reach an agreement
on establishing a new mechanism to shoulder our
common responsibilities. We call again for the need for
Council's members to speak as one voice on this issue,
which involves is the crime of using those prohibited
weapons. We reiterate that the lack of a mechanism to
hold accountable those who used chemical weapons
in Syria will allow them to enjoy impunity and fail to
ensure that they will be held accountable in the future.
On the other hand, we look forward to the final findings
of the investigation of the alleged use of chemical
weapons in Douma on 7 April. We renew our support
for the Fact-finding Mission of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to uncover the truth.

We share the Secretary-General's disappointment
over about continued inconsistencies in the
Syrian Government's declaration concerning its
chemical-weapons programme. Once again, we call
on the Syrian authorities to fully cooperate with the
OPCW and provide it with the required information
to end the discrepancies regarding the details of its
chemical programmes.

In conclusion, we reiterate our firm and principled
position condemning the use of chemical weapons
anywhere, anytime and by any party. We underscore
the need to hold accountable the perpetrators of those
crimes, whether individuals, entities, non-State groups
or Governments. We once again emphasize that there
is no military solution to the crisis in Syria. The only
solution is a political one in accordance with the
2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and
resolution 2254 (2015).

