Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Like almost all other speakers, I would like to begin by
expressing our condemnation of the attack on the United
Nations facilities in Mogadishu, our solidarity with the
families of the victims whose lives it claimed, and our
certainty that the attack will not deter the efforts of the
United Nations and African Union to support Somalia
on its path to stability and development.

My delegation welcomes the opportunity to set
out its position on this topic because, for Ecuador, it
is important to discuss different approaches to and
visions of conflict prevention and natural resources.
I must, however, reiterate my country's steadfast
rejection of ongoing attempts to bring matters linked
to development and all that it entails, including the
responsible and sustainable use of natural resources,
into the field of security and thus under the jurisdiction
of the Council, because we believe that the appropriate
forums in which to address such topics of universal
interest are the General Assembly and Economic and
Social Council.

The Constitution of Ecuador establishes the right
to a decent life, towards which the use and responsible
management of natural resources is oriented, respecting
their limits and vital cycles. This mandate is reflected
in the National Plan for Good Living, which seeks to
achieve the sustainable and comprehensive development
of the human being.

In this regard, Ecuador emphasizes the following
points, which we believe should guide this debate:
respect for the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, especially those of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States and of non-intervention;
and people-centred objectives to promote human and
economic and social rights and sustainable development.
Such objectives do not restrict or limit the leading role
of the State on its national territory; to the contrary,
they strengthen it.

On the basis of those principles, my delegation
believes that it is important to bear in mind two cross-
cutting aspects of the prevention of conflicts linked to
natural resources. There is a common but differentiated
global responsibility, given that the wealthy countries
are the largest polluters, whereas the countries of the
South possess the greatest natural heritage and supply
society with environmental resources to the benefit of
all humankind.

The redistribution of global income in an effort to
achieve equitable sharing of global wealth would help
to prevent conflicts over natural resources, including
ongoing conflicts and those that have occurred in
the past in various regions worldwide. In that sense,
we believe that unrestrained economic growth is
impossible; therefore, this unbridled trend must be
limited by authentic paths to sustainability.

The gross injustice manifested by the current
international economic system does not guarantee
equitable access to natural resources; it generates high
levels of underdevelopment and social exclusion in
many regions. Clearly, such injustice lies at the root
of the violence that continues to overwhelm many
societies.

Finally, my delegation cannot fail to recall the
many victims of armed conflict caused by the unbridled
ambition of certain countries seeking access to the
natural resources of other sovereign States. Those
conflicts are even more painful when they occur under
the cover of humanitarian intervention. Our efforts
should seek to guarantee the access of all humankind
to the resources necessary for life and development,
within the framework of respect for the rights of nature.

