Mr. Danforth (United States of America): I want
to thank Special Representative Qazi for his very
persuasive report, and beyond that for the
commendable job that he and his colleagues are doing
for the people of Iraq.

I am pleased to report to the Security Council on
the efforts and progress of the multinational force,
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1546 (2004).
The activities that I will discuss demonstrate that the
multinational force, working closely with the Iraqi
Interim Government, remains committed to a secure,
stable, and democratic Iraq. Today I will report on four
broad areas. First, I will discuss the current security
situation in Iraq. Secondly, I will discuss the status of
the Multinational Force's (MNF) joint effort with the
Iraqi Interim Government to build and deploy Iraq's
security forces. Thirdly, I will report on the status of
efforts to rebuild the infrastructure of Iraq. Finally, I
will discuss our hopes and expectations regarding the
future involvement of the United Nations in the
rebuilding of Iraq.

My remarks today will provide a summary, but
we have also distributed a longer written report and it
is posted on our web site. It will also be issued as a
document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/2004/730.

With regard to the security situation, let me
address the terrible events of the last 24 hours before I
go into details of the last three months. Those events
bring to the fore what will be a theme in my remarks.
The security situation is fragile, attacks are persistent,
and lives continue to be lost. There are setbacks and we
have to acknowledge them. But that only strengthens
our resolve.

The MNF consists of forces from over 30
countries. Countries other than the United States
contribute approximately 23,000 personnel. Working
closely with Iraqi Security Forces, those brave men
and women have performed with admirable
professionalism in their efforts to improve the security
situation in Iraq.

In the two weeks following the assumption of
responsibility and authority by the fully sovereign and
independent Iraqi Interim Government on 28 June
2004, there was a large drop in acts of violence against
MNF operations. However, in the weeks that followed,
insurgents and terrorists increased their attacks against
Government officials, civilian contractors, foreign
nationals, and the Iraqi people. As we all know, the
anti-Iraqi forces resorted to horrific tactics against
civilians. In August, largely as a result of Moqtada al-
Sadr's illegal Mahdi militia resuming its insurrection in
Najaf and the Al Thawra neighbourhood in Baghdad,
attacks on the MNF increased as well.

To respond to these open challenges to the Iraqi
Government, the MNF has employed new counter-
insurgency tactics and continues to train and deploy
Iraqi security forces. The key to defeating the
insurgents and terrorists, who are tenacious and remain
determined to undermine the Iraqi Government, is to
continue training and deploying Iraqi forces at an
accelerated pace. In its endeavours, the MNF
coordinates closely with the Iraqi Interim Government.

Concerning the security forces, let me turn to the
status of the MNF's joint efforts with the Government
to develop Iraqi security forces. The Iraqi security
forces fall under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of
Defense or the Ministry of Interior. Forces under the
Ministry of Defense are the Iraqi Army, including the
Iraqi National Guard, the Intervention Force, the
Special Operations Force, the Iraqi Air Force and the
Coastal Defense Force. As of 10 September, the Iraqi
Ministry of Defense had over 231,000 Iraqi security
forces either on duty or in training. Iraqi security
forces falling under the Ministry of the Interior's
jurisdiction also have a crucial role in national security.
Those forces include the Iraqi Police Service, the Civil
Intervention Force and the Department of Border
Enforcement.

The Iraqi Police now number over 86,000. We are
currently training the civil intervention force, an
emergency response force, and a dignitary protection
force. The goal is to have 135,000 well-equipped,
highly motivated police when training efforts are
complete. The Department of Border Enforcement has
hired over 14,000 border police - with a goal of
hiring 32,000. In addition to the forces from the
Ministries of Defense and the Interior, the other
Ministries are guarded by the Facilities Protection
Service, which has nearly 74,000 personnel on duty.

Much work remains to be done and the insurgents
have proven persistent in their attacks against the Iraqi
Interim Government, their security forces, the Iraqi
people, and all those seeking to assist and rebuild the
new Iraq. Developing competent leadership for those
forces is a top priority, and sometimes has been a
challenge.

We are currently focused on assisting the Iraqi
Government in its efforts to instil a sense of
responsibility and professionalism in the Iraqi forces,
and we are optimistic that we are achieving good
results. The Iraqi National Guard, for example, has
performed especially well in recent weeks - fighting
bravely against insurgent activities. The performance
of the Iraqi Police has also improved markedly since
April. But there is still a lot of work ahead.

As to infrastructure development, a stable,
peaceful Iraq requires more than well-trained and well-
equipped security and police forces. It also requires the
development of a new infrastructure and the creation of
economic opportunity for the Iraqi people. To that end,
forces assigned to the MNF, especially civil affairs
personnel, have worked to restore essential services to
the Iraqi people. For example, engineering units have
helped to restore power to pre-conflict levels
throughout Iraq, although the events of yesterday
indicate that maintaining those basic services continues
to be a challenge. They have repaired numerous
bridges, ports, roads, and railroads. They have
constructed schools, hospitals, post offices and other
public buildings. Medical units have developed
children's vaccination programmes. Civil affairs
personnel work daily with the Iraqis to help them form
the structures needed to build a democratic society. The
MNF will also be available to provide security for the
upcoming Iraqi elections.

With reference to the role of the United Nations,
while we see real progress in the efforts of the MNF to
provide the means for a free, stable Iraq, I must state
candidly that great challenges remain. We believe that
the United Nations will be an important part of the
efforts to meet those challenges. Security Council
resolution 1546 (2004) endows the United Nations with
a leading role to advise and assist the Iraqis in
preparing and holding national elections. The
Transitional Administrative Law requires the elections
to be held no later than January 2005. Let there be no
doubt: we are committed to that timetable.

Resolution 1546 (2004) also notes the creation of
a distinct entity under the unified command of the
MNF that is dedicated to providing security to the
United Nations in Iraq. I think I speak for all Member
Nations when 1 say that the horror and sorrow of the
attack of 19 August 2003 are still very much with us.
With the Special Representative of the Secretary
General for Iraq, Mr. Qazi, and his staff of 35
dedicated people now on the ground in Iraq, I can state
that the United States and the MNF remain committed
to working with the international community to ensure
that the security needs of the United Nations are met.
But that effort merits international support if it is to be
successful. The United States strongly urges that
Member States contribute to the future of Iraq by
providing financial assistance and troops to provide
security for the United Nations in Iraq.

Time is of the essence, particularly as we look to
the upcoming elections, which are to take place no
later than 31 January 2005. Working together, we will
help the Iraqi Government ensure that the people of
Iraq reach this important milestone.

The assumption of governing authority by the
Iraqi Interim Government marked the beginning of a
new era for the people of Iraq. However, while the new
Government is widely supported by the public, the
transfer did not mean an end to the challenges that face
us. Well-armed insurgents and terrorists remained
determined to assassinate leaders, take hostages and
attack the multinational force and Iraqi forces. Only
the rule of law, backed by well-trained Iraqi forces,
supported by a thriving infrastructure and economy and
energized by a free and fair elections process, can
defeat those who wish to destabilize the country.

We look forward to increased United Nations
activities in Iraq, especially those that will promote the
democratic process. You can rest assured that the
multinational force remains committed to working with
the Iraqi people and the United Nations to make that
possible.

