Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): The adoption by
the Security Council of resolution 1373 (2001) was a
landmark in the global fight against terrorism. Through
it, the international community took the clear stand that
the fight against terrorism requires sustained, long-term
and global action. The United Nations has a central
role to play, and one upon which national efforts
should be built, since States have the primary
responsibility for adopting measures to fight terrorism
and its financing - measures aimed at suppressing all
active and passive support for terrorism. In so acting,
States must comply fully with the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, in particular resolution 1373
(2001), which established a set of mandatory
provisions for all States and which entrusted to the
United Nations an effective leading role in this
fundamental combat against one of the greatest threats
to international peace and security today.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) was
established by resolution 1373 (2001) as an instrument
of the Security Council to promote implementation by
Member States of all aspects of resolution 1373 (2001).
Approaching two years of existence, the Committee
has registered the remarkable achievement of securing
the cooperation of the entire United Nations
membership, thus making, through its work, an
important contribution to the global fight against
terrorism. In fact, it is undeniable that, thanks to the
activity of the CTC, the international community has
an enlarged and more effective legal framework for
fighting terrorism. It is also undeniable that, because of
States' self-assessments through their reports to the
CTC, there is a clearer picture of the existing
legislation and machinery to prevent terrorism and of
the legislative gap that remains to be filled. The
creation and revision of legislation by a large number
of States, in line with resolution 1373 (2001), has been,
indeed, an important accomplishment of the CTC.
There is now an urgent need to extend the CTC's
assistance to a number of developing countries in order
to make international legislation to combat terrorism
more global and, especially, more effective.

The quarterly programme of work of the
Committee for the current period provides an overview
of adherence to resolution 1373 (2001). The fact that
all States have submitted their first report and that a
large number have submitted their second and third
reports testifies to the universal commitment to the
fight against terrorism. The great increase in the
number of States that have adhered to the 12
international conventions and protocols related to
terrorism is a clear demonstration of the important
progress achieved so far.

The complexity of the tasks related to reporting
by States will be greater with the stage B reports,
which require that States assess police and intelligence
structures to detect, monitor and apprehend terrorists,
assess customs, immigration and border controls to
prevent the movement of terrorists and assess controls
preventing access to weapons by terrorists. With the
reporting of stage B, the CTC reaches the very core of
the fight against terrorism.

The work of the independent experts of the CTC
has been instrumental to the achievements of the
Committee. I would therefore like to take this
opportunity to show my appreciation for their
commitment and their professionalism. Their
contribution to the Committee has been a positive
factor.

Almost 40 Member States are late in submitting
their second and third round reports, and all of them
are developing countries. That reality shows that it is
not an easy task for a large number of countries to
comply fully with the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001). It is not due to lack of commitment or lack of
recognition of the importance of the fight against
terrorism. It is essentially due to a lack of capacity -
national and regional or subregional - to meet the
resolution's requirements. In fact, a large number of
developing countries have enacted anti-terrorist
legislation, but their scarce financial, technical and
human resources impede the implementation of such a
legislative framework. Moreover, those countries lack
the capacity to deal adequately with border controls
and security, the movement of criminals, the smuggling
of illicit drugs, illegal firearms, precious materials and
possible links with terrorists. We recognize the need
for those countries approach international standards in
order to meet the great challenges lying ahead. But to
achieve that goal, we need substantial long-term
assistance focused on national and regional capacity
building in areas related to resolution 1373 (2001).
Only through concerted efforts and international
assistance will we be able to meet the reporting
requirements of the CTC and to strengthen our capacity
in the fight against terrorism.

We welcome the commitment by the Committee
to provide technical assistance to countries in need and
the more active approach mentioned in the programme
of work of identifying assistance priorities and finding
appropriate providers of assistance.

Before I end, let me make absolutely clear the
fact that the Angolan Government condemns the
methods and tactics employed by terrorists. The end
will never justify the means used by terrorism.

However, I should like to call the attention of the
Security Council to the root causes of terrorism. These
root causes remain, among others, injustice, extreme
poverty, and social and political exclusion. The fight
against terrorism should also address its root causes if
we are jointly to succeed.

Let me end now by commending you, Sir, for the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, which you,
as its Chairman, have been guiding. The practical
contribution of the independent experts has also been a
very important factor, and I think that together we
should be able to continue our action and increase our
capacity to deal with this major scourge.

