Mr. Soares (Portugal): I would like to start by saying
that Portugal concurs fully with the statement just made by
the representative of the Presidency of the European Union.

The consequences of the conflict in Sierra Leone and
what seems currently to be the gradual emergence of a
post-conflict situation require a coordinated response both
from the international community and from the legitimate
Government of that State. Without political will in Sierra
Leone to overcome the current political and economic
challenges, the consolidation of peace will remain illusory;
but the same could be said if the international community
failed to provide credible assistance to the people of Sierra
Leone.

In this regard, Portugal commends the efforts of the
Government of Sierra Leone to re-establish the democratic
process and to promote the tasks of national reconciliation,
reconstruction and rehabilitation. We welcome in particular
the recent adoption by President Kabbah of a disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration plan.

Our delegation attaches special importance to the
provisions of the draft resolution before the Council which
emphasize the need to promote national reconciliation. We
also join others in demanding not only that the remnants of
the ousted junta and members of the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF) lay down their arms immediately, but also that
all forces and factions in Sierra Leone respect human rights
and strictly abide by the rules of international humanitarian
law. Full adherence to the arms embargo imposed by
resolution 1171 (1998), in particular by neighbouring
countries, would also be instrumental for the stabilization
of Sierra Leone.
In this context, the establishment of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) will
also be a meaningful step in the right direction. Its carefully
designed mandate is quite clear and has to be fully
respected by all relevant actors in this process. We
welcome the commitment of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) to ensure the security of United Nations
personnel, and we hope that the necessary security
arrangements can be concluded before UNOMSIL
observers are actually sent to Sierra Leone.

Portugal also underlines the importance of paragraph
14 of the draft resolution, which welcomes the efforts of
the Government of Sierra Leone to coordinate a national
response to the needs of children affected by armed
conflict, as well as the recommendation of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children in
Armed Conflict that Sierra Leone be made a pilot project
in the context of post-conflict peace-building. The open
debate on this issue which took place in this Chamber last
month under the Portuguese presidency and the
subsequent adoption of the presidential statement of 29
June 1998 demonstrate the particular importance the
Council attaches to this theme.

For the reasons just stated, Portugal will support the
draft resolution before the Council.

