Mr. Mawe (Ireland): Ireland commends Argentina
for organizing today's debate and for its effective chairing
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. The Group has been
particularly active this past year, with the adoption of
five presidential notes. I also wish to thank both the
ICC prosecutor and the Al-Qaida sanctions Committee
Ombudsperson for her briefing today.

Ireland aligns itself with the comprehensive
statement delivered by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the 23 members of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) Group.

Today we wish to highlight three key aspects of
working methods which we believe are of particular
importance to the effectiveness ofthe Security Council:
sharpening the Council's preventive role; the use of the
veto; and strengthening engagement with countries
contributing troops and police to peacekeeping
operations.

For us, it is clear that the Council needs to enhance
its preventive capacities and needs to be alerted as early
as possible to potential crises, so that appropriate action
can be taken. Current experience reveals a Council
that frequently finds itself responding to crises in an
incremental manner, escalating the tools at its disposal
as situations deteriorate. Better outcomes can be
achieved where the Council's tools are utilized much
earlier.

There have been a number of practical initiatives
aimed at strengthening the Council's preventive role,
including the establishment of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa,
the introduction of horizon-scanning briefings and,
more recently, the increased use of informal discussions
with the Department of Political Affairs, as well as the
use of "any other business" to raise emerging issues of
concern.

Ireland welcomes these initiatives as well as the
adoption of resolution 2171 (2014), on 21 August, which
strengthens existing acquis on the Council's preventive
role.
But more needs to be done to develop a genuine
culture of prevention. Innovative formats such as
Arria Formula meetings can trigger fresh thinking on
the dynamics of a conflict and inform the necessary
response. We saw this recently in the case of the
Central African Republic, and we welcome the growing
transparency and interactivity by the Council in holding
these meetings.

We also welcome the suggestion by the former
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay,
at the August open debate on conflict prevention (see S/PV.7019) that her successor would regularly and
routinely provide an informal briefing to Council
members on situations of concern in order to strengthen
early warning.

Ireland believes that the unfettered use of veto
rights by permanent Council members inhibits
the effectiveness of the Council and needs to be
reconsidered. The veto is not and cannot be viewed as
a privilege, but, rather, it brings particular duties and a
special responsibility to resolve conflict.

Ireland welcomes the initiative by France for a
voluntary code of conduct on the use of the veto in
mass atrocity situations. Ireland encourages permanent
members to agree to a statement of principles on a
voluntary code of conduct by the seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations, next year.

Finally, as a significant peacekeeping troop
contributor, we are strongly of the view that a
dynamic, interactive and meaningful partnership
between Council members, the Secretariat and troop-
and police-contributing countries is of benefit to all.
Presidential note 630, adopted this time last year, joined
a substantial existing acquis on peacekeeping working
methods, which go a significant way towards enhancing
the quality of the interaction and consultation with
troop and police contributors.

The main challenge now is implementation, and
we commend efforts which seek to strengthen this
triangular relationship.

All States Members of the United Nations have a
legitimate stake in how the Security Council is run;
the Council was established, after all, to ensure prompt
and effective action on behalf of the full membership. I
think that the fact that the Council has been discussing
this topic since 10 o'clock this morning shows that this
is an issue that matters to the entire membership.

In that regard, on conflict prevention, and across a
broad range of topics, Ireland, together with the ACT
Group, will continue to work for constructive and
cooperative engagement with Council members. We all
have an interest in taking practical steps to improve the
way in which the Council does its business and in order
to enhance its effectiveness.

