Mr. Burt (United Kingdom): I am delighted to have
cast the United Kingdom's vote in favour of resolution
2379 (2017), and I am grateful to Council members
for their unanimous support of this United Kingdom-
drafted text.

One year after we gathered on the margins of the
seventy-first session of the General Assembly and
promised to do all we could to bring Da'esh to justice,
this resolution is a vital step towards achieving that
profoundly necessary goal. As we vote in the Chamber,
we think of the people who suffered so grievously at the
hands of Da'esh - of the innocents whose homelands
were overrun; of the millions who were forced to flee;
of the suffering inflicted on those who stayed, many of
whom were massacred or enslaved; of the civilians who
died in terrorist attacks in Europe and around the world;
and of the great cities that were occupied, pillaged and
subjected to rule by terror.

There can never be adequate recompense for
those who were forced to endure the wanton brutality
of Da'esh, and the dead will not be brought back. But
this resolution means that the international community
is united in our belief that there should at least be
accountability for those who perpetrated such wicked
acts. The United Nations will now help to gather
and preserve evidence of Da'esh's crimes in Iraq. I
can announce that Britain will provide £1 million to
establish the United Nations investigative team that will
lead these efforts, and I would respectfully encourage
other countries to contribute.

Bringing Da'esh to justice will be possible
only because Iraq's courageous armed forces have
liberated one city after another, including Mosul,
and advanced with the support of many nations,
including my own, that sent their war planes into action
against the terrorists, breaking Da'esh's grip on about
three-quarters of the Iraqi territory it once occupied.
Wherever Da'esh has been driven back in Iraq, the
painstaking process of gathering evidence of its crimes
can now proceed under the auspices of the United
Nations. As the United Kingdom Commissioner for the
International Commission on Missing Persons, set up
after the conflict in former Yugoslavia, it is my hope
that some of this evidence will help Iraqi families learn
the fate and even find the remains of their loved ones,
especially in the terrible mass graves that dot the lands
which Da'esh occupied.

Britain has worked closely with the Government
of Iraq to bring forward this resolution, and we will
continue to work alongside the Government of Iraq and
our partners to implement it, ensuring that the United
Nations does everything possible to support domestic
and international efforts to hold Da'esh to account.
By striving for justice, we shall also be seeking to
heal the sectarian divides that Da'esh has exploited
and enflamed.

The defeat of Da'esh as a territorial entity is now
within sight, but its downfall will not in itself create
peace and stability. Lasting peace will be secured
only once we have helped Iraq to overcome sectarian
division and achieve the national unity that its people
deserve. Justice is an essential requirement for reaching
that goal, for it isjustice that leads to reconciliation, and
reconciliation is the only way to protect a society - any
society - against extremists who would sow hatred
and division.

That is why we must help Iraq to strengthen its
justice system so as to ensure that all those who commit
atrocities in the conflict are brought to justice. In the
meantime, we know that bringing Da'esh to justice will
take time, demanding patience and resolve from us
all. But we owe it to those who have suffered to press
ahead, however long the road might be, remembering
that many offenders have been long prosecuted after
they committed their crimes, as those in Srebrenica
will remember.

I will close by reminding the Council of an old
phrase - the millstones of justice turn exceeding
slow, but they grind exceeding fine. Those millstones
have begun moving today. I want to thank my friend
the Foreign Minister and the Government of Iraq for
our work together in making resolution 2379 (2017) a
reality. Let us make the consequences of the resolution
a reality, too, and bring some justice to those who have
suffered for too long.

