Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (Spoke in Spanish): We wish to express our appreciation for
the briefing provided today by Mr. Pedersen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, following
his extensive consultations in the framework of finding
an inclusive and sustainable political solution to the
conflict in Syria. We reiterate our support for his
practical and direct approach, as well as the five pillars
that underpin his diplomatic mediation efforts and the
establishment of credibility in the process.

Despite the apparent inertia in which we find
ourselves, we believe that both the international
community and the Syrian population are watching
attentively, and perhaps with some apprehension, to
see whether the ongoing political process will produce
results. Coupling that with the tense calm being
experienced by the population of northern Syria, who
live in fear of yet another humanitarian catastrophe,
we believe it is imperative to redouble efforts to avoid
a military escalation, which would affect the lives of
millions of civilians, endanger the credibility of the
political process and bring into question the ability of
the United Nations to prevent further suffering and come
up with a credible and sustainable political solution.

The political process and the situation in Idlib are
not mutually exclusive. On the contrary, we believe that
the success of one depends upon the capacity of the
international community - and of the Security Council
in particular - to avoid an even greater tragedy. In that
regard, we deplore the recent attacks in the demilitarized
zone in Idlib, which have claimed the lives of hundreds
of civilians, including children, and we urgently call
on the parties involved to maintain their commitment
to the ceasefire and the full implementation of the
agreement between the Russian Federation and Turkey.
We hope that all the necessary steps will be taken to
avoid violations of the agreement and of international
humanitarian law.

We take note of the recently concluded round of
talks held last week in Nur-Sultan, where the Astana
guarantors expressed their commitment to the
advancement of a Syrian-owned and United Nations-
facilitated political process under the guidelines of
resolution 2254 (2015). We recognize the progress,
albeit insufficient, towards the establishment of the
constitutional committee and its terms of reference.
We hope that the forthcoming consultations, facilitated
by the United Nations and to be held in Geneva on a
date not too far in the future, will produce satisfactory
results and demonstrate concrete progress. That would
provide renewed vigour and impetus to the political
process towards the definitive resolution of the Syrian
conflict. We urge the parties to exercise the greatest
possible degree of flexibility and show a constructive
spirit in those consultations. We invite them not to lose
sight of the need to alleviate the suffering of a people
stricken by years of conflict and to steer their course
towards a new future. For the Dominican Republic,
the success of the consultations lies in agreeing on an
inclusive constitutional committee that leads to the
meaningful and significant participation of women as
agents of peace, progress and well-being for all.

In conclusion, we reiterate our commitment to
resolution 2254 (2015), and we urge the full respect and
implementation thereof. In that context, we advocate
the consolidation of the role of the United Nations in
the facilitation, mediation and rapprochement between
the Syrian Government and the opposition, with a
view to building the necessary political will for the
establishment of the constitutional committee and its
terms of reference. We are hopeful that the committee
will be able to convene at a not-too-distant date as a
concrete step towards a renewed, credible and inclusive
political process.

I express our desire to see more meaningful
progress with regard to the release of detainees, a factor
that is vital to the building oftrust and credibility in the
political process from a holistic point of view.

We assure Ambassador Pedersen of our determined
support for his work and his conclusions from the
efforts thus far, the lessons learned and the shared
commitment to end the conflict. We urge the parties
to move decisively towards bringing about concrete
results that unequivocally put a new face on the Syrian
conflict - one that speaks of a transition towards a
future of hope and justice.

