Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): At the outset,
Mr. President, allow me to express Mali's satisfaction
at seeing your country, Chile, preside over the work of
the Security Council during the month of January 2015.

Let me also to congratulate Chad for its outstanding
leadership of the Security Council's work last month, in
particular for holding an open debate on terrorism and
cross-border crime (see S/PV.7351) , which was presided
over by my counterpart and friend, Minister Moussa

Faki Mahamat. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Cherif, who is present here today.

Allow me, as well, to reiterate my delegation's
congratulations to Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Spain and Venezuela upon taking their seats in the
Security Council this year. I also convey our best wishes
for the new year to all Member States. We express our
sincere thanks to Argentina, Australia, Luxembourg,
the Republic of Korea and Rwanda for the work they
achieved during their tenure on the Council.

Finally, allow me to acknowledge Mr. Herve
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for the briefing he has just given us on the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali
(S/2014/943).

Through me, the Government of the Republic of
Mali thanks Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
report. I would like to make the following remarks.

The first concerns the security situation. The
Government of the Republic Mali notes that the report
of the Secretary-General comes at a time marked by
a significant increase in terrorist attacks in northern
Mali. As underscored in the report, the security
situation in the north of my country remains unstable
and worrisome. I recall that, when I addressed the
Council on 8 October 2014 (see S/PV.7274), I drew
the attention of the international community to the
proliferation of acts of terrorist targeting the Malian
defence and security forces, civilian populations and
the forces of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

Since then, acts of terrorism, including the laying
of improvised explosive devices on main roads, shell
and rocket attacks on Malian armed forces camps
and MINUSMA bases, and suicide attacks, have
intensified, unfortunately claiming the lives of Blue
Helmets, soldiers of the Malian army and numerous
civilians. During the period covered by the report, as
was just mentioned, a total of 16 peacekeepers lost
their lives to such attacks. Furthermore, the reporting
period saw a whole slew of new attacks, committed
not only by terrorist groups but also by forces hostile
to peace. Those included the attack against the joint
MINUSMA camp in Tessalit on 29 December 2014, for
which the Ansar Eddine terrorist group, which is on the
list of the Council's Sanctions Committee, has claimed
responsibility. On the night of 29 and 30 December,
hostile forces attacked a ship of the Malian Shipping
Company between Bamba and Timbuktu. On
3 January 2015, an ambush left Mayor Aroudeiny Ag
Hamatou of Anderaboukane in Menaka - a Tuareg
politician who was deeply committed to the ongoing
peace process - shot dead. On 4 January, a car bomb
targeting peacekeepers in the Gao area injured several
troops of the Nigerian contingent, to whom we express
our heartfelt condolences. They also include an attack
committed just yesterday, 5 January, by unidentified
assailants against the town of Nampala in the Segou
region, just 500 kilometres from Bamako, which
claimed a number oflives and posed a further challenge
not only to the Government of Mali but also to the
Security Council and the international community.

Those various attacks clearly show the
determination of the terrorist groups and hostile forces
to impede the peace process under way, which should
be a call to all of us. For its part, the Government of
the Republic of Mali, views those terrorist attacks as
a blatant violation of the ceasefire agreements, the
road map signed in Algiers and the relevant resolutions
adopted by the Security Council under Chapter VII of
Charter of the United Nations.

I must recall here the need for the armed groups
operating in northern Mali to set themselves apart
decisively from terrorist groups. MINUSMA forces
on the ground can attest to undesirable links between
certain parties and terrorist groups. That must stop. We
cannot accept such attitudes. A clear choice must be
taken between the peace process and other actions. We
must avail ourselves of the means to undertake adequate
verification and make determinations in that regard.

I also recall that, in my statement of8 October, faced
with the resurgence of terrorist attacks that have clearly
demonstrated that MINUSMA was, unfortunately, no
longer working in a peacekeeping environment, as my
friend Mr. Herve Ladsous already stated a few weeks
ago, I proposed the establishment ofa force intervention
brigade, along the lines of the brigade of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, by contributing
countries for deployment in northern Mali with robust
rules of engagement and means to combat terrorist
groups and drug-traffickers.

Furthermore, with a view to addressing the
emergency, a ministerial meeting of the African
countries contributing troops to MINUSMA was held
on 5 November 2014 at Niamey at the initiative of my
counterpart, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Niger, Mr. Mohamed Bazoum. Among other things,
the meeting requested sped-up consideration of the
establishment of a quick reaction force for northern Mali
as part of the Nouakchott Process on enhancing security
cooperation and operationalizing the African Peace and
Security Architecture in the Sahelo-Saharan region, in
order to make comprehensive recommendations to the
African Union Peace and Security Council.

The Niamey ministerial meeting thus also echoed
Security Council resolutions on the importance of an
early conclusion to the inter-Malian talks taking place
in Algiers, noting that the conclusion of an agreement
between the Government of Mali and northern armed
movements would promote a more effective fight
against terrorist and criminal groups operating in
the northern part of our country. The findings of the
Niamey ministerial meeting were forwarded to the
Security Council in view of the brainstorming session
on MINUSMA held here on 10 November 2014, which
I would like to congratulate the Secretariat team for
having initiated. The Government of Mali welcomes
the measures to strengthen MINUSMA advocated by
the Secretary-General in paragraph 65 of his report
and looks forward to the follow-up measures that
the Security Council may wish to take following the
conclusion of the ministerial meeting in Niamey.

My second comment is about the political process,
to which Under-Secretary-General Ladsous also
referred, in particular the inter-Malian talks being held
in Algiers. Indeed, the report of the Secretary-General
reviews in a timely manner the peace talks taking place
in Algiers between the Government and the armed
movements and groups in northern Mali under the
auspices of the international mediation led by Algeria.

In my capacity as head of the Government delegation
to this process, I would like to reiterate to the Council
the personal commitment oins Excellency Mr. Ibrahim
Boubacar Keita, President of Mali, to reaching a final
and comprehensive peace agreement with our brothers
and sisters in the armed movements from the north
of the country, and to consider together a reworking
of the Malian State, which, as the Under-Secretary-
General indicated, would reassure all Malians. That
must be undertaken with the understanding that the
solution that we seek for the north must be built on a
national consensus that is acceptable to all Malians and
that political and institutional frameworks are created
to encourage all Malians to live out their diversity
in the framework of the established principles and
constitutional rules, so that no Malian feels like a
foreigner in their own country.

In his message to the nation on 31 December 2014,
the President reaffirmed his determination to resolve
the question of northern Mali through dialogue. In
that context, the President remains convinced that
decentralization, within the framework of the free
administration of communities, within a unitary State,
is the cornerstone of the inclusive inter-Malian talks
under way in Algiers. The offer of decentralization
and of the free administration of communities through
a significant transfer of prerogatives is sincere. It will
also be a comprehensive offer. It is the best response to
the legitimate demands of our citizens, whether from
the north or the south, who all aspire to well-being and
therefore want a say in resources, local institutions and
the manner in which their affairs are managed at the
local level.

At the same time, the President committed, in
his message to the nation, to taking all necessary
steps to ensure a diligent and full implementation of
the future peace agreement commitments, drawing
all possible lessons from preceding agreements.
By opening their arms to all those who want to lay
down their weapons, the President recalled that his
primary objectives are still peace, stability, territorial
integrity, social cohesion, justice, equity, the inclusion
of all without distinction - and I would highlight that
element - and national reconciliation. It is understood
that the republican, unitary and secular nature of the
State of Mali are and remain non-negotiable.

My third point concerns compliance with
commitments. The Government of Mali has consistently
honoured its commitments in the peace process that is
under way. Since the signing ofthe ceasefire agreement
of 23 May 2014, Mali's defence and security forces
have not committed any act likely to be interpreted as
a violation that threatens to overshadow the political
process. Of course, we cannot say as much of the
other signatories to the 24 July 2014 declaration of the
cessation of hostilities.

Furthermore, the constant emergence of armed
groups in spaces unoccupied by the national defence and
security forces, in order to attack and commit violations
against certain communities largely explains why
vigilante groups have been formed by the communities
concerned in order to protect their land. In that respect,
I take this opportunity to emphasize strongly that
these self-defence community groups, described in the
report of the Secretary-General as pro-Government,
are neither founded nor supported by the Government
of Mali. Beyond the fact that some of the allegations in
the report should be subject to verification, I would like
to reiterate the commitment by the Government of Mali
to meet its human rights commitments, which amply
justify continuing the investigations under way.

Let me now share with the Security Council the
decisions taken by the Heads of State and Government
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Heads of State and Government of the
Nouakchott Process, which includes all 11 countries
of the Sahel, and the Heads of State and Government
of the Group of Five Sahel (G-S), which includes 5
countries of the Sahel region, who met, respectively, on
15 December 2014 in Accra, from 17 to 18 December in
Nouakchott and on 19 December 2014 in Nouakchott. I
would like to recall here those decisions.

First, the Heads of State of those various
organizations reiterated their commitment to
Mali's sovereignty and territorial integrity and the
unitary character - and I would repeat, the unitary
character - and republican form of its State. The Heads
of State also reiterated their call on all armed groups in
northern Mali that are signatories of the Ouagadougou
preliminary agreement of 18 June 2013, to differentiate
themselves from terrorist groups, as I mentioned. They
welcomed the results achieved since July 2014 by the
inter-Malian open peace talks held in Algiers with the
support of international mediation led by Algeria and
urged the Malian parties, including the Government,
to conclude a peace agreement when the talks held in
Algiers are resumed in January 2015. We will probably
see that timetable extended into February in order to
reach a compromise on the basis of the draft agreement
submitted to the parties.

On the eve of the resumption of talks in Algiers, I
would like to appeal to the Security Council members
who are able to do so to exert the necessary pressure to
cause the leaders of the armed movements to become
personally involved in the process when the talks
resume. That is a crucial point.

During the negotiations held in Algiers, we could
have achieved a breakthrough, because the draft
agreement that we had before us, which was partly
based on the offer made by the Government of Mali,
is a good document and forms a sound basis for
further discussions. It deals with most of the questions
that need to be tackled with respect to the four main
elements of negotiation. We also had the opportunity in
Algiers to interact with our brothers. The problem here,
of course, was that the leaders of these movements were
not present. I believe that the international community
needs to be firm on such issues.

It is incomprehensible that, when the Government
of Mali decided to send five ministers - with me, your
humble servant, at the head of the delegation - our
brothers from the movements could not find the time
to come to the negotiating table. At a time when the
international community has invested and sacrificed
so much in terms of human and material resources and
energy to put in place the mediation, so that together we
could overcome the obstacles facing us, those leaders
did not attend.

Today only a handful of mostly political issues
remain that can be resolved only at the highest possible
political level. That is why we hope that with respect to
the session, which is going to resume at the end of this
month or perhaps early in February, the most important
thing is not to move with undue haste towards the
convening of a meeting but to ensure that commitments
are made by all the parties at the highest possible
level. This is of fundamental importance. We stand
ready to do so, because we feel that we are very close
to an agreement. This is probably the last leg - the
last 100 metres, as sprinters would say. We are very
close, but we have to exert the pressure necessary to
ensure that we are able to cover these last 100 metres
in a very effective but responsible way, with all parties
sitting around the negotiating table. We must make the
necessary sacrifices.

Malian public opinion understands that compromise
and sacrifices are necessary and that solutions must
be found to the problems affecting Malians, because
what we face today is the renewed flare-up of threats
on the ground. Even as we negotiate and move towards
peace, hostile forces are trying to pull us in the opposite
direction. That is why it is important that we be able to
overcome this hurdle, so that the Government and the
armed movements can join forces to fight those who are
the real enemies today, that is, terrorist groups and drug
traffickers, whose interests are interlinked.

I think that it is important to convey these positive
messages, namely, that agreement is more than possible,
but we have to continue to work actively. We must work
because all of our efforts must be focused on this. If
we miss this opportunity, that offered by the beginning
of 2015, to achieve an agreement, I am afraid that the
situation might simply spin out of control and later we

will not be able to regain that control. So the Council
must bear in mind that it needs to focus on this process
during this very critical phase.

One of the notable and relevant decisions of the
Nouakchott summit and the G-5 Sahel was on the
security situation in Libya. Libya is of concern not only
to our heads of State but also to us in Mali and to the
Sahel. The Council will recall that the Malian crisis
is, after all, linked to the Libyan crisis, and, so long
as a solution is not found to the Libyan crisis, all that
we are doing in Mali and in the Sahel will continue
to be at risk. So with respect to the Libyan crisis, the
heads of State and Government of the Sahel welcomed
the efforts undertaken by Algeria and the Special
Representative of the United Nations to ensure that
the necessary conditions are created to hold a dialogue
among all Malian parties.

To preserve the unity, territorial integrity and
stability of Libya and of the whole of the Sahelo-Saharan
region, the heads of State and Government of the G-5
Sahel launched an appeal to the Security Council for it to
set up, jointly with the African Union, an international
force to neutralize the armed groups, help with national
reconciliation and create stable institutions in Libya.
Libya is of concern to us. Continuing efforts must be
made in that respect, and we hope that the next African
Union summit in Addis Ababa will provide the Heads
of State with an opportunity to once again address this
issue and to consider solutions thereto.

Allow me also to touch on the Ebola virus
epidemic, which poses yet another threat to peace and
security throughout the world. I would like here to pay
tribute to the personal commitment of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, in the fight against this
scourge. We welcome the fact that above and beyond
the reports he receives, he has travelled to the area, as
he did on 20 December. He visited Mali to convey his
solidarity and to witness at first hand the harm done by
the epidemic in the countries affected.

We in my country mobilized fully to prevent the
spread of the disease. As underscored in the report
of the Secretary-General, through the efforts of the
Government of Mali and the assistance of its partners,
to which I pay tribute, we were able to stem the spread of
the disease in our country. Indeed, since 16 December
2014 there have been no cases of Ebola in Mali. Of
seven confirmed cases, five were fatal and two were
cured. However, the threat remains. The Government
of the Republic of Mali therefore continues to advocate
vigilance and the strict observance of prevention
measures among the population.

By way of conclusion, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report, the members of the
Security Council and the mediation team headed by
Algeria for their support to Mali and their efforts to
achieve a definitive and lasting peace in my country.

I should like also to thank all of the other countries
that are not members of the Security Council or of the
mediation team but that are friends and partners of Mali
and that have always provided us with multiformatted
support, often in a very understated way. I should like
also to reiterate the congratulations of the Government
of the Republic of Mali to Mr. Mongi Hamdi on his
appointment as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of MINUSMA and to assure him
of our full cooperation so as to ensure the success of
his mission. We also take this opportunity to express
our gratitude to Mr. David Gressly and Mr. Arnauld
Akodjenou, Deputy Special Representatives, and to
General Kazura for the outstanding work carried out.

I wish also to thank MINUSMA, the troop-
contributing countries and the Barkhane force for the
outstanding work they have done in Mali in a very
difficult and hostile environment.

Last but not least, I would like to pay tribute to
our colleague Minister Bert Koenders, former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for the
outstanding work that he did at the head of MINUSMA.

