Costa Rica associates itself with the statement made by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict and takes this opportunity to congratulate France on its presidency of the Security Council for the month of June and to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary- General for Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, and the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund, Henrietta Fore, for their presentations. In times like these, when a pandemic is sweeping the globe, we must protect children who are caught up in armed conflict. Their health, safety, education and future are doubly threatened by the violence of war and the impact of coronavirus disease and the measures taken to contain it. That is yet another reason to silence the weapons, and why the delegation of Costa Rica wishes to recall the Secretary- General's call for a global ceasefire. We also stress the importance of the members of the Security Council supporting the call, which is so necessary to protect child victims of hostilities. Given the times, the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1612 (2005) should lead us to reflect more than ever on the importance of its mandates and their implementation as mechanisms to protect children and guarantee their rights. In 2020 we also celebrate the fifteenth anniversary of General Assembly resolution 60/1, on the responsibility to protect, which reminds us that the duty of all States to prevent atrocities and genocide includes protecting children. Resolution 1612 (2005) achieved three main things. The first is the establishment of the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict, which is the best way to obtain timely, objective and accurate information on the condition of children and to take the necessary action to guarantee their rights. The second is the adoption of action plans for the protection of children in armed conflict. We take this opportunity to acknowledge the achievement of the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in signing 29 plans in 2019 and in supporting Governments in adopting relevant legislation. The third is the establishment of the Security Council Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict, which has the important responsibility of reviewing the mechanism's reports, taking effective action and determining progress made in the situation of children and the implementation of action plans. In that connection, the resolution underlined the role of listing and delisting, which should be done on the basis of reports and objective criteria. We emphasize that there must be consistency between the findings of reports and the lists. I conclude by recalling the obligation of all States, even those without armed conflict, to end impunity for abuses, crimes and atrocities committed against children, as well as the important role played by institutions such as the International Criminal Court in the fight against impunity.
