Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Lebanon
would like to reiterate the importance of preserving the
territorial unity and integrity of countries and abiding
by the principle of non-aggression and non-interference
in their internal affairs. We therefore once again
express our full support for the Djibouti peace process
and the Transitional Federal Charter, which provide the
appropriate framework for reaching a lasting political
agreement in Somalia. We also welcome the 9 June
Kampala agreement and the road map agreed by the
parties on 6 September.

Lebanon would like once again to reiterate its
satisfaction with Qatar's continued mediation efforts to
resolve the border conflict between Djibouti and
Eritrea. We also thank Qatar for having deployed
troops to the border between the two countries.

We commend the positive developments that have
taken place, including the withdrawal of Eritrean
forces. We call for continuing efforts to achieve
objectives, in particular with regard to the
Eritrea/Djibouti Border Commission and the issue of
prisoners of war and missing persons. We call for
compliance with resolution 1862 (2009), of 14 January
2009, as well as the agreement reached at Doha by the
Governments of Djibouti and Eritrea on 6 June 2010.

However, we reiterate our great concern about the
contents of the 18 July report (see S/2011/433) of the
Somalia/Eritrea Monitoring Group in connection with
Eritrea's actions in the Horn of Africa region,
especially its support for Somali rebels. The
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
leaders of neighbouring countries have issued reports
of Eritrea's persistent efforts to destabilize the
region- a matter that heightens our concerns. We
therefore call upon Eritrea to resolve the current
problems through negotiation and cooperation with
IGAD, the African Union and the United Nations, and
we support the draft resolution submitted by Gabon,
which is backed by IGAD, as it provides a clear
message of the need to implement all United Nations
resolutions, to respect the principles of good
neighbourliness and to deal with all pending issues
through dialogue in order to strengthen peace and
security in the Horn of Africa.
5
