Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Uruguay for convening today's
debate and express our appreciation for the statements
made by the Secretary-General and representatives
of civil society who have briefed us on the particular
problems faced by humanitarian personnel dedicated to
medical missions and health personnel.

It is necessary and appropriate for the Security
Council to address this issue on a regular basis and that
it reiterate its appeal to the United Nations membership
and all parties to conflicts to respect the standards
and principles related to the protection of civilians
enshrined in international humanitarian law, human
rights and international criminal law. Nevertheless,
on many occasions, these appeals are ignored. They
have therefore been insufficient to prevent or eliminate
armed conflicts or to ensure the protection of civilians
during conflicts, including in post-conflict stages.
This is particularly worrying given the persistence
of and increase in attacks against those involved in
humanitarian operations and attacks on humanitarian
convoys and medical facilities. All such attacks
constitute war crimes.

Mexico strongly condemns this violence and
calls on all parties to a conflict to respect and
protect civilians, wounded and sick combatants and
humanitarian workers alike. It is unacceptable that
these personnel and facilities should be considered as
parts of the battlefield rather than as sanctuaries for the
wounded and the sick. The granting of humanitarian
assistance can in no way be held hostage to political or
military interests in an armed conflict, whether it be
international or domestic conflict.

Similarly, given the devastating consequences of the
use of explosives in densely populated areas, because of
the difficulty of fully predicting and controlling their
effects in the area around a detonation point - and
therefore on people living there - we support efforts to
adopt a political declaration on the issue. It is necessary
and urgent to agree on a comprehensive response, since
the consequences of the use of explosives in densely
populated areas are experienced over the long term. We
must prevent explosive weapons from destroying entire
infrastructures, including hospitals and health centres.

In the light of this reality, the historic adoption
of resolution 2286 (2016) represents an opportunity
to step up and focus the efforts of Member States and
the Organization to protect civilians. Accordingly,
the Secretary-General's recommendations provide
a basis for strengthening our response. It is also
vital to seek to address the structural failings of the
Organization in these cases. That is why we reiterate
our appeal to the permanent members of the Security
Council to follow the example of one of their own,
France, and commit themselves not to veto Council
decisions in cases that involve mass atrocities. Nearly a
hundred countries have aligned themselves in support
of the Franco-Mexican initiative in this regard. We
therefore call on the members of the Security Council
to implement the Security Council code of conduct
proposed and strengthened by the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group, so as to enhance
the capacity and effectiveness of the Organization in
the face of violations of international humanitarian law,
human rights and international criminal law.

We welcome the increasing interest and attention
being given to including better policies for the
protection of civilians in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. The Security Council's condemnation
is very important, but it should be accompanied by
decisive actions to combat impunity in those cases. We
also have to focus on addressing the underlying causes
of conflict and on sustainable peace as a goal but also
as a process and tool for ensuring international security
and human security.

Civilians, and in particular women, boys and
girls, continue to be the majority of the victims in
armed conflicts. It is therefore essential to translate
the political commitment of the Security Council into
up-to-date and strengthened protection mechanisms,
which in turn generate a tangible change in the situation
on the ground. We therefore echo the recommendations
of the Secretary-General and call on the Security
Council to ensure that this issue remain at the heart of
our definition of political strategies and solutions on
its agenda.

