Mr. Matjila (South Africa): As per your directive,
Mr. President, I will not thank the briefers, but I will
join my neighbours in welcoming the Foreign Minister
to the Council.

The briefing and details provided by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, led some of us to relive the
difficult past in South Africa and the very similar
processes taking place in Colombia. That is why we
pledge our utmost support to Carlos and his team as
they implement the mandate with which the Council
entrusted them in contributing modestly to the peace
process in Colombia.

Consolidating peace after decades of conflict and
mistrust is not an easy task. We wish to commend
the efforts of the Colombian Government in trying to
address issues such as social security, basic services
and land and rural development, as well as economic
opportunities and legal protection, particularly for
former combatants and members of the Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia - People's Army
(FARC-EP).

In addition, the visits and engagements by high-
level officials of the Colombian Government, including
by President Ivan Duque Marquez, to the territorial
areas for training and reintegration represent a
positive development. We also wish to commend the
efforts of the former combatants in contributing to
the peace process. Initiatives that enhance their skills
and create opportunities for the broader communities
in which they live are positive strides towards
reintegrating into Colombian society and contributing
to the economy. However, there are many challenges to
be addressed moving forward.

South Africa fully supports the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace, which was signed between the Government of
Colombia and the FARC-EP in 2016. We commend the
progress made in its implementation, including on the
demobilization and reintegration processes of former
members of the FARC-EP. We wish to call for the full
implementation of the peace agreement and of the
statutory law of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, in
accordance with the provisions of the agreement.
We agree with the Secretary-General that
Colombia's peace process is at a critical juncture,
and the implementation of the agreement remains
at the heart of the situation in Colombia. We note
President Duque's decision to undertake a process of
review of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, which
he has indicated could be an opportunity to create a
national consensus regarding transitional justice in
Colombia. It is trusted that this process will not result
in heightened tensions in the country. It is important
to deepen efforts to de-escalate tensions, address the
reintegration processes and allay the concerns of the
former combatants, particularly with regard to legal
and security guarantees. The Special Jurisdiction for
Peace is a vital component of the agreement and any
further delay in its implementation could undermine
the political, socioeconomic and security prospects
of Colombia.

South Africa's process of reconciliation and
reconstruction was underpinned by the establishment
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, which
presented an opportunity to facilitate reconciliation
between the perpetrators and the survivors of
such human rights violations. In the words of our
Constitution, the Commission process allows for the
cultivation of

"a need for understanding but not for vengeance,
a need for reparation but not for retaliation, a need
for ubuntu but not for victimisation".

That process was essential to the long-term
consolidation of hard-won freedom in South Africa. In
that context, we support the statement that was issued
on 11 March by the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia, in which it highlighted the importance
of preserving the gains made in the peace process by
guaranteeing the rights of victims. We should be firm
in creating conditions conducive to the full and free
functioning of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace as part
of the peace agreement. South Africa therefore calls
on all parties to respect the constitutionally mandated
mechanisms and frameworks established to assist the
political and judicial transition.

In its own struggle to overcome decades of
division and mistrust and in seeking a better future for
all, South Africa was significantly supported by the
international community. In that regard, the support
for the work of the United Nations through its Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
as well as the relevant United Nations agencies, civil
society and international partners, has been invaluable.
We urge Members and the international partners to
support and encourage the people of Colombia to
preserve and fully implement the peace agreement in
addressing the concerns and rights of victims, access
to justice, reparation, guarantees of non-repetition,
inclusive dialogue and peaceful negotiations to resolve
all outstanding issues in Colombia.

