Mr. Milanovic' (Serbia): Before proceeding with
my statement, I would like to underline how privileged
I am to deliver my statement today, 11 November, a
date that continues to stand out as a beacon of hope
and reconciliation all over the world. In paying respect
to those who have laid down their lives for peace and
liberty before and after that momentous day, let me
reaffirm my country's commitment to lasting peace
and reconciliation in our region and beyond.

At the outset, I would like to welcome Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to
thank him for his report to the Council (S/2014/777, annex).

Serbia supports the territorial integrity and
constitutional arrangements of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as provided for by the Dayton Peace Agreement,
and considers the country one of its key partners in
the region. Accordingly, my country accepts every
decision taken by the two entities and three constituent
peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and is committed
to promoting good-neighbourly cooperation on
the basis of the closest possible relations with the
central Government and the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We continue to deepen and enrich the
special relations that we have with Republika Srpska.

Serbia shares the assessment, prevalent both within

and without Bosnia and Herzegovina, that the general
elections of October were fair and democratic and that
their results were accepted by all political actors. We
also continue to believe that the right way forward
is the honouring by the post-election majority of the
political will expressed at the elections. The political
dialogue between Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
is extensive and wide-ranging. That is evinced very
tellingly by the fact that Sarajevo was the first visit
destination of Serbian Prime Minister Aleksandar
Vueic' after his electoral victory, as well as by the joint
donor conference, held in Brussels on 16 July, to raise
funds to relieve the consequences of the catastrophic
floods that hit both Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
last spring.

The visit of Mr. Zlatko Lagumdzija, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Deputy Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to Belgrade
in August, and his meetings with the highest ranking
officials of Serbia were also assessed as an important
contribution to the strengthening of the stability of the
region and the promotion of economic relations between
the two countries. On that occasion, the two sides
expressed their interest in revitalizing the infrastructure
connecting Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina and
intensifying the work on energy generation projects,
especially on the Drina River.

The two countries are in agreement on the need to
hold a joint meeting of the Government of the Republic
of Serbia and the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The meeting is now expected to take
place upon the formation ofa new Council. In addition,
the return visits to Bosnia and Herzegovina of Tomislav
Nikolie, President of the Republic of Serbia, and Ivica
Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, will take
place some time soon.

Last but not least, the two countries signed a
memorandum of understanding on joint ventures in
third-country markets in Belgrade last September, as a
reflection of their excellent overall relations.

Also, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina continue
to address in good faith and mutual interest all
outstanding issues, which are significantly reduced
in number now, in direct contacts and talks without
intermediaries. They include demarcation, refugees
and missing persons, and the process of succession.

I would like to reiterate that, as the country with
the largest number of refugees in the region, Serbia
shares the concern of High Representative Inzko
with respect to the recommendation of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to lift the refugee status on refugees from Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the region. We consider that the
recommendation is premature, has a negative effect
on the protection of refugees and is detrimental to the
implementation of the regional housing programme
and the process of reconciliation. Serbia calls for the
adoption of lasting, just and sustainable solutions that
will address the needs and respect the rights of the
long-displaced vulnerable population.

Finally, I would like to point out that Serbia is
a staunch supporter of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
European integration. To that end, we have been
promoting the integration process, including through a
number of institutions, initiatives and acts, such as the
Commission on the Implementation of the Action Plan
of the Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation
in the Field of European Integration, exchange of
experiences in the fulfilment ofthe Copenhagen criteria
and readiness for coordination on the road towards the
European Union, making it possible for the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to draw insight from the
part of Serbia's application relating to foreign affairs
and the fulfilment of other technical membership
conditions fulfilled by my country. We cooperate
with Bosnia and Herzegovina in the cross-border
cooperation programmes under aegis of the European
Union's Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance.

