Mr. Attaf (Algeria) (interpretation from Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting today at a time when the
Palestinian territories are enduring an extremely dangerous
situation that can be described as a new downturn in the
peace process in the Middle East.

The international community has been keenly
involved in this process. Because of the obstacles
experienced and the serious hindrances caused by the
Israeli leadership's failure to respect its commitments, our
Council must today face the logical results of such a
situation and of the Israeli attitude, which differs greatly
from what the international community has set down as
the fundamental principles for a peaceful, comprehensive
and lasting settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict.

The Israeli design still fails to respect the rights of
others and is aimed at imposing a peace that benefits only
one party, posing the possibility of the security of that
party to the detriment of legitimate Arab security. The
horrendous Israeli provocations, that violate the
fundamental duty of respect for holy sites, recognized by
the entire world, are represented by the opening of a
tunnel under the Al Aqsa Mosque. This is part of Israel's
intransigent flouting of everything the international
community has decided about commitments and
conditions for the settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
This policy has an end and a means. It recently took
concrete form, as everyone knows, through the freezing
of the Israeli withdrawal from Hebron, the refusal to
resume negotiations on the final situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, the return to the policy of
settlements, the blocking off of the Palestinian territories,
the confiscation of Arab lands and the collective
economic sanctions and daily acts of violence against the
unarmed civilian population.

My country condemns this policy, which runs
counter to peace as a whole and peace in all its
particulars.

How can the Security Council meet the challenges
it faces today in fully shouldering its responsibilities in a
conflict wherein the conditions for a settlement are set
down in its own resolutions, which today have been
flagrantly and arrogantly flouted by Israel?

Secondly, the present policy of the Israeli leadership
runs counter to the very logic and meaning of the peace
process. It no longer considers itself bound by the
agreements of the Madrid Conference or the resolutions
of the Council. It no longer respects the Washington and
Oslo agreements. The resumption of negotiations with
Syria and Lebanon at the point at which they were
interrupted are no longer acceptable to the Israeli
administration.

 

Thirdly, based on the above, it is clear that, while
claiming to desire the unconditional relaunching of the
peace process, Israel is exploiting the delay in order to
redefine and threaten it as a whole. What kind of peace can
be established and maintained without the total recovery by
the Palestinian people of its rights, including its right to the
creation of its own State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital? What peace can be established and maintained
without the complete withdrawal of Israel from the Syrian
Golan Heights? What kind of peace can be established and
maintained without a full and unconditional Israeli
withdrawal from southern Lebanon?

Fourthly, given Israel's scornful flouting of its
commitments, we can only assume that it entertains the
unrealistic notion that peace can be based on the rejection
of Arab rights and Israeli security on Arab insecurity.

Fifthly, no one can today deny that the Israeli position
is a defiance of the international community, and in
particular of the Security Council in its function as the
organ responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security. The failure to resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict
is, in fact, a violation of the Council's resolutions.

Finally, the events at the Al-Aqsa Mosque fall within
the framework of a well-known and carefully thought-out
plan for total judaization of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, in
contravention of international legitimacy, including the
position of the Security Council.

At a time when the Palestinian territories are going
through a tragic period, which follows upon a period of
hope, and when the peace process as a whole is at a total
standstill, the Security Council must fully shoulder its
responsibilities by issuing a just opinion sustaining a just
cause, rejecting the policy of fair accompli and condemning
Israel's refusal to respect the commitments it has
undertaken.

This means, first, that the tunnel must be closed, since
its use is a violation of the sanctity of the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
In addition, the deteriorating situation in the occupied
territories requires that Israel fully respect its commitments
under the Oslo and Washington agreements and that it lift
all its repressive measures, which run counter to a policy of
peace and are causing the sufferings of the Palestinian
people today.

Secondly, given the obstacles currently hindering the
peace process in the Middle East, the Security Council has
the responsibility once again to emphasize the Madrid
agreements as a general framework for the peace process
in the Middle East. The Council must also enshrine the
principle of "land for peace" as a basic condition for this
process and reaffirm that its resolutions form the basis for
this process.

At the most recent Cairo summit, the Arab leaders
reaffirmed their commitment to the peace process as a
strategic choice. However, this process must not be a one-
way street. That is why the international community -
primarily represented by the Council, the sponsor of the
peace process - and all parties involved must today,
more than ever before, make serious efforts to reactivate
the peace process in the Middle East by requiring Israel
to renounce its intransigent policy of rejection. This
policy has led to the tragic situation we are considering
today and will doubtless lead to others if we do not find
a definitive solution to the situation.

Finally, I turn to you, Sir, in expressing my warm
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council and my wishes for your success.

