Mr. Mukerji (India): Let me begin by thanking you,
Madam President, and your delegation for organizing
today's debate on the important issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We also thank all the
briefers in this debate for their very valuable inputs.

It bears recalling that the Security Council has been
considering the protection of civilians as a thematic
subject since 1999. The topic has also become a key focus
in many resolutions, including some that are country-
specific and relate to United Nations peacekeeping
missions. However, the sad fact remains that civilians
continue to suffer disproportionately during armed
conflicts. We therefore hope that today's debate and
the comprehensive concept note (S/2013/447, annex)
prepared by your delegation, Madam President, will
contribute to the evolving discourse on strengthening
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

India has consistently supported full compliance
with the applicable international humanitarian laws by
all parties to an armed conflict. We believe that a critical
requirement in that context relates to the capacities of
national institutions in situations of armed conflict
and the need to strengthen them. Obviously, capacity-
building of key national institutions, including in the
security and justice sectors, needs to be adequately
resourced. It is important that the international
community, including the United Nations, step up to
the plate and partner with national authorities so as to
build and strengthen the capacity of State organs.

Today, as we mark World Humanitarian Day, we
must emphasize that adequate resourcing is also an
imperative for United Nations peacekeeping missions,
which are now also being charged with mandates for the
protection of civilians. We must also hold accountable
those who target United Nations peacekeepers, who are
responsible for protecting civilians in their theatre of
operations.

Moreover, efforts at peacebuilding should be
initiated right at the beginning, and the cause ofthe armed
conflict addressed through national reconciliation and
inclusive political processes, while giving all sections
of society a stake in peaceful coexistence.

The need to ensure humanitarian access to
populations affected by armed conflict cannot be
overstated, and States must endeavour to facilitate
such access. However, humanitarian actors must also
ensure that their activities do not provide legitimacy
or operational space for terrorist or armed groups.
Terrorists and illegal armed groups, which often bear
the primary responsibility for attacks against civilians,
should be held accountable for such attacks.

Security Council action must be based on full
respect for the Charter of the United Nations, including
the sovereignty and integrity of Member States. Insofar
as issues of impunity are concerned, we believe
that a lasting solution is not in the creation of more
international or regional institutions but in building
national institutions through capacity-building efforts
so that they can function consistently with the rule of
law.

In conclusion, I should like to reiterate our
consistent view that the protection of civilians is
primarily a national responsibility that becomes even
more important in an armed conflict. It is our belief
that contributions to national capacity building rather
than intervention mechanisms should be the priority of
the Security Council.

