Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his briefing. I also thank
Ambassador Saikal of Afghanistan.

1 associate myself in advance with the statement to
be delivered on behalf of the European Union.

Ayear andahalfafterthe beginning ofthe transition,
Afghanistan has fully entered the transformation
decade. The Government has demonstrated its will to
move forward under often difficult circumstances. In
that regard, I reiterate France's support for the Afghan
Government to encourage it to continue its efforts
undertaken since September 2014. France continues to
stand alongside Afghanistan, particularly within the
framework of the friendship and cooperation treaty.
The year 2016 began with positive signals, which
included initiatives that could lead to a peace process
and recent nominations to the High Peace Council
and the Ministry of the Interior. However, the Afghan
Government has many substantial challenges before
it - and they are substantial indeed. At the level of
security, the conflict continues to spread, the level of
violence unfortunately remains very high and civilians
are the main victims. The Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces have on the whole managed to
maintain control of the situation on the ground and to
counter some of the acts of terror in the large cities,
despite severe tactical, logistical and organizational
difficulties. In that context, the Government should not
let up in its efforts, with the support of its international
partners, to build its capacities.

At the political level, it is essential to maintain the
Government's unity in a context fraught with tensions.
The effective relaunching of the peace process by way
of the offer made to the Taliban to hold direct talks - as
well as through electoral reform, a more active fight
against corruption and the relaunching of the economy,
which has been hit by a severe crisis leading to
hundreds of thousands of Afghans illegally emigrating
to Europe - are all areas in which expectations are
particularly high.

The illicit economy, and in particular drug
trafficking, are major impediments to the security and
development of Afghanistan. This trafficking, together
with the illegal exploitation of mineral resources, is the
main resource for the armed insurrection. A high level
of corruption persists, which stifles the development of
legal economic activities, while constituting a major
public health issue.

Important steps have been taken since the
Government took office, including the adoption of a
national action plan. Those steps must be maintained and
strengthened, with the assistance of the United Nations.
In that context, we welcome the call of resolution
2274 (2016), which was adopted today, to review, in
close consultation with the Afghan Government, the
United Nations role in supporting the fight against
the illicit economy, including drug trafficking, and in
encouraging international cooperation.

Finally, the situation of women and children
remains worrying. It is essential that the authorities
and Afghan civil society continue to mobilize to fully
implement the national action plan on women and peace
and security adopted in 2015 in line with resolution
1325 (2000) by establishing appropriate financing
mechanisms. It is also vital for the Afghan Government
to continue to implement its commitments in the area
of protecting children in armed conflict arising from
the 2011 and 2014 action plans. The recent conclusions
drawn by the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict will provide a useful road map for Afghanistan
and the United Nations in that area. The response to
those challenges will be important in the creation of
the conditions for the voluntary and sustainable return
of Afghan citizens who have sought refuge outside
the country, which the Government has made one of
its priorities. In this fragile context, the international
community must continue to support Afghanistan
as it moves towards greater stability, prosperity and
democracy. The conferences in Brussels and Warsaw
later this year will offer many opportunities to reaffirm
that message.

While Afghanistan continues its political and
security transition, the support of the United Nations,
in particular for the Government, remains essential,
especially to make it possible for the people to benefit
from Government programmes and international
assistance. The resolution we have just adopted this
morning reiterates the UNAMA's central role, which
embodies the will of the international community
to continue to support Afghanistan. We attach great
importance to the United Nations continuing to be
availed of the means necessary to achieve that goal.

In conclusion, allow me to praise the work of all
United Nations personnel in Afghanistan, who are
working under especially difficult circumstances.

