Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I have
the privilege and the great honour of speaking on
behalf of another old European country represented in
this Chamber, but also on behalf of the sole new
European democracy represented on the Security
Council. I must add that we are very happy to be so.

Mr. President, I would like to thank you for
having organized this open debate, which is taking
place just 10 days after the ministerial-level meeting
held to listen to information provided to us by the
United States Secretary of State, Mr. Colin Powell,
relating to Iraq's programmes for the production of
weapons of mass destruction and to its links to
international terrorism.

These two debates strengthen the central role of
the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security. They highlight even
more the need to preserve its unity and its
determination to disarm Iraq. We are very committed to
the principle of multilateralism, and Bulgaria welcomes
this approach.

As previous delegations have done, I would like
to say that we greatly appreciate the intensive,
important work being done by the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) in Iraq.

We would like to reaffirm our support for the
inspectors as they discharge their mandate, as set out in
detail in resolution 1441 (2002). The experience
accumulated over the past 12 years by UNMOVIC and
IAEA shows that the success of inspections depends
largely on the active cooperation of Iraq. It should be
recognized that the Baghdad regime tends to yield only
when very strong diplomatic and military pressure is
brought to bear.

Iraq agreed to the provisions of resolution 1441
(2002) thanks to the united pressure applied by the
international community. From that standpoint, the
work of the Security Council and the United Nations
vis-a-vis the Baghdad regime is still the main factor in
ensuring Iraqi cooperation with the inspectors. It is also
the principal condition for a peaceful settlement of the
cr1s1s.

Bulgaria believes that Iraq's cooperation to date
in respect of the full implementation of resolution 1441
(2002) is unsatisfactory. Baghdad imposes conditions,
and it shows signs of active cooperation with the
inspectors only when pressure is brought to bear by the
international community. This prompts us to observe
that, unfortunately - as the statements made by the
chief inspectors have confirmed - the Iraqi authorities
are still in material breach of resolution 1441 (2002).
The philosophy underlying that resolution is that it is
up to Iraq, not the inspectors, to achieve disarmament.
The inspectors are there to verify that disarmament is
taking place. Accordingly, it is essential that Iraq
cooperate actively and unconditionally. The burden of
proof is on the Iraqi authorities. The Government of
Saddam Hussain - not the inspectors - must prove
unambiguously that Iraq has no weapons of mass
destruction.

The Bulgarian Government is waiting for Iraq to
give clear and definitive answers to pending question
arising from the IAEA and UNMOVIC reports, as well
as answers to questions raised in the statement made by
Secretary of State Colin Powell on 5 February. As
other delegations have pointed out, the most serious
questions relate to chemical and biological weapons.

We are giving careful consideration to the French
ideas about how to strengthen the inspections regime in
Iraq. We believe that that proposal accords with the
Bulgarian position, which has always advocated
inspections of maximum effectiveness. We hope that
the French ideas, as set out earlier by Foreign Minister
Dominique de Villepin, will be one element in an
overall Security Council strategy geared towards
achieving the disarmament of Iraq. It is clear that one
essential element of that strategy is the active
cooperation of Iraq.

Bulgaria is in favour of the complete
disarmament of Iraq by peaceful means. We should
give priority to using all possible means to seek a
peaceful settlement of the crisis, including bringing
every kind of pressure to bear, both political and
military, in order to attain our objective. Bulgaria
believes that that goal can still be attained if Iraq
immediately agrees to cooperate actively and
unconditionally with the inspectors and comes into
compliance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 1441 (2002).

The Security Council has repeatedly warned Iraq
of serious consequences if it does not comply with the
requirement to disarm. This prompts me to observe that
responsibility for any undesirable outcome of the crisis
would lie squarely with the authorities in Baghdad.

Any lack - or, worse, complete absence - of
unity and determination within the Security Council on
the question of the disarmament of Iraq would in the
final analysis increase, rather than reduce, the potential
risk to international peace and security resulting from
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Bulgaria solemnly appeals to the Security Council to
stand united. That is an essential condition for a
peaceful outcome to the crisis and for averting future
threats to international peace and security.

