Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Japan on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I believe that
your able leadership, Sir, will guide the Council in
the right direction in the fulfilment of its mandate on
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
also commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
comprehensive and informative briefing this morning.
I would also like to extend the Republic of Korea's
heartfelt condolences to the victims of the recent
terrorist attacks in Istanbul, Dhaka, Medina, Jeddah,
Qatif and Baghdad, as well as our best wishes for the
speedy recovery of the injured. The Republic of Korea
condemns those heinous and cowardly terrorist attacks
in the strongest terms and will continue to join the
international community's counter-terrorism efforts.

The Republic of Korea welcomes the series of
efforts undertaken by the international community to
facilitate the resumption of the peace process between
Israel and Palestine, including the Paris conference
held on 3 June, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's visit
to the region in late June and the Middle East Quartet
report released on 1 July. All those efforts share the
same purpose, namely, revitalizing the two-State
solution process. Unfortunately, however, the reactions
of the parties to the Quartet report are raising questions
as to whether they have a genuine intention to enter into
serious negotiations to realize the two-State solution.
In particular, we express strong concern over the
recent decision by the Israeli Government to advance
plans to build more settlement units in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem. The Republic of Korea believes
confidence-building measures, including ending
settlement expansion in the occupied territories, are
urgently required to safeguard the two-State solution.
We call on the leaders of both parties to demonstrate
genuine commitment to the two-State solution through
policies and actions, as described in the Quartet report.

On Syria, the Republic of Korea commends the
efforts by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and concurs with his View
that a nationwide ceasefire, unimpeded and sustained
humanitarian access and a parallel political process are
closely interlinked and mutually reinforcing. In that
regard, a recent agreement on a nationwide ceasefire
for the Eid Al-Fitr holiday and improvement in
humanitarian access are commendable steps. However,
the situation on the ground - including frequent
ceasefire violations, "stop-and-go" humanitarian access
and the ongoing use of siege tactics - shows that the
efforts ofthe parties to the conflict are still falling short
when it comes to abiding by their existing commitments
and the relevant Security Council resolutions.

In addition to the joint letter dated 14 June
addressed to the Secretary-General and the Presidents
of the Security Council and the General Assembly,
co-sponsored by 59 Member States, including the
Republic of Korea, we once again urge all the parties
to strictly comply with the cessation of hostilities, and
the Syrian Government to guarantee full, sustained
and unimpeded humanitarian access. Those concrete
actions will pave the way for a negotiated political
transition, which is the only way to end this war.

Turning to Yemen, the Republic of Korea hopes that
the peace talks, to be resumed on 15 July in Kuwait,
will produce concrete outcomes, such as resolving
the differences between the parties over key issues
of the road map proposed by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed. We
also call on the parties and key regional players to step
up their efforts to maintain the cessation of hostilities
during the negotiations, and beyond.

While the situation in the Middle East remains
chaotic and has resulted in enormous human suffering,
the international community's efforts to end the
protracted conflicts and achieve sustainable peace
continue. Through previous experience we learn that
what matters most is not the repetition of words but
concrete actions to make real changes on the ground.

The Republic of Korea urges all the parties to
conflict to take the necessary measures to resolve those
conflicts and bring about peace. The Republic of Korea
will continue to play a constructive role to that end.

