Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): Let me also
thank the Prosecutor for her report and briefing on the
situation in Libya.

The United Kingdom has been concerned about the
ongoing difficulty in Libya's internal political situation
since the Prosecutor delivered her previous briefing
(see S/PV.6962). Those challenges are, to some extent,
to be expected after four decades of misrule. Security
and justice sector reform are, however, more crucial
now than ever before if Libya is to rebuild its State
institutions and return to stability in the aftermath
of the revolution. We, along with our international
partners, remain committed to working with Libya to
provide it with the support it needs to meet the serious
challenges it faces.

We welcome the ongoing efforts to investigate and
bring to justice all those who are guilty of war crimes
and crimes against humanity since 15 February 2011. We
particularly welcome the signing of the memorandum
of understanding between the Office of the Prosecutor
and the Government of Libya on burden-sharing on
further investigations and prosecutions, and we hope
that swift progress can be made on its implementation.

The United Kingdom welcomes Libya's positive
response to the recommendations made in the United
Nations report on torture and death in detention in Libya.
We echo the Office of the Prosecutor's call upon the
Libyan Government to fully implement its April 2013
law criminalizing torture, enforced disappearances and
discrimination.

We also share their concerns about Libya's slow
progress on processing detainees. We echo calls for
Libya to work closely with the United Nations and
the International Committee of the Red Cross to help
independently confirm the screening and processing of
detainees, releasing those against whom there is little
or no evidence and submitting the remainder to trial.
In doing so, we believe that it will help to establish
confidence in the Libyan justice system.

We fully support the ongoing investigations in
relation to gender crimes and in relation to the situation
of internally displaced persons, including Tuaregs.
Those efforts continue to play an important part in
challenging impunity and ensuring accountability for
those who bear the greatest responsibility for the most
serious crimes. We urge the Libyan Government to
resolve that situation as quickly as possible.

The United Kingdom is grateful for the update from
the Prosecutor on the cases of SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi. We note in particular the
recent decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber that the
Al-Senussi case is to proceed in Libya. The United
Kingdom supports the right of Libya to hold national
trials for crimes committed within its jurisdiction. Any
action must be taken in line with the decisions of the
International Criminal Court. Detention must be in
accordance with international law, including access
to legal advisors, and trials must be consistent with
Libya's international human rights obligations. We
encourage Libya's full cooperation with the Court on
the Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi case and the Abdullah
Al-Senussi case.

The United Kingdom continues to be a friend of
Libya and a supporter of the International Criminal
Court. We look forward to future cooperation between
Libya and the Court as Libya returns to stability in the
aftermath of the revolution.

