Mr. Sorcar (Bangladesh): Allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council.

My delegation broadly associates itself with the
statements made by the representatives of Pakistan on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China and of Cuba on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
07-30973

The issues of energy and the environment are of
critical importance in the context of sustainable
development - even more so for developing countries.
The development aspect has been thoroughly
deliberated on by an extensive range of actors,
particularly within the United Nations. The security
implications of global climate change, however, have
not merited consideration by intergovernmental bodies
like the United Nations, although they have, for more
than a decade now, been considered outside the
Organization. They have been the subject of research,
using a variety of scenarios and models, by a wide
range of institutions from academia to think tanks and
beyond. The United Kingdom presidency has definitely
taken a bold step in attempting to explore whether the
energy-climate-security nexus is mature enough for
intergovernmental deliberations. We believe, however,
that this is still primarily an issue of development,
although the security ramifications can no longer be
dismissed. It is becoming increasingly apparent that
global climate change has the potential to turn out to be
a major security concern only if we, through our
apathy and inaction, fail to deal with climate change as
a sustainable development issue.

While the interrelationship among energy, climate
and security is being examined, there is little doubt that
the global climate is changing, relentlessly and
inexorably. The fourth assessment report of the
Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change shows
that, unless very drastic measures are taken, humanity
will have to face unprecedented challenges of an
inconceivable magnitude. No country will be spared
from the adverse effects of climate change, though
some will be disproportionately affected. Populous and
underdeveloped countries, particularly those that are
geographically disadvantaged, will be the hardest hit.

The projection for Bangladesh is ominous, to say
the least. The country is basically a vast river delta,
indeed the largest in the world. It is cleaved by two of
the mightiest rivers - the Ganges and the
Brahmaputra. These rivers and their thousands of
distributaries shape the destiny of Bangladesh's 147
million people. With warming weather, the Himalayan
snow will melt and torrential waters will flow down
from the north, inundating the flat alluvial plain. With
a rising sea level, saline water will flow up from the
south, and meet the melting mountains. Millions of
people will be caught in between with nowhere to go.

What might come next will need some
imagination. But even the mere possibility of such an
unthinkable event is sufficient reason to seriously look
for ways to prevent a future that none of us will be able
to handle.

Bangladesh will not be the only country affected
by global climate change, although it will be one of the
worst affected. The increasing surface and ocean
temperature will lead to evaporation and more rainfall
around the world, thereby giving rise to widespread
floods. Extreme weather events, such as droughts,
hurricanes and tornadoes, will occur more frequently
and with increased intensity. No one can fight the
wrath of nature, however much he may be endowed
with resources. But human wisdom and action can
perhaps prevent some extreme weather events,
particularly if the instability of nature is man-made.

We already know what action we need to take to
prevent the looming global catastrophe. We have
examined this situation in the context of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
and its 1997 Kyoto Protocol. Regrettably, we have not
moved into timely action and have failed to meet the
deadline. We now need to urgently look for
mechanisms, institutions and consensus-building
processes that will motivate us to combine our forces
to avoid a horrendous future of our own creation. We
hope that the recent report of the IPCC will be
instrumental in overcoming our inertia and will trigger
a cascade of actions that is long overdue.

We welcome the proposed world summit on
climate change and encourage the Secretary-General to
explore its possibilities. A world summit will give us
opportunity to take a fresh look at what our common
and differentiated responsibilities are. Demonstrable
progress and leadership is required from industrialized
countries, particularly in providing reassurance that
low carbon emissions will not be obtained at the cost
of development. We stand ready to join in a global
consensus which will shape the destiny of our present
and future generations.

