Mr. Gilmour: I am grateful for the opportunity to
provide an update on the human rights mapping report
in the Central African Republic. The report, which
was mandated by the Security Council in July through
resolution 2301 (2016), is nearly 400 pages long and
covers the major violations and crimes committed in
the country from 2003 to 2015. It was launched jointly
by the Central African authorities and the United
Nations in Bangui two weeks ago. I attended the launch,
together with the leadership of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).

The objective of the report is to help the Central
African Republic authorities and the international
community fight impunity for the years of massive
abuses in the Central African Republic and prevent the
resurgence of conflict. Our aim is also to advance the
implementation of MINUSCA'S core tasks to develop
comprehensive transitional justice mechanisms in line
with the 2015 Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation
principles, to support the Special Criminal Court, and
to help develop national vetting mechanisms for defence
and security forces.

By documenting incidents throughout 13 years of
multiple conflicts in the Central African Republic, the
report constitutes the start of a process of collecting
evidence of the violations committed. It details 620
incidents, including horrific accounts of entire villages
being burned to the ground; multiple gang rapes
of women and girls, extrajudicial killings; deaths
following severe torture or ill-treatment in detention
centres; serious violence against civilians on the
basis of religion, ethnicity or as reprisal for perceived
support for other armed groups; the recruitment of
thousands of children as child fighters; and attacks on
both humanitarian actors and peacekeepers. The vast
majority of incidents were attributed to the eX-Seleka
and the anti-balaka groups, as well as the Central
African defence and security forces.

Unfortunately, some of those abuses appear to be
resuming today, as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has so eloquently detailed just now.
That is a rather alarming development. It is therefore a
timely moment to send an unequivocal message to the
perpetrators of such violations f as we did through the
mapping report - that their actions are being watched
and carefully documented, and that they will be held
accountable. During my visit, there was unanimity
among the many Central Africans I spoke to regarding
their utter rejection of any amnesty for perpetrators of the
most serious crimes, which is in line with the principles
of the Bangui Forum. Building on the momentum of
the report, we hope that some of the perpetrators of
the most serious violations will be arrested in the near
future, which would demonstrate a true resolve to
fighting impunity and is what the Central Africans are
vocally demanding of us all, particularly in relation to
the big fish, as they are called - those who ordered and
carried out the most unspeakable atrocities.

The mapping report provides a set of
recommendations to inform the prosecutorial strategy
of the Special Criminal Court, a central mechanism
that will help reverse the impunity trend in the Central
African Republic. I had an encouraging meeting
with Special Prosecutor Muntazini Mukimapa, who
recently arrived in my country. The legacy of human
rights abuses in the Central African Republic is so
vast that judicial mechanisms will obviously not be
the only avenue to administer justice. The mapping
report also provides guidance for the development of a
comprehensive approach to transitional justice, which
will help identify the appropriate mechanisms for truth,
reparations and guarantees of non-recurrence. All of
that, we believe, will support reconciliation efforts,
given that continued impunity is one of the primary
root causes of the ongoing violence.

Finally, the mapping report also highlights essential
preconditions that must be met before transitional
mechanisms can be functional - measures to protect
victims and witnesses and conditions to ensure that
all individuals can participate in the process. Human
rights defenders and leaders of women's groups and
religious communities with whom I met in Bangui and
Bambari have been courageously documenting human
rights violations with few guarantees of security. Their
courage should be matched with support from the
United Nations and other international partners.

Beyond transitional mechanisms, institution-
building - especially the establishment of the new
National Human Rights Commission and the reform of
security and defence forces to allow them to carry out
their protection responsibilities - are key priorities
in that regard. We are encouraged by the support
of partners, particularly the African Union and the
European Union in that respect.

As my visit to the severely overcrowded Ngaragba
prison in Bangui made clear, rule-of-law infrastructure
requires increased capacity, and prisons must be
constructed and run in a more humane manner and with
adequate food. That is not the case at present, a matter
that I raised with the Prime Minister. While police,
justice and corrections officials have begun to deploy
in several parts of the country, they continue to lack
many of the resources necessary to carrying out their
functions. I believe we must step up efforts to build the
capacity of police, justice and corrections authorities,
especially in the areas most affected by the conflict.
Re-establishing such services is crucial if we are to
avoid fuelling further resentment.

In order to build on the positive momentum that the
launch of the Mapping report has created, I really hope
that the Council can support the Central Africans and
MINUSCA's incredible efforts in such truly difficult
circumstances by providing the means to implement
its mandate to protect civilians, fight impunity and
support institution-building, without which we simply
cannot succeed in our common goals.

