The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Greece.

At the outset, I would like to thank the three
Committee Chairmen for their most informative
briefings.

Greece fully associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the European Union. I would,
however, like to add the following points.

This debate is taking place only a short time after
the deadly terrorist attacks in London, which we
condemn and which deeply shocked the international
community. Once more, it was proved that terrorism
continues to pose a serious threat to the most
fundamental value of mankind, that is, the right to life,
freedom and security of person. The London terrorist
attacks, as well as last year's attacks in Madrid and
those elsewhere, whether in the past or more recently,
show that terrorism is likely to be with us for a
considerable period of time. No country is immune. We
should therefore accelerate and better coordinate our
efforts to eradicate it, both domestically and
internationally.

Acts of terrorism are not justifiable on any
grounds, be they political, philosophical, religious or
other. Those committing such acts should be brought to
justice. However, our fight against terrorism must not
ignore human rights. Counter-terrorism measures and
the protection of human rights are not mutually
exclusive.

The United Nations has played, and continues to
play, an important role in the fight against terrorism by
addressing the challenge as one of the most serious
threats to our peace and security, as well as by
addressing the challenge of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. The work and ongoing
efforts of the three committees have considerably
enhanced the role of the United Nations in dealing with
those threats. I would like to express our appreciation
to the Chairmen of the committees for their
commitment and dedication in carrying out their
difficult tasks.

With respect to the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions Committee, I would like to express my
sincere thanks to its Chairman, Ambassador Cesar
Mayoral. The Visits he carried out to Member States
were useful and facilitated a better understanding of
their obligations under resolution 1267 (1999) and
subsequent resolutions. We also thank the Committee's
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team for
its work to improve the effectiveness of the sanctions
regime. We look forward to its third report and
anticipate new recommendations on necessary
improvements in that field. The visits of the Team to
Member States and to regional organizations have
enhanced the Committee's interaction with those States
and organizations. The result will be better
implementation of sanctions.

Likewise, we look forward to the renewal of
resolution 1526 (2004), with a View to improving the
sanctions regime. The principle of due process must be
taken into consideration. In our View, sanctions can
serve their objective only if their implementation is
consistent with the protection of human rights. We also
think that more transparent and clearer criteria and
requirements should be established for the listing and
de-listing of individuals and entities. Individuals and
entities included in the Committee's list should be
informed about the measures imposed on them, listing
and de-listing procedures and the humanitarian
exemptions provided for in resolution 1452 (2002).
Lastly, we think that a process for reviewing the cases
of individuals and entities claiming to have been
wrongfully placed or retained on the Committee's list
should be envisaged as a means of improving the
sanctions regime and enhancing its legitimacy.

On the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), I would like to extend my warm
congratulations to Ambassador Ellen Margrethe Loj for
her intensive efforts to strengthen the Committee's
dialogue with Member States. I would also very much
like to thank the Committee's Executive Directorate for
its work, as well as Ambassador Ruperez and his staff.
The recent Visits to Kenya, Albania and Thailand by
members of the Executive Directorate constitute useful
tools to assist States to implement resolution 1373
(2001) in an open manner and to identify the technical
assistance needs of States. However, what is really
important is to have proper follow-up for those visits.
We were pleased to hear from the Committee's Chair
that that issue is a high priority for the CTC.
Furthermore, we fully support the efforts of the
Committee to continue its dialogue with Member
States that have not submitted their reports, in order to
encourage them to report in a timely manner. Finally,
we believe that the Committee should develop a set of
best practices to provide guidance for the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) on the basis
of best practices developed in the context of other
international, regional and subregional organizations.

I also wish to express our appreciation to the
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
Ambassador Motoc, for his efforts to advance the work
of the Committee. We were pleased to hear that, with
the support of the group of experts, the Committee has
already examined more than 50 reports. It is a matter of
concern, though, that 75 States are late in submitting
their national reports. Such delays do not facilitate the
fulfilment of the Committee's mandate. They also do
not allow the Security Council to assess the progress
achieved by the States concerned in their
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We urge
those States to meet their obligation under the
resolution and to submit their reports without further
delay.

We welcome the adoption by the General
Assembly earlier this year of the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism, which addresses another serious aspect of
the terrorist threat. We urge all Member States to sign
the Convention at the summit to be held in September.
Likewise, we support the early conclusion of the
negotiations on a comprehensive convention on
terrorism, as well as its adoption during the sixtieth
session of the General Assembly.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are still a number of speakers remaining on
my list for this meeting. I intend, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 pm.

The meeting was suspended at 1.15pm.
