Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you for convening this meeting,
Mr. President, and Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
for introducing it. We are particularly grateful to
the three Force Commanders for their enlightening
briefings on three topics related to peacekeeping, and
we warmly welcome all the Force Commanders here
today. Their views should improve synergy between
those on the ground and the Security Council.

Guatemala considers the peacekeeping operations
of the United Nations to be of fundamental importance.
They are an essential tool in the Organization's work,
in which we have taken part as a troop-contributing
county on the American continent, in Africa and in the
Middle East. We value our participation in a task as
noble as that of peacekeeping, which is also edifying
for our own armed forces. From its beginnings to this
day, United Nations peacekeeping forces have evolved
both conceptually and operationally. The introduction
of new technologies, as General Dos Santos Cruz
mentioned, is only one example of that. The increasing
number of complex operations in recent years has led to
an ever-growing demand for resources and, with that,
a series of unprecedented challenges. It is clear that in
order to solve them we will have to rely on everyone's
involvement and participation - the Security Council,
the States Members of the United Nations and the
Secretariat.

Guatemala contributes troops to the three missions
about which we have been briefed today. We are very
aware of the high quality of their Force Commanders
and their commitment. Owing to time limitations, I will
make only the following remarks and ask one question.

First, we emphasize again the importance of
peacekeeping operations with mandates that are clear,
practicable, verifiable and adapted to each individual
case. The primary responsibility for establishing that
condition falls to the Council.

Secondly, like many others, we demand results
from mission Heads and the troops on the ground,
but we must also stress that we have to provide them
with the tools they need to do their work effectively
and ensure their security. In that context, we should
also deal with the issue of the large gaps that exist
in the areas of capacities, resources and training, by
improving coordination between the Security Council,
the General Assembly and the Secretariat, as well as
the troop-contributing countries.

Thirdly, we should point out the importance of
giving the greatest possible priority to improving the
security and protection of personnel deployed in the
field, particularly in crisis situations or where we are
dealing with a politically challenging environment.
The clearest example of the importance of this point
can be seen in the recent events involving the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force. For their part,
host Governments must respect the basic principles of
peacekeeping operations, with no exceptions.

Fourthly, as is well known, we still have reservations
about the involvement of the United Nations in
peace-enforcement operations - in other words,
offensive activities - which raise serious questions.
I am specifically referring to resolution 2098 (2013),
adopted on 28 March, which includes a new approach
in support of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The chief issue is about an accurate definition of the
line that divides peacekeeping and peace enforcement.

Fifthly, we believe that cooperation between
missions is important on a case-by-case basis,
always assuming that the conditions on the ground
and the mandates allow it. In that regard, and as was
explained by General Iqbal Asi, we believe that the
United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire is a positive
example that could help to clear up doubts about the
timing, requirements, impact and implementation of
such cooperation.

Finally, during the interactive part of ths meeting,
we would like to hear from the Force Commanders their
thoughts as to how we, the members of the Council,
can do a better job of taking into account the opinions
of personnel in the field and feedback from Force
Commanders when we are renewing peacekeeping
mission mandates.
Before I conclude, I would like to pay tribute to
peacekeeping operations personnel, including from my
own country, who have sacrificed their lives in service
to United Nations peacekeeping missions.

