I would like to thank Special Representative Fall for his insightful briefing. We would like to start by adding our voice to the condolences expressed to the people of Burundi on the passing of President Nkurunziza. The fight against the spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is indeed a global challenge and we welcome the measures taken by the countries of Central Africa to mitigate its effects. Those countries must continue to strengthen regional cooperation. In that regard, we welcome the various initiatives undertaken in the subregion. The efforts made by the Presidents of Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to strengthen relations between the countries of the Great Lakes region is commendable. We hope that those diplomatic initiatives continue and that they serve to make progress on pending national and regional issues. It is also a positive step that Cameroon has taken measures to implement the recommendations of the Major National Dialogue. We also applaud the adoption of the law on the promoting bilingualism, thereby affirming equal status to French and English, which will help protect the rights of citizens to access Government services in both languages. Despite those positive developments, we remain concerned about the security situation in the Far North, North-West and South-West regions of Cameroon, which are characterized by ongoing violations of human rights and international humanitarian law. We particularly regret the death of Cameroonian journalist Samuel Ajiekah Abuwe, also known as Samuel Wazizi, and hope that the facts related to his death are clarified and that those responsible are brought to justice. It is essential for the Cameroonian authorities to ensure that national and international human rights organizations and the media can work in the country unhindered. In a wider context, we regret that the security situation in some parts of the subregion remains volatile due to the activities of armed groups. Extremist groups have ignored the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and instead escalated attacks while security forces were deployed as part of the response to COVID-19. The attacks perpetrated by Boko Haram and the Lord's Resistance Army are particularly concerning. The consequences of such attacks are devastating for civilians, especially women and girls, who are disproportionately exposed to violent attacks and conflict-related sexual violence. The region continues to suffer the adverse effects of climate change, which is threatening human security and livelihoods. Severe floods have led to displacement and have compounded the challenge of responding to the pandemic. We are pleased to hear that mitigating those adverse effects remains a priority for the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). The humanitarian situation in various parts of Central Africa continues to be troubling, especially in Cameroon, where the escalation of violence and insecurity negatively impacts the lives of civilians and humanitarian workers. In conclusion, we welcome the good offices of UNOCA in promoting peaceful solutions in the subregion through dialogue, confidence-building and reconciliation among the countries. We would like to commend, in particular, Special Representative Fall, UNOCA and the Economic Community of Central African States for their efforts to promote peaceful solutions to the crises in the region.
