Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Since this is the first time that I am taking the floor
in the Chamber this month, I would like to thank the
Russian Federation for its leadership and work during
its presidency of the Council in September. Similarly,
we congratulate Spain on its assumption of the Council
presidency in October. The Spanish delegation can
count on our full support in carrying out its important
duties.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore, for her
briefing.

My delegation associates itselfwith the statement to
be made by the Permanent Representative of Uruguay
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.

We begin by remembering the late Force
Commander, Lieutenant General Jose Luiz Jaborandy,
Jr., and we express our gratitude for the work he did.
We welcome the new Force Commander, Lieutenant
General Ajax Porto Pinheiro, who has my country's
full support.

Haiti is at an important stage on its path to the
consolidation of stability and democracy. A positive
sign of this is the beginning of the electoral process
on 9 August. With regard to the electoral process, we
recognize the work done by Haitian institutions and
authorities, in particular the Provisional Electoral
Council, but we also believe it is necessary to
underscore the role played by the Haitian National
Police in maintaining security. We hope that the
difficulties encountered in this area are resolved in the
coming stages.

At a time when the transition from emergency
relief to development is being planned, we must not
forget that there are still humanitarian challenges. We
welcome the relocation of the majority of internally
displaced persons, but we are concerned by the end of
the funding for basic services and relocation subsidies
for those who remain. We are also concerned about the
food and health insecurity, and we hope that efforts
to erradicate cholera will continue. The support of
the international community must be strengthened,
particularly contributions to financing the call for
transition and the urgent humanitarian funding
appeal launched by the launched by the Humanitarian
Coordinator in Haiti in August.

The process of reconfiguring the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) must be
subject to the needs of peace of the country and the
region, and not to special interests. We must ensure
long-term progress and support Haiti on the path to
inclusive development and social peace. That is why we
are pleased to see the proposal to conduct a strategic
assessment of the United Nations presence in Haiti.
This exercise should be undertaken without prejudging
the outcome, be flexible enough to be able to base
decisions on the conditions on the ground and, most
importantly, be carried out in coordination with the
new Haitian authorities.

The MINUSTAH consolidation plan establishes
four specific priority areas that must show the way
forward. In this regard, the training ofpolice capacities
remains fundamental. We value building the capacity
of the Haitian National Police to carry out its work, but
we hope that efforts will be stepped up to achieve all
the objectives set out in its development plan.

Despite this, we cannot overlook the deterrent role
that MINUSTAH continues to be play, nor the support
that the police units and the military contingents offer
to the Haitian National Police. That is why we welcome
the recommendation of the Secretary-General to
maintain the police and military personnel currently
authorized for the next 12 months.

Important progress has been achieved in Haiti
through a joint effort of the population and the Haitian
authorities, with the support of MINUSTAH, the
United Nations system and international partners.
This collective effort over all these years must help
to strengthen institutions that are effective, inclusive
and ready to be accountable, particularly those in areas
relating to the rule of law. This should make it possible
to achieve inclusive and sustainable development,
as well as the full exercise of human rights and the
strengthening of a democratic society. The international
community should maintain its support in accordance
with the principle of national ownership.

I conclude by paying tribute to each and every one
of the staff of MINUSTAH, who have worked for peace
and development in Haiti, in particular the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honore.

