Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): In precisely two weeks, it will be four
years since the Security Council - in response to an
appeal by the leadership of the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia - approved the deployment of the first
United Nations peacekeeping operation in history to be
preventive in nature. A decision was taken to send a
United Nations military contingent to the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

Many of us remember that time well. In December
1992, a number of regions of the former Yugoslavia were
swept up in bloody conflict. The United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) - first
established at that time as part of the United Nations
Protection Force and then as an independent mission -
played an important role in preventing a widening of the
Yugoslav crisis and in the stabilization of the internal
situation of Macedonia. This reaffirmed in practice the
vitality of the concept of preventive diplomacy.

The United Nations has the right to be proud of the
success of this operation and we pay due tribute to the
personnel of UNPREDEP, among whom there are
representatives of the Russian Federation.

In describing UNPREDEP as a successful operation,
we believe first and foremost that the original objective of
the deployment of a United Nations preventive mission in
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia - averting
the spillover into that country of conflicts from other
regions of the former Yugoslavia - was achieved and
that the mandate which the mission had been given by the
Security Council has been fulfilled.

 

The situation in the region itself has radically changed.
Hostilities have ceased and, thanks to the collective efforts
of the international community, the process of stabilization
is gaining momentum. These positive changes are reflected
in the significant change in the relationships between
Macedonia and its neighbours, primarily the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).

Guided by these very objective and universally
recognized criteria in the sphere of peacekeeping, we
believe that it is right and justified to raise the question of
shutting down UNPREDEP. If we act out of inertia and
transform this operation into something inviolable by
maintaining it, we run the risk of wiping out all the
operation's earlier positive achievements and, indeed, of
calling into question the unique experience of preventive
peacekeeping.

It is precisely from that point of View that the Russian
Federation is approaching today's draft resolution, which
provides, for the first time, for a substantive reduction -
by nearly one third - of the size of UNPREDEP. We also
take note of the draft resolution's oblique reference to the
possibility for a full drawing down of the operation.

These aspects represent a definite step forward. At the
same time, in our view, they are now already clearly
insufficient. In the light of the evolving situation in the
region over the past year and of the current trend towards
a further positive evolution, we do not see the point of
maintaining UNPREDEP after May 1997. It is precisely for
that reason that we proposed including a clear statement in
the text of the draft resolution that the present extension of
the UNPREDEP mandate must be the last.

Unfortunately, our principled position is not reflected
in the draft resolution and we shall therefore be unable to
support it. At the same time, we have taken into account
the positions of the other members of the Security Council,
the Macedonian leadership and the troop-contributing
countries and shall not block the adoption of a decision
today. We shall abstain on the vote.

In conclusion, I should like to state that the Russian
Federation firmly believes that this is the final extension of

 

the UNPREDEP mandate. Moreover, our approach in no
way reflects an underestimation of the real problems in
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, nor does it
exclude the possibility of a further international presence
in that country - including a United Nations presence -
in order to support and maintain those programmes
currently being implemented in that country with
international assistance.

However, it is clear that the presence in that country
of United Nations military contingents must cease after
May 1997. We have no doubts whatsoever on that score
and we do not want our partners to entertain any such
doubts. That is important in preparing to consider the
question of UNPREDEP in May next year. That
consideration will indeed be the final one.

