Mr. Mulet (spoke in French): Allow me to thank
you, Mr. President, for having granted me this
opportunity to present to Council members the

recommendations of the fact-finding mission to
Somalia, which was led by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. The mission was dispatched
in response to the presidential statement of
19 December 2007 (S/PRST/2007/49), in which you
tasked the Secretariat to consider further support to the
African Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and to update
contingency planning for a possible United Nations
peacekeeping operation to succeed AMISOM.

The mission visited the region from 7 to
25 January 2008 and consulted the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, the African Union and
regional and Somali stakeholders. The mission visited
Merka, Baidoa and Kismayo and spent three days in
Mogadishu, where it met with the Prime Minister and
other Government Ministers and assessed the security
situation on the ground.

It was the first United Nations mission to visit
Kismayo since the resumption of armed conflict at the
start of the second half of 2006. In Mogadishu, the
team visited various districts of the capital to assess the
security situation.

In assessing possibilities for a United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Somalia, the fact-finding
mission conducted a comprehensive analysis of the
security situation, including threats and risks to the
security of United Nations personnel. In that regard, it
is important to note that the situation is not the same
throughout the country. Security conditions in the north
are relatively more stable than those in central and
southern Somalia. In those areas, the conflict remains
extremely complex, characterized by inextricable
alliances between clans, sub-clans and extremist
elements, fighting for control of political and economic
space, and temporary alliances of some groups, aimed
at forcing the withdrawal of the Ethiopian Armed
Forces from the country.

As the Transitional Federal Government (TFG)
has limited capacity to regulate economic activity and
maintain law and order, criminal and other armed
elements are free to control the collection of revenues
from customs, the port and commerce, as well as those
generated by and water and land distribution. In
addition, such groups engage in the trafficking of arms,
drugs and human beings. Political tensions within and
between clans are driven by control over resources. In
many cases such tensions are linked to the activities of
criminal and insurgent elements but cannot be
separated from them.

(spoke in English)

The continued threat of abduction, kidnapping
and extortion limits the capacity of United Nations and
humanitarian agencies to operate in the country. At the
same time, the United Nations country team estimates
that the size of the population in need of humanitarian
aid is now approaching 2 million people.

The general security trend in Mogadishu appears
proportional to the level of military efforts undertaken
by the Ethiopian armed forces and the Transitional
Federal Government coalition to defeat the anti-
Government elements or conduct forcible disarmament.
Between June and September 2007, there was a sharp
increase in standoff attacks, improvised explosive
device incidents, mine attacks and assassinations, but a
marked decrease in armed clashes. Since September,
concerted efforts by the Ethiopian armed forces and the
actions of the TFG against anti-Government elements
within Mogadishu have increased. Of note is the fact
that, during the last quarter of 2007, attacks by anti-
Government elements became more coordinated and
began to be conducted during daylight hours.

Security incidents occur almost daily, mostly by
insurgents targeting TFG elements, as well as
Ethiopian and AMISOM. personnel. On 8 and
9 February 2008, the United Nations common
compound was targeted by hand grenade and
improvised explosive device attacks. Threats against
the United Nations have also appeared on Islamist
websites.

In summary, while the Transitional Federal
Government has made some progress in its efforts to
start an inclusive and viable peace process by reaching
out to opposition groups, the security situation in many
parts of Somalia, particularly in the capital of
Mogadishu, remains complex, volatile and
unpredictable. Due to the complexity of the conflict,
shifting alliances and extremist activity, the situation in
south and central Somalia can change daily, making
any location that is safe one day potentially dangerous
the next.

I would now like to refer to the contingency plans
for a possible United Nations peacekeeping operation.
Possible future developments are presented in the
annex to the report before the Council under four

scenarios, leading up to the possibility of deploying of
a United Nations peacekeeping operation. Based on
those scenarios, the Secretariat has further developed
contingency plans on the support that could be
provided by the international community to the peace
process in Somalia.

Scenario 1 generally represents the current
situation in Somalia. The TFG, with the support of
national and international partners, continues to work
on the development of an inclusive and viable political
process, including by initiating dialogue. Meanwhile,
the security situation remains volatile. Under this
scenario, the current security situation does not allow
for deployment of the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia (UNPOS) and United Nations country
team personnel in Mogadishu and the south and central
parts of the country. However, the Department of
Safety and Security (DSS), in consultation with the
designated official, could develop viable options for
security arrangements that would allow a limited
number of UNPOS staff and United Nations country
team members to relocate from Nairobi to Mogadishu
and other parts of south and central Somalia. The
relocation would enable the United Nations to
effectively facilitate the mediation efforts on the
ground and address critical gaps in humanitarian and
recovery assistance.

The Security Council may also consider the
establishment of a maritime task force, formalizing the
unilateral initiatives presently being undertaken by
individual Member States, either as a United Nations
task force or as an international task force under a
United Nations mandate. This contingency
arrangement would also provide medical, logistic and
in extremis support for United Nations personnel in
Somalia.

Scenario 2 envisages a measured improvement in
the political process, with at least a critical mass of the
opposition parties supporting political dialogue. Under
this scenario, while the security situation would still be
volatile, dialogue on security arrangements would have
commenced, creating the conditions necessary for
strengthening the United Nations presence in
Mogadishu and other areas of south and central
Somalia.

The objective under the contingency plan in this
scenario would be for the United Nations to further
enhance its political support to the peace process
through the relocation of UNPOS headquarters - in
addition to the limited number of personnel initially
deployed under scenario 1 - to Mogadishu in order to
facilitate political dialogue on the ground. Subject to
the presence required, security arrangements could take
considerable time to put in place and entail a major
investment in resources and physical protection
measures. This further assessment will be undertaken
by DSS during the month of April, in close
consultation with the Department of Political Affairs,
UNPOS, the Department of Field Support and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

Scenario 3 envisages a measured improvement in
both the political and security situations and the
acceptance and implementation by the major clans and
factions, including a critical mass of armed opposition
groups, of a code of conduct on the use of arms. While
that may be short of a full security agreement - a
ceasefire and/or the cessation of hostilities - it would
establish a minimum code of behaviour among the
armed groups, including a commitment not to attack
United Nations and humanitarian personnel. The
Ethiopian Government and the TFG would have
indicated readiness to consider a phased withdrawal of
Ethiopian troops from Mogadishu.

Under this scenario it is assumed that the political
dialogue between the Government and the opposition
would have commenced. But if the withdrawal of
Ethiopian troops is to be achieved under this
scenario - for example, before political and security
agreements have been finalized - an impartial
stabilization force formed by a coalition of willing
States of about 8,000 highly trained and capable
troops, together with police officers, would be
required.

Under this scenario there would still be clan
tensions, extremist elements and the potential for the
resumption of conflict. The stabilization force would
therefore require timely and accurate intelligence on
extremist and other groups. The force would also need
strong physical protection at its bases to defeat attacks
by mortars and rocket-propelled grenades. Troops
would need to apply tactical techniques to minimize
their vulnerability to roadside bombs and should
possess electronic countermeasures to defeat radio-
controlled explosive devices.
A United Nations force could not be tasked with
this role, as the vast majority of United Nations

peacekeeping troops do not possess the those
capabilities or training. As a result, the Security
Council could consider this option only if offers were
forthcoming from capable Member States ready to
form a coalition of the willing under a strong lead
nation, as proposed by Special Representative Ould
Abdallah. The combined coalition stabilization force
and AMISOM. could allow the withdrawal of the
Ethiopian armed forces from Mogadishu.

In scenario 4, a viable political process would
have taken hold, involving players from southern and
central Somalia and "Puntland", with the majority of
the parties agreeing to a political power-sharing
agreement and agreeing to renounce violence, lay
down arms and commit to support the implementation
of a Security Council mandate establishing an
integrated United Nations peacekeeping operation.
Although spoilers would still remain, they would have
been marginalized to the extent possible. Under this
scenario, the Ethiopian forces would have withdrawn
or would be in the process of doing so. A military
agreement would have been signed by the major clans
and factions outlining key security arrangements,
including a ceasefire.

A number of conditions would be required in
order to ensure the best chances of success for an
integrated United Nations peacekeeping mission in
Somalia under this scenario. The strategic assessment
and fact-finding missions further reviewed and refined
those conditions with their counterparts on the ground,
developing proposals for graduated interlinked
political, security and programmatic assistance aimed
at achieving an inclusive and stable political and
peacebuilding process in Somalia. The conditions
include the cessation of hostilities, agreement by all
major groups to allow for external monitoring, and an
inclusive political dialogue.

The United Nations military personnel who
would be required for a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia under this scenario number up to
27,000, with a possible police component of up to
1,500 police officers. Prior to the deployment of any
mission, an integrated mission-planning process should
be completed, including a comprehensive technical
assessment mission to Somalia. The mission would,
among other things, maintain a secure environment for
the functioning of a broadly accepted political
dispensation and assist in the development of security,
judicial and corrections institutions capable of ensuring
the rule of law and the administrative and institutional
capacity necessary to provide basic and social services
to the population.

Finally, with regard to support for AMISOM, on
20 February this year we received a letter from
Chairperson Konare of the African Union requesting
that the United Nations put in place a financial,
logistical and technical support package for AMISOM,
totalling some $817,500,000. The Secretariat is
reviewing that request to see how best the United
Nations could respond to it. In the meantime, we
encourage Member States to provide additional support
to the African Union and to troop-contributing
countries of AMISOM. In the meantime, the Secretariat
continues to provide 10 planners to the African Union
in Addis Ababa, who are supporting the planning for
AMISOM.

