Mr. Shingiru (Burundi) (spoke in French): As
this is the first time I take the floor, Sir, under your
presidency, let me first congratulate you personally and
your country on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of January 2015.
Rest assured of the full cooperation of the Burundian
delegation during your tenure.

Before entering the heart of the matter that brings
us together this morning, let me also thank you for
convening this important meeting on the latest report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office
in Burundi (BNUB) (S/2015/36). We also thank
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his extremely detailed briefing and
special interest in our country, Burundi. We recall the
strong and constructive message he delivered during
his last visit to Burundi, in mid-December, and his wise
counsel during the 12 December 2014 meeting with the
President of the Republic shortly after the BNUB flag-
lowering ceremony. I would also like to thank Mr. Parfait
Onanga Anyanga, former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Burundi, for the excellent work
he did while posted in Bujumbura. We particularly
appreciate that he brought a successful conclusion to
the enormous work he was able to accomplish in our
country in such a short time.

I will focus on four main areas, namely, the electoral
process under way with a view to general elections in
2015, a few words on the round table following the
Geneva Conference on Burundi held in mid-December
2014 in Bujumbura, and an overview of the security
situation. And of course, afterwards I will also make
a few general comments on the report (S/2015/36)
submitted for the Council's consideration today.

As the Council is aware, the year 2015 will be
one of general elections in Burundi. As elsewhere, the
Government has taken care to entrust this important
event to the Commission e'lectorale nationale
independante (CENI), which was set up by consensus.
The preparatory process is therefore under way, and an
important step has just been taken with the completion
of the electoral enrolment operation throughout the
national territory and in Burundian Embassies abroad.
The operation went very smoothly overall despite the
observance in some areas of a few isolated cases of
logistical irregularities. Those irregularities will not,
however, undermine the entire operation.

As the report recommends in paragraph 63, the
Government is committed to doing everything in
its power to ensure that the 2015 elections are free,
democratic, inclusive, transparent and take place in
a peaceful climate. The Electoral Code, the code of
conduct and the road map that have been set up by
consensus are, in our view, essential to ensure the
smooth conduct of the elections. In paragraph 65
of the report, the Secretary-General expresses his
certainty that those instruments, which were adopted
by consensus, are essential to the continuation of the
process. We agree with him.

The Council may have heard in certain political
circles and civil society allegations of an attempt to
manipulate the elections. The report refers to that in
paragraph 15. Those unfounded concerns are from one
of the opposition parties. I must say here that, after
having heard those accusations, which were based
on isolated and minor cases, the Government and
CENI launched messages of appeasement to call on
Burundian politicians, civil society and the media to
adopt responsible language and behaviour that respect
the principles of democracy and tolerance - behavior
that would take into account the political culture of our
population, bearing in mind the fact that Burundi is a
young, still-developing democracy. The quality of the
electoral process will depend in part on the experience
accumulated gradually since the 2005 elections.

At the meeting on 22 December 2014 between CENI
and electoral process stakeholders on the evaluation of
the voter enrolment, participants had an opportunity to
share concerns about technical and policy solutions that
will help CENI complete the finishing touches on the
provisional election register. In that connection we have
established a regular and open debate on all the matters
raised. As the Council is aware, we have championed
dialogue since the Arusha Accords, and we will not
shirk our responsibilty. Moreover, the report even
acknowledges, in paragraph 64, the strong commitment
of the Government of Burundi to maintain a frank and
ongoing dialogue on the matter.

We would like to take this opportunity to once again
express the gratitude of the Government of Burundi to
all partners that have already provided financial and
material support to the electoral process. The latest to
sign the financing convention to support the ongoing
electoral process was the European Union, with an
amount of €8 million. Of course, we invite all those
who wish to do so to act promptly.

We also greatly appreciate the countries and
international organizations that have agreed to send
electoral observation missions before, during and
after the elections in order to put an end to partisan
speculation such as that which occurred in 2010 with
the unjustified boycott by certain political parties. We
hope that they will not commit the same error this year,
because the empty-chair policy does not benefit anyone.
Even without popular support, one must play the game.

In that regard, we welcome the appointment of
the Head of the United Nations Electoral Observation
Mission in Burundi (MENUB), Mr. Cassam Uteem and
we wish him every success in his new duties. He can
count on the cooperation of my Government to that
effect. The status of mission agreement on MENUB
staff has just been finalized between the two parties,
allowing his team to work on the ground on a solid legal
basis.

As we all know, elections are actually a sign of a
properly functioning democracy - because democracy
is the set of facts and actions of the daily life of
citizens with respect to themselves and the institutions
that govern them. Democracy cannot develop in a
fragmented, divided society where there is distrust.
In that context, the Government of Burundi has just
established the Truth and Reconciliation Commission,
and the 11 individuals who will serve as commissioners
were elected in a climate of transparency.

As the Council knows, Burundi is currently
moving from the post-conflict phase to the sustainable
socioeconomic development phase. The continuing
reconstruction of the country and the long and
arduous journey to the harmonious development of
the Burundian people require enormous resources that
Burundi cannot afford on its own. In that framework,
on 11 and 12 December 2014 in Bujumbura, we held
with our partners a round table between Burundi
and its main development partners. We engaged in a
dialogue wherein we took stock of the current strategic
framework for growth and poverty reduction by
highlighting the progress achieved and the challenges
that remain in implementing our mutual commitments.
We thank Ambassador Seger for using his expertise
to facilitate the negotiations and the adoption of the
joint communique that led to the round table. We call
on our partners to review the document so that the
commitments reiterated at the Club du Lac Hotel in
Bujumbura will become a reality.

With regard to security and stability, Burundi is
a very safe country, as the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs mentioned early in his briefing,
except for a few isolated cases of crime in some parts
of the country. Peace and security prevail throughout
the nation's territory and people go about their normal
activities, as the report acknowledges in paragraph
20. The Government has pledged to stem all forms
of crime and disruptions to peace and security. It is
worth mentioning that at the end of December 2014,
while people were preparing to celebrate the end of
the year, Burundi experienced an infiltration, from the
neighbouring territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, of a column of armed men who were quickly
subdued by our courageous soldiers.

We once again reject the choice ofviolence as a way
to achieve political gains in our country. As the report
of the Secretary-General indicates in paragraph 59, my
country has come a long way. Burundi has suffered
greatly through cycles of violence and peace was
hard won, thanks to the peace agreements, including
the Arusha Accords. For us, this is an achievement
to be preserved. The use of violence is unacceptable
and must give way to a war of ideas and development
programmes.

Speaking of our restored peace that we have
regained thanks to the support of the international
community, we will continue to support peace,
Burundi shall express its gratitude by participating in
peacekeeping missions, particularly in Somalia and the
Central African Republic. For us, it is a badge ofhonour
to be among the first francophone troop-contributing
countries. We take this opportunity to launch again an
appeal to the international community to provide more
support to our troops who are doing excellent work on
the ground far from their families.

I now turn to the report submitted for the Council's
consideration. In section C of the report, paragraphs 24
and 25, reference is made to the process of establishing
the transitional justice mechanisms. I spoke earlier
about the Truth and Reconciliation Commission that
is already in place. Now the international community
must provide sufficient support to the Commission to
carry out its mission.

With regard to section D of the report on
governance and institution-building, the Government
of Burundi will continue to work to combat corruption
and seek to address the remaining challenges in this
area, which is an ongoing battle. In that regard, we
thank our technical and financial partners for their
support to the institutions that fight corruption and
promote good governance in our country. Of course, we
thank our local partners in civil society, who continue
to contribute to the common fight against the scourge
of corruption. They know who they are. I cannot name
them all here as I might forget some.

In terms ofthe rule oflaw, as addressed in section E,
it would be idealistic to want to establish a perfect rule
oflaw. As the Council knows, the rule of law is an ideal
that no country in the world has fully achieved. Despite
this, the Government has taken commendable initiatives
towards this ideal or at least to try to approximate it. This
is the case particularly when we look at the holding of
the National Conference on Justice, the drafting of the
strategic plan on judicial ethics of the Supreme Council
of Magistrates, the review of the legal framework for
prisons and correctional institutions and so forth. Even
if these efforts were overlooked by the drafters of the
report, these are the facts and they have produced
tangible results, even though many challenges remain.

With regard to the promotion and protection of
human rights in section F of the report, we welcome
the fact that the report recognizes that the country has
seen significant progress and a marked decrease in the
number of what the report calls extrajudicial killings
and the political violence of young people who are
affiliated with political parties. In that respect, we
recall that the fight against impunity remains a priority
for the Government.
As for section G on social and economic development,
we recall that Burundi, like most developing countries,
cannot attain the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) by the deadline. However, remarkable progress
has been made in the areas of education and health. In
any case, development assistance must be reconsidered
to accelerate the achievement of the MDGs, which still
have not been met in our countries, and the post-2015
agenda is a good opportunity to do so. The conference
on financing for development to be held in Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia in July will be important in that regard.

On issues related to peacebuilding addressed in
section C of Chapter IV on cross-cutting issues, the
United Nations country team which has just taken over
from BNUB will have to implement the peacebuilding
priority plan for 2014-2016, which is the result of an
inclusive process.

With regard to BNUB and its transformation into
a country team, addressed in Chapter V of the report,
let me recall that the lowering of the BNUB flag took
place on 12 December 2014 in the presence of the
two co-Chairs of the ceremony, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
who is present in the Chamber, and Mr. Laurent
Kavakure, Burundian Minister for External Relations
and International Cooperation. It must be said that this
symbolic gesture was the expression of two desires:
first, that of the Government of Burundi, which was
eager to move forward and fully appropriate the national
peacebuilding process, which is now in a mature phase,
as has been the case since 2005; and, secondly, that
of the Security Council, as expressed in its resolution
2137 (2014) of 13 February 2014.

We rightly acknowledge that BNUB, under the
enlightened leadership of Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
has carried out work in political dialogue, protecting
human rights and strengthening the institutional
capacity of the Government and civil society and has
supported the election process under way. The United
Nations, of which the Council is a part, can be proud of
having contributed to this shared success.

