Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Mr. President, for calling today's meeting
and welcome you to New York. I also welcome Foreign
Minister Trujillo Garcia to the Security Council.
Finally, I thank Special Representative Ruiz Massieu
for his briefing.

China strongly condemns the recent terrorist attack
in Bogota. We convey our deepest condolences and
sympathy to the bereaved families and those injured in
the attack.

The Colombia peace process continues to advance.
The Colombian Government has carried out a
comprehensive assessment of the situation in the country
and seeks consensus among all parties in Colombia
with regard to the revision of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace. Thanks to the joint efforts of the Government
and relevant parties, the national security situation in
general has been stable, with State institutions being
restored, economic recovery under way and the peace
process bearing fruit.

China welcomes those developments. While
the overall situation in Colombia is stabilizing and
improving, the security situation in some parts of
the country remains fragile. In addition, Colombia
has the daunting tasks of fully implementing the
peace agreement, reintegrating ex-combatants,
fighting organized crime and realizing social and
economic development.

Some time ago, Colombia commemorated the
second anniversary of the peace agreement. We hope
that all parties in Colombia will cherish the hard-
won peace process, further solidify consensus, meet
each other halfway and resolve their differences by
continuing the inclusive dialogue and negotiations. The
Security Council should respect the leadership of the
Government and the people of Colombia, and provide
constructive assistance to advance the Colombian
peace process.

China welcomes the appointment by Secretary-
General Guterres of Mr. Ruiz Massieu as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Colombia.
China commends former Special Representative Arnault
for his work. We hope that Special Representative Ruiz
Massieu and the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia will continue to help the Colombian
Government address the issues of reintegrating former
combatants and achieving security in conflict areas
in a bid to promote mutual trust among all Colombian
parties and actively implement the peace process.

Chinajoins other members of the Security Council
in supporting the work of Special Representative Ruiz
Massieu and the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia to fulfil their mandates - advancing
the Colombian peace process and contributing to the
early realization of comprehensive peace and stability
in Colombia.

