On behalf of my delegation, I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Zahir Tanin for his insightful briefing. I would also like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivica Daei¢, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia. I would also like to join others in expressing our views over the recent developments in the field. Today I would like to bring the following three points to the attention of the Council. First, the Indonesian Government steadfastly upholds the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the States Members of the United Nations, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and international law. Indonesia will not condone any act that violates the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a State. Dialogue is the best and only way to address differences. Secondly, we call for the resumption of dialogue. We welcome the lifting of the 100 per cent tariff imposed on the goods from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. That development leads us to the official resumption of the European Union- facilitated dialogue, focusing on issues related to missing and displaced persons, as well as economic cooperation. Indonesia also welcomes the economic normalization commitment that was signed under the auspices of the United States. That commitment has shown us that there will be no economic progress if recognition and withdrawal of recognition campaigns between the parties continue. During this critical circumstance of the pandemic, no action is more important than engaging in dialogue. Thirdly, with regard to the role of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in the region, Indonesia commends the Mission's multiple capacity-building initiatives and workshops, including inter-ethnic youth cooperation. The meaningful participation of young people in peace processes and decision-making is crucial for reconciliation and building collective memory towards breaking the community divide. In conclusion, for almost two years, Indonesia has followed closely the progress of UNMIK in seeking a peaceful solution in the region through dialogue. Sadly, there is still no significant progress, as the parties continue to present diverging narratives on the expected outcomes of dialogue. We support the Secretary-General's call for the leadership in Belgrade and Pristina to demonstrate flexibility and creativity to overcome their differences. Political leaders need to ensure an inclusive approach through greater participation by key stakeholders, in particular women and youth, in consultations and decision-making processes. Young people are the hope for a future to which Indonesia - even beyond our term in the Security Council - will always be committed as a true partner for peace.
