Mr. Sc'epanovic' (Montenegro): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of January. I would also like to thank you for
organizing today's important debate, as well as to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing. Montenegro
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2086 (2013).
My country fully associates itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union. I would,
however, like to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.

Following the trend of change in the nature of
conflict and in the dynamics of global security, as
well as the more demanding conditions in which
peacekeepers operate, the concept of peacekeeping
has been evolving and, as a result, we have seen a
shift from traditional to modern and more complex
peacekeeping, with a truly multidimensional character.
With their diversified mandates and vast array of tasks,
peacekeeping operations carry out crucial work in
countries emerging from conflict in order to pave the
way for post-conflict peacebuilding, the prevention of
the recurrence of armed conflict, and a move towards
sustainable peace and development.

What is needed to meet that challenging objective
and build more resilient States is a strategic and
coordinated vision and planning, within the framework
of an integrated and coherent overall approach that
effectively and efficiently incorporates and combines
many different aspects of mutually enforcing
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities, starting at
the earliest initiation stages. Significant progress has
been made so far in developing the nexus between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Incorporating
a peacebuilding perspective in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations, thereby contributing to
supporting priority peacebuilding areas, has come
a long way. We should continue to build on it, in
accordance with the relevant strategy of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Field Services and while following the priorities of host
countries in order to ensure national ownership.

The involvement, active engagement and, most
important, close cooperation and collaboration of a wide
range of the stakeholders involved is of the utmost priority
in ensuring complementarity and comprehensiveness in
the pursuit of lasting peace and stability. Of particular
importance in that context is the need to promote the
work to more clearly define and identify everyone's role
and responsibility so that the contribution of every actor
is optimized. Close partnerships and the system-wide
cohesion of United Nations bodies and other elements
of the larger United Nations system and its growing
connection with regional, subregional and other
international organizations represent an irreplaceable
tool for the success of peacekeeping operations in their

peacebuilding tasks. It is equally important that we aim
for the enhancement of integration and coordination
between host Governments and international partners.

Institution-building and capacity development
in peacekeeping mandates, in particular in the fields
of justice, security and enforcement, are critical
components of peacebuilding that enable host countries
to effectively tackle post-conflict situations and
challenges, especially in the area of the rule of law. In
that vein, the civilian capacities initiative represents
a good and useful example of enhanced partnership
between the United Nations and its Member States
to expand the pool of relevant civilian experts in
peacekeeping operations to support the immediate
capacity-development needs of countries emerging
from conflict.

I also want to underline that women have to
be included as active participants in peacekeeping
missions and in all peacebuilding activities, including
in decision-making roles, because we know that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes involving
the participation of women have a better chance to
succeed. The protection of civilians, especially women
and children, is another area that I believe is central for
the restoration of security and, as such, has to be taken
into account throughout the lifecycle of a peacekeeping
operation.

Montenegro greatly appreciates the importance
and role of United Nations peacekeeping as a flagship
activity of the Organization and a vital instrument in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Although it is a small country with limited capacities,
Montenegro is firmly commited and determined to
contribute actively and constructively to the noble
cause of peacekeeping and peacebuilding, with a
View to securing sustainable peace around the globe.
My country continuously enhances its participation
and contribution in that regard and will make further
contributions in line with international efforts.

