Mr. Chen Xu (China)(spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution, because while Iraq is still under
comprehensive sanctions extending the oil-for-food
programme is the only effective means to alleviate the
humanitarian suffering ofthe Iraqi people.

It must be pointed out that in certain areas the
draft resolution does not fully reflect our requests and
positions.

It is well known that the current oil industry
situation in Iraq is extremely worrying and can hardly
be sustained. Both the Secretary-General and
independent oil experts have repeatedly submitted
extremely objective and professional reports to the
Council. The Iraqi Government has proposed the use of
a certain amount of cash components in order to
maintain and improve oil-producing conditions. These
are reasonable and practical proposals, and the Security
Council should consider them positively. However, this
has not been appropriately reflected in the draft
resolution, and we very much regret this.

In the past two years the United Nations Office of
the Iraq Programme and the many humanitarian
agencies in Iraq have repeatedly pointed out that the
communications facilities in Iraq can hardly meet basic
needs and requests. This is one of the most crucial
areas that have seriously hampered the implementation
of humanitarian projects. Effective measures are
needed to improve this situation.

However, not only have large amounts of
contracts been put on hold, but the proposal agreed by
many members of the Council that the Secretary-
General present a list for rapid approval has not been
accepted, due to the differing opinions of a number of
Member States. We deeply regret this.

As the oil-for-food programme is about to be
extended, we must mention that many humanitarian
projects have been put on hold. According to the latest
report of the United Nations Office of the Iraq
Programme, the amount that has been put on hold
exceeds $2.5 billion, and there is no sign of
improvement. Obviously, this cannot be accepted.
Although the Secretary-General has launched many
appeals, and the contract-submitting countries have
done their best to cooperate, many contracts have yet to
be approved. Obviously, this has not been caused by
purely technical reasons. Once again China calls upon
the countries concerned to prove by their actions that
they are sincere in reducing the holds.

The comprehensive sanctions regime lasting more
than 10 years is the major reason for the humanitarian
sufferings of the Iraqi people. This is an undeniable
fact. The oil-for-food programme cannot, and will
never, completely address those humanitarian
sufferings. Only early lifting of the sanctions can
achieve this objective. Therefore, China calls for the
early lifting of the comprehensive sanctions against
Iraq.

