Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to join other
delegations in expressing our gratitude to Ambassador
Munoz, Chairman of the Al Qaeda and Taliban
sanctions Committee, for his second l20-day briefing
under paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution
1526 (2004). We also thank the Al Qaeda and Taliban
Monitoring Team for their first six-month report under
resolution 1526.

Our meeting today closely follows the third
anniversary of the tragic events of 11 September 2001,
which shocked the entire world and evoked universal
condemnation. The recent terrorist attack on innocent
school children and their parents in Beslan was a
gruesome reminder of the continuation of this threat.
We extend our profound condolences to the victims and
to the Government of the Russian Federation. Last
week's bombing of the Australian Embassy in Jakarta
is but the latest reminder of our vulnerabilities to
globalized terrorism.

Terrorism, whether perpetrated by individuals,
groups or States, poses an ever-present threat to many
countries. Today, it also threatens Pakistan's vital
national interests. We have therefore participated
actively in the global campaign against terrorism. We
have led the way in capturing the majority of the
leadership of Al Qaeda and over 500 terrorists. Our
campaign is ongoing on the Afghan-Pakistan border, in
bilateral cooperation with the major Powers and within
the United Nations.

Our success against the terrorists has, naturally,
attracted increased terrorist attacks, including against
our President and Prime Minister. The Monitoring
Team of the 1267 Committee, which visited Pakistan in
July, noted in its report the convincing demonstration
of our determination to fight the terrorists.

It would be simplistic to expect the Security
Council's sanctions regimes alone to eliminate the
threat of terrorism. The campaign against terrorism
must be pursued with full comprehension of the threat
and with a clear strategy for success.

We have noted the work done by the Committee
during the past four months. We have also noted the
recommendations of the Monitoring Team. We will
continue to work closely with the Committee and the
Team in their efforts to improve the sanctions.

I have a few comments to make about the work of
the Committee and the Monitoring Team. First, we
share the Chairman's view that the completeness and
accuracy of the Consolidated List is essential for the
success of sanctions. This would also help States in
prosecuting or extraditing listed individuals and
entities.

Second, the Committee should continue to further
improve the delisting procedures and address due
process concerns. Third, the implementation of
financial sanctions should not unduly target Islamic
charities or discourage people from making
contributions for charitable purposes, which is an
Islamic obligation.

Fourth, the Committee should use the term
"associates" carefully. Expansive interpretation of that
term to target diverse terrorists as being linked to Al
Qaeda runs the risk of diluting the focus of the
Committee.

Fifth, visits to States by the Committee Chairman
and the Monitoring Team should be used to foster
cooperation through facilitation of the provision of
technical assistance and constructive dialogue. We
hope that post-visit briefings and reports will continue
to be made on a regular basis. These have been useful
in enhancing the Committee's understanding and in
promoting transparency.

Sixth, the Committee's efforts to cooperate with
other United Nations bodies should be pursued, as
pointed out by the Chairman today, while fully
respecting their distinctive mandates. Seventh, we have
noted the Monitoring Team's concerns regarding the
threat of Al Qaeda's constructing bombs that disperse a
chemical, biological or radiological pollutant or
making a dirty bomb or other weapons of mass
casualties. We believe that there is a need for a realistic
evaluation of that threat, which should not divert the
Committee from fulfilling its central mandate.

The threats of terrorism by weapons of mass
destruction can and should be addressed through steps
under resolution 1540 (2004) of the Council, as well as
through the faithful implementation and improvement
of existing international regimes dealing with weapons
of mass destruction issues.

We believe that the Committee also needs to
adopt a discerning approach in dealing with the
Taliban, bearing in mind the political and security
realities in Afghanistan and the policies of President
Karzai's Government.

Terrorism continues to be a global threat
requiring a coordinated international response.
Paragraph 2 of the Monitoring Team report indicates
that Al Qaeda has evolved into "a global network of
groups unbound by structure but held together by a
set of overlapping" ideological goals. It appears from
the report that that evolving network generally avoids
using conventional means of finance, travel or arms
acquisition. That underscores the need for a matching
response to prevent future terrorist attacks.

Global cooperation against terrorism has been
highly successful. Determined and collective action has
contained and destroyed the violent agendas of the
terrorists. The immediate anti-terrorist response must,
however, be accompanied by a clear, long-term
strategy for success in ensuring an end to this
murderous tactic. Such a strategy must include the
following elements.

First, there must be consensus on a definition of
terrorism. Secondly, the terrorists' cause must be
delegitimized by addressing issues such as foreign
occupation, the denial of self-determination, military
intervention and the use of force. Thirdly, broader
structural issues must be addressed, including political
and economic injustice. Fourthly, we must ensure that
counter-terrorism does not violate fundamental human
rights or provoke a clash of cultures.

Attempts to identify terrorism with Islam are both
unfair and counterproductive. They defame our sacred
and peace-loving faith; unwittingly they accord
terrorists an ideological respectability they do not
deserve; and they intensify hostility. They weaken
those who propagate moderation and cooperation. In
this context, we would urge consideration of the
strategy of enlightened moderation proposed by
President Musharraf of Pakistan.

We agree with the Chairman that we need to do a
lot more to defeat terrorism. The Al Qaeda and Taliban
sanctions Committee and the Security Council can
reinforce and coordinate, but they cannot substitute for
national and regional actions. The success of the
Committee hinges on the cooperation it receives from
States, as well as on the comprehensiveness and clarity
of our response to the terrorist threat.

