Mr. Rudolph (Germany): For the third time in just
over a year, the Security Council is having an open
debate on the situation in Afghanistan. The last 12 months
have seen an increase in the activities of the international
community, in particular the United Nations, to bring
about a peaceful solution to the Afghan conflict. The last
12 months have not seen, regrettably, an increased
willingness by the Afghan parties to put an end to the
fighting. Outside support for the parties seems to have
continued as well.

Germany fully supports what the representative of
the Netherlands said on behalf of the European Union and
very much shares the concerns expressed by many in the
course of yesterday's and today's open debate. With the
snows melting, new and large battles may be just around
the corner. The political consequences could be serious,
the humanitarian impact disastrous. According to the
Secretary-General's recent report, the rather limited
fighting within the first two and a half months this year
led to the displacement of 115,000 people from north of
Kabul alone. We strongly support the request made by the
United Nations to the Taliban authorities to take measures
to encourage the return of the displaced to their home
communities.

We remain deeply concerned about the human rights
situation in Afghanistan. In resolution 1076 (1996),
adopted on 22 October 1996, the Security Council
denounced the discrimination against girls and women
and other violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in Afghanistan. The General Assembly
repeated this denunciation in its resolution 51/195,
adopted by consensus on 17 December 1996, and called
upon all Afghan parties to respect the human rights of
every individual, regardless of gender, ethnicity and
religion. In spite of these very clear expressions of the
will of the international community, human rights
continue to be largely violated in Afghanistan. In this
respect, policies of the Taliban denying girls and women
access to education and to many forms of employment are
particularly disturbing. It is clear that the international
standing of any Afghan party cannot be independent of its
record in complying with international obligations and the
unanimous decisions of United Nations bodies.

My Government fully supports the untiring efforts of
the United Nations, in particular the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan, that aim at exploring
every possibility to bring the Afghan conflict closer to its
peaceful solution. Since the open Security Council debate
on Afghanistan on 9 April 1996, the United Nations

 

Special Mission has been strengthened by the secondment
of political affairs officers. Norbert Holl was appointed as
its new Head. In December 1996, the General Assembly
renewed the mandate of the Special Mission and further
strengthened it by allowing for the deployment of three
additional military advisers and two civilian police advisers.

The principles for peace in Afghanistan, as laid down
in General Assembly resolution 50/88, were reaffirmed in
several Security Council decisions, including resolution
1076 (1996), and updated and further elaborated in General
Assembly resolution 51/ 195 . We have said again and again
that what remains to be done is to put these principles for
peace into practice. So far, the parties have decided to
continue fighting. But Norbert H011 and his dedicated staff
have been successful in keeping channels open, to the
extent where, as experience has shown, the Special Mission
is currently the only institution that can bring together all
parties for talks. So long as we do not want to give up hope
that we may see the Afghan conflict solved peacefully, the
task of the Special Mission will remain of crucial
importance.

What can be done to convince the Afghan parties to
renounce the military option and commit themselves to a
peace process? There may be no easy answer to that
question. But it is clear that it is the United Nations that
must try to bring the parties to the negotiating table, and
that the United Nations will need help from its Member
States in doing so. Security Council resolution 1076 (1996)
as well as General Assembly resolution 51/195 assign the
central role in international efforts aiming at a peaceful
resolution of the Afghan conflict to the United Nations. At
the same time, both decisions call on Member States
actively to support the work of the United Nations and to
use any influence they have with the Afghan parties to that
end.

We would therefore encourage the Secretary-General
and the Special Mission to intensify their contacts with
regional and other interested States on the issue of
Afghanistan. The international meeting on Afghanistan
planned for 16 April can be an important step in that
direction. We also call upon all concerned to coordinate
closely with the Special Mission all initiatives they plan
with regard to Afghanistan. Any peace talks involving the
Afghan parties should be chaired by the United Nations.

It has been repeated often that the Afghan conflict
must be solved through negotiations and not on the
battlefield. Peace in Afghanistan requires a joint effort by
all of us, under the leadership of the United Nations. We
must translate our strict rejection of a military solution
into full support, in words and deeds, for the United
Nations Special Mission. Germany stands ready to play
its part, and we look forward to continued cooperation
with the United Nations and with other interested Member
States in pursuing our common goal of a peaceful
Afghanistan.

