Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): It
has been more than four years since the Security Council
adopted resolution 794 (1992), when the humanitarian
situation in Somalia demanded the deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping force to create a climate propitious
for humanitarian assistance. Today, more than two years
after the withdrawal of the force from Somalia, this meeting
provides an opportunity to take stock of developments in
Somalia, to exchange views and to conduct consultations on
the measures the international community should take in
order to promote the establishment of a central authority
that enjoys the support of all Somali factions so that the
people of Somalia may find stability and begin a life of
prosperity and development. In that connection,
Mr. President, I would like to thank you very sincerely
for having taken the initiative to convene this meeting. I
hope that the Council will continue to conduct such
meetings in the future.

Despite the humanitarian nature of the intervention
of the United Nations in Somalia and the deployment of
an international force under Chapter VII of the Charter
because of the exceptional circumstances in Somalia at
that time - most importantly the absence of a central
Government that could extend its authority to the entire
country - the humanitarian tragedy and the continuation
of the civil war have claimed many innocent victims.
While the United Nations has been successful in its
humanitarian intervention, it has been less successful with
the establishment of local political and social institutions
capable of taking over for the State institutions destroyed
in the civil war.

The situation today in Somalia differs radically from
the situation that prevailed in the past. Numerous regional
initiatives have led to many positive developments, the
first of which was the Nairobi meeting last October. I
would like, in that connection, to thank the Government
of Kenya for taking that important initiative, particularly
since Mr. Hussein Aidid participated in that meeting
alongside other Somali factions. Ethiopian mediation too
was successful in organizing the Sodere meeting in which
more than 26 factions participated, and which concluded
with the establishment of the National Salvation Council.
During February and March, the Italian Special Envoy,
Mr. Cassini, was able to organize two meetings between
Mr. Ali Mahdi Mohamed and Mr. Hussein Aidid, and
efforts are under way to have Mr. Osman Atto participate
in the consultations so that the reunification of Mogadishu
can be achieved and the airport and port of the capital can
be opened.

Other developments in Somalia were the
participation of the National Salvation Council in the
session of the League of Arab States last March, and the
issuance of the Sodere documents. This led to the
declaration of the Arab League that it would finance, with
the voluntary contributions of its members, the holding of
a national reconciliation conference in Bossaso as well as
the necessary assistance for mediation efforts within
Somalia.

 

The report of the Secretary-General contains important
proposals, and the Egyptian delegation hopes that they will
be given serious consideration. They include the designation
of a new Special Envoy and upgrading the size and role of
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia. There are
a number of options to choose from, and at present Egypt
supports the Secretary-General sending a Special Envoy to
Somalia on a mission similar to that of Ambassador
Chretien, who has been in the Great Lakes region in the
past few months. The new Special Envoy should be sent
with a view to establishing contacts with the Somali war
lords and the representatives of the Somali people, and
perhaps also in order to visit neighbouring States and other
interested States and to consult with competent regional
organizations with a View to presenting a comprehensive
report to the Secretary-General on measures to be taken, at
which time the Security Council could consider them and
adopt an appropriate resolution.

The outcome of recent initiatives and consultations on
Somalia indicates that there are positive trends which must
be exploited, because it is unacceptable for the present state
of affairs to continue. It is necessary now to reach an
agreement on the nature of the United Nations role in
Somalia. The delegation of Egypt calls for a substantial
modification of this role, and it calls upon the international
community, represented here, to assume its responsibilities
Vis-a-Vis the Somali people. This is why we consider that
serious thought needs to be given to a new United Nations
initiative to help define the character of further initiatives
which the United Nations might take in this area.

I hope it is clear that such action can in no way
replace any local or individual initiatives. It can only be
complementary to such initiatives, and it should pursue
specific objectives. It should emphasize United Nations
support for regional efforts and push the factions to
participate in such efforts. It should take account of the
positions of neighbouring States, other interested States and
competent regional and international organizations, with a
View to recommending to the Secretary-General measures
to be taken. We should be wary of violations of the
embargo on arms shipments to Somalia, which was adopted
in Security Council resolution 733 (1992). And it should
reaffirm the United Nations commitment to a peaceful
settlement of the crisis.

Egypt underscores the importance of stability in
Somalia both in the light of the strong historical, cultural
and other links between Somalia and our country - which
extend back to the sixteenth century BC. - and because
Somalia is a fellow Arab and African country. In March
Cairo welcomed a delegation of the National Salvation
Council, and, last week, Mr. Hussein Aidid. We will
continue to maintain contacts with all the factions and
representatives of the Somali people without exception in
order to support the national reconciliation effort. We
reaffirm that Egypt does not oppose other initiatives,
because all international and regional initiatives are
complementary and pursue a common goal: the
achievement of national reconciliation. Egypt will also
continue to provide humanitarian and cultural assistance
to all regions of Somalia. Because of the appearance of
cholera and malnutrition, it is extremely important to
respond to humanitarian needs in Somalia, and the
international community must provide assistance.

The efforts of the United Nations and of regional
and international organizations to support national
reconciliation depend on a number of considerations, the
most important of which is that the international
community must not recognize any authority in Somalia
that does not represent all factions of the Somali people.
Secondly, the embargo on arms shipments should be
respected and strictly monitored. The Somali factions
must be persuaded to examine all the options open to
them so that they can select the best and most
appropriate. The international community must continue
all necessary humanitarian and development assistance to
all regions of Somalia without exception. The territorial
integrity of Somalia and the principle of non-intervention
in its internal affairs must be respected.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that the main
responsibility for stability in Somalia rests with the
Somali people themselves. But at the same time, we must
recognize that it is important and necessary for the United
Nations to play a role and to make efforts to assist the
Somali people in overcoming the present crisis.

