Mr. Giiktiirk (Turkey): Like previous speakers, I
would like to begin by welcoming the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Hans
Haekkerup. We thank him for his eloquent
presentation. He has been in his present capacity for
only two months, but he has shown remarkable
dexterity in leading the Mission's operations.

Turkey firmly supports the Special
Representative in his efforts to ensure the effective
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). Turkey's substantial contributions to the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) will continue.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on
UNMIK indeed draws a tantalizing picture. We are, on
the one hand, presented with a political outlook utterly
fragmented on ethnic and agenda matters, the
immediate result being the precarious security situation
in and around Kosovo. On the other, we see a gradual
movement towards normalcy thanks to the efforts of
the international community through the pillars of civil
administration, institution-building and economic
reconstruction.
Kosovo is part and parcel of the Balkan reality.
History has proved time and again that, in the context
of the Balkans, exaggerated expectations take the fast
lane. What we have been witnessing lately is, in a way,
only a repetition of the obvious. One of the
responsibilities of the international community is
therefore to curb precisely that. And to do that, we
should build on our successes achieved by the work of
UNMIK in the course of its now 18 months oflife.

Ethnic harmony remains the overriding objective
of our project. Provincial-level structures are now
being articulated. A Working Group set up by the
Special Representative has begun in earnest the
drafting exercise of the legal framework for substantial
autonomy. The Secretary-General, in paragraph 22 of
his report, in document S/2001/2l8, rightly states that
"the overarching aim of the Working Group will be to
ensure the participation of all Kosovo communities in
the final definition of the legal framework", and goes
on to say that "UNMIK is attempting to develop the
broadest possible support for the legal framework
before my Special Representative takes the final
decision to move forward with Kosovo-wide
elections."

Once this legal framework is established, the
entire people of Kosovo will be asked to follow its
trajectory. Therefore, now is the time for all
communities in Kosovo be given the direct and full
right to participate in the Working Group. We hence
fully support the legitimate expectation of the Turkish
community to be represented in this Group. This is in
fact a prerogative of the Turkish community emanating
from its acquired rights and status. These were
confirmed and given operative expression last
September, in the letter of Mr. Kouchner, the former
Special Representative, addressed to the Turkish
community. In his letter, Mr. Kouchner provides
assurances, inter alia, that "UNMIK shall fully and
fairly involve members of the Turkish community, as
well as members of all other communities, in the
preparation of future arrangements for the
establishment of provisional institutions in Kosovo for
the interim period."

The chances of the Kosovo experiment becoming
a truly inclusive one leading to multi-ethnic harmony
depend to a large extent on the latitude the smaller
communities will enjoy in their daily dealings and in
determining their future. This will also define the
contours of the perspective from which the larger
segments of the society view each other.
We remain concerned by the recurring violence in
south-east Serbia. The recent agreement between the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the representatives of the ethnic Albanian community
in southern Serbia to enact a ceasefire is therefore a
welcome development. The success of this agreement,
as well as of the agreement reached between the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia on the phased and conditioned reduction
of the ground safety zone, requires the cooperation of
all concerned.

The recent eruption of violence in the northern
part of Macedonia must be taken with the seriousness it
deserves. The terror of the extremist elements can in no
way be condoned. It is important that all involved in
the region distance themselves from these elements.
The Government of Macedonia has our full support in
its efforts to restore tranquillity on its territory.
Equally, all must contribute to the effectiveness of the
measures undertaken jointly by the Kosovo Force and
UNMIK along Macedonia's northern border. The
territorial integrity and the sanctity of the
internationally recognized borders of the Republic of
Macedonia and other countries in the region are the
common concern of the international community. The
spiral of turmoil can be endemic, but countering it
requires a much wider scope.

