Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank the delegation
of Jordan for convening this truly important debate.
Indeed, I think I can say at this stage that it is a quite
extraordinary event, for all sorts of reasons. You, Sir,
have emphasized the importance of the occasion by
bringing your Crown Prince to the table: your country's
future, your kingdom's future.

Allow me also to thank our two briefers - Mr. Peter
Neumann and Mr. Scott Atran - for their quite
remarkable presentations. As I listened to the two

gentlemen I could not help but ask why I have had to sit
for four months, at this particular table, before I heard
an outside contribution of that sort of value and that
sort of experience. The Security Council needs to hear
more of such wisdom and such knowledge.

Through you, sir, may I thank His Royal Highness
for his presence today and for his insightful comments:
not commentary on youth - which is all that I can
offer - but commentary by youth, and extraordinarily
valuable for that reason, alone.

As others have done, we should start by
acknowledging that youth has been radicalized
throughout history, but in times past, the dissemination
of radical ideas, radical advocacy and any radical
recruitment took weeks, months and even years. Today,
those same messages are transmitted with instant
effect. The social media and communication skills of
groups like Daesh have accelerated and globalized the
dissemination process and made it even more difficult
to undertake effective counter-measures. Too often, the
damage has been done; the evil has been spread before
we even know it. The tools of this modern world that we
now take for granted, combined with the increasingly
young demographic of many countries, contribute to
an environment where those with ill intent can target,
exploit and radicalize the young with previously
unimaginable speed and previously unparalleled
intensity.

It is wrong to lay blame for violent extremism at the
feet of the young; indeed, we are grateful to Jordan for
focusing today's debate on the role that youth can play
in combatting violent terrorism. New Zealand therefore
takes this opportunity to offerjust three suggestions for
better tackling the radicalization of youth.

First, Governments must recognize that national
and local contexts really do matter. Even if sometimes
presented as an international message and package, the
real factors that motivate young people to follow an
extremist path are almost always local, as Mr. Atran
emphasized in his presentation. If we are going to
address youth radicalization successfully, we must
identify the domestic or local pressures that marginalize
our vulnerable youth. We must ask how terrorist groups
are so successful in exploiting and manipulating these
pressures in order to radicalize and recruit. Do they
make youth dream, as Mr. Atran suggested?

We must then specifically tailor our responses to
those factors, with Governments, communities and
young people all working together in partnership. The
resulting counter-violent extremism programmes must
demonstrate to our young people that they can have
a real stake in their society and must help to develop
trust in State authority, and - again, as Mr. Atran
emphasized - getting young people to trust State
Authority is never going to be easy. It never has been
easy. They are not necessarily attracted by any notions
of the modern nation State. These partnerships of trust
should be based on an understanding of radicalization
that goes far beyond the security lens, so we thank
Jordan for giving this debate that broader perspective
as well.

Ifwe treat at-risk young people only as the objects of
security concern, we grossly oversimplify the issue and
perpetuate the marginalization that often contributes
to violent extremism. Partnerships with young people
and their communities must be based on inclusion and
respect. Families are often the first responders to those
starting down the path to Violent extremism, and those
families must be supported in their efforts to challenge
propaganda, provide leadership and offer credible,
alternative narratives to give them that stake in society
of which Mr. Neumann spoke, reversing that sense of
exclusion.

Secondly, we must empower our young people to
create a social force - their own social force, not one
that we control - which rejects violence as a means
of achieving their goals. Mr. Atran described such a
programme in North-West Pakistan. The Council
emphasised that very point last year in resolution 2178
(2014), which encourages States to empower community
leaders, families, parents and fellow youth to meet the
challenge of violent extremism. Too often, families and
communities have watched helplessly as groups like
Daesh spread their message of hate by using the tools
of the modern age with skill and sophistication. As
Mr. Neumann urged, we need tailored solutions using
those very tools.

But even as young people are the targets of
radicalization and Violent extremism, those same young
people are also well equipped to combat that messaging,
and they can do so at a technological, ideological and
social level that they know, understand and can use to
great advantage. The most effective counter-violent
extremism programmes are those that harness the
energy, passion and creativity of young people, who are
already collaborating online and who naturally respond
to that sort of challenge.

Thirdly, we urge States to contribute to and draw
from the experience of others, not least, in respect of
effective measures initiated by young people themselves.
We welcome recent efforts to coordinate international
activity and to share experiences, such as the White
House Summit on Countering Violent Extremism and
the work of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum,
in particular the Abu Dhabi Memorandum on Good
Practices for Education and Countering Violent
Extremism.

As the Council and United Nations counter-terrorism
entities focus on supporting States to implement
resolutions to counter violent extremism, we strongly
urge that we make building durable partnerships with
our young people - partnerships that promote peace
and combat Violent extremism - an essential feature
of the measures that we adopt. The Secretary-General
reminded us that young people represent promise, not
peril. We should never regard youth as a problem; we
should regard it as a solution.

This is the last time that I will speak in the Security
Council Chamber, so want to thank my colleagues for
their friendship, collegiality, support and - I suspect
sometimes - for their patience. I wish the Council well
as it deals with the many threats to international peace
and security.

