Mr. Fall (Senegal) (spoke in French): A few days
ago, Mr. President, I had the pleasant duty of
conveying to you my congratulations, and I would like
to do so once again.

What has come to be called the question of Iraq is
now one of the most urgent items of international
politics on the agenda of chancelleries throughout the
world. Excessive media coverage of the debate on Iraq
may be one of the explanations for that fact, but some
observers would not hesitate to evaluate the growing
importance of the Iraqi issue in the light of the tragic
terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001 and the
re-emergence of violence in the Middle East. I would
like to stress that, for its part, Senegal does not want to
become embroiled in a controversial debate about the
real, apparent or supposed interconnection of these
facts.

In participating in this public debate of the
Security Council on the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait, Senegal would like simply to emphasize two
major concerns. The first is the overriding obligation of
Iraq and its leaders to comply, without conditions or
conditionalities, with all the resolutions adopted by the
Security Council since 1991.

The second is the urgent necessity for concerted
and completely legitimate international action, through
the collective action of the Security Council, should
Baghdad fail to comply with or deliberately refuse to
abide by the Council's injunctions.

Perhaps there is no need to remind the Council
that my country, Senegal, is one of the few Member
States of sub-Saharan Africa to have taken part in the
Desert Shield coalition in 1991. The basic objective of
that operation was to put an end to the Iraqi occupation
of Kuwait and to enable that friendly country to regain
its full sovereignty over its territory.
The coalition had been expressly set up on the
basis and in implementation of a Security Council
resolution. Ninety-three Senegalese soldiers lost their
lives in a tragic airplane crash while on a pilgrimage
several days before their triumphant return home. Their
deaths are still mourned by their families and the
Senegalese people, with the solidarity of all the
members ofthe Desert Shield coalition.

But it was our fight. It was the fight of the
international community against aggression, a fight for
the respect of international law and of the Charter. It
was the fight of our common Organization, of which
Iraq and Kuwait continue to be an integral part.

Eleven years after the adoption of Security
Council resolution 687 (1991), the issue of Iraq is still
very much on the Council's table. If the drastic
sanctions imposed by the Council have still not been
lifted, and the Iraqi people, unfortunately, continue to
be the main victim, we must acknowledge that
exclusive responsibility for this is due to the
Government of Iraq's non-compliance with Council
resolutions.

Iraq absolutely must respond concretely to the
requests of Kuwait, including those concerning the
release of the Kuwaiti detainees and the return of all
property and archives of the State of Kuwait, in
accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Accordingly, Baghdad must absolutely
submit to the requirements of Council resolution 687
(1991) on the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction that might be in its possession and to
honour scrupulously the commitments it made with
respect to the non-acquisition of arms prohibited by the
Council.

Moreover, the expulsion of the inspectors of the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) in
1998 could only give rise to doubts, suspicions and
exasperation on the part of the international community
as to Iraq's real intention to comply with its
international disarmament obligations. The community
of nations therefore very legitimately continues to have
doubts about Iraq concerning its possible possession of
weapons of mass destruction, including biological,
chemical, bacteriological, radiological or even nuclear
weapons. That doubt exists despite repeated assurances
by Iraq, despite the multiple organized on-site visits in
the last few months, which were highly publicized in
the media.

That said and noted, in accepting the return of the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and in committing before all
the world to offer all the required guarantees on
security, movement and access to all agreed sites
without conditions or hindrance, Baghdad has taken a
significant step in the right direction. Therefore, my
delegation welcomes the agreement concluded between
the United Nations and Iraq in Vienna some days ago
on the details ofthe return of the inspectors.

In that spirit, Senegal strongly urges Iraq to
comply scrupulously with the terms of the agreement
concluded by facilitating immediate, unconditional and
unlimited access to the suspected sites, including those
considered sensitive.

For everything must be done to prevent - rather
than simply postpone - a military confrontation of
incalculable consequences for the planet and especially
for that crucial region of the world that has already
suffered from so many conflicts and tragedies, most of
whose victims have always been the unarmed civilian
population, especially women and children.

Iraq and its leaders must understand that they
have nothing to gain from a military confrontation. On
the contrary, they have everything to lose, as do we, the
peoples of the United Nations. The immense resources
which might be swallowed up in a war, the scenario for
which would be known in advance, could be used to
reconstruct that country of a glorious past, to alleviate
the suffering of its people and to construct a society
that is more democratic, peaceful and in harmony with
its neighbours and the rest of the international
community.

My country well understands the security,
humanitarian, existential and humanitarian concerns of
certain Member States. Those concerns are completely
legitimate, especially in the light of the very real tragic
events of 11 September 2001 and the persistence of the
terrorist menace throughout the world. But only
multilateral action, planned collectively in a concerted
manner, can really overcome the many threats
compromising the future of humanity. That is why
Senegal believes that any coercive international action
must absolutely be carried out within the framework of
the United Nations by means of the Security Council,
which alone can give such action indisputable
international legitimacy.

Therefore, it is most important for our Council to
fully evaluate its historic responsibilities under the
Charter of San Francisco, to which all of us without
exception have adhered freely and without reservation.
There is great risk that the Council and the United
Nations along with it will lose credibility if they do not
fulfil their statutory obligations on the question of Iraq,
as well as on the other questions on its agenda.

In order that the exception does not become the
rule and that the norms do not dissolve into a broad
regime of exceptions, which many States would
request, the same energy the Council is expending on
the question of Iraq can and must serve as a precedent
in the management of other, equally urgent issues. No
Member State can claim to be above the United
Nations or wilfully exempt itself from the field of
international law, Council resolutions are binding for
all, including the States that would defy the United
Nations for 35 years, the States that would possess
weapons of mass destruction and the States that would
occupy militarily foreign territories in violation of
United Nations resolutions.

Together, let us be optimistic but reasonable
about the future, with the firm hope that
multilateralism, the founding principle of our
Organization, will triumph, in the enlightened interest
of us all.

At a time when many of us are nervously
preparing loading weapons, when peoples bled white
have exhausted all their tears, we must together
continue to find unexplored ways for a diplomatic
solution based on the strength of international law and
derived from the relevance of Security Council
resolutions.

In this regard, Senegal particularly appreciates
the recent clarifications by the United States and the
United Kingdom on the real objective of Iraq's
disarmament, while we support the position of the
Europeans, especially France, whose efforts and
initiatives towards a solution to the crisis within the
United Nations deserve our recognition.

In the search for a peaceful solution to the dispute
between Iraq and the United Nations, Senegal supports
Secretary-General Kofi Annan in his personal efforts
towards a resolution based on the strict respect of the
principles inscribed in the Charter of San Francisco and
on the relevant Security Council resolutions.

We are aware that the United Nations was created
on the ashes of the League of Nations, which was
totally indifferent, a partisan of a wait-and-see policy
dealing with the fate of small countries. Coming on the
heels of the victory of the Allies in the Second World

War. The basic mission of the United Nations, far from
being war, remains a mission of peace - peace among
States, peace among peoples, peace among nations.
Let us refuse to be inadequate to the task, and let
us always remain faithful to this cardinal objective,
which remains the very raison d'etre of our
Organization that, first and foremost, wishes to spare
future generations from the scourge of war.

