Mr. Mathias: I would like to thank Mr. Lang for
his wide-ranging and multidimensional report (see S/2011/30) to the Secretary-General, as well as for his
presentation this morning. Mr. Lang was appointed on
25 August 2010 as the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Legal Issues related to Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia. In just four months, he has
travelled and consulted widely and has brought
together a large amount of information into a coherent
report that identifies various strands of possible actions
by the international community.

Some of those strands relate to piracy-related
issues that are not of a legal character. While those are
not of direct concern to the Office of Legal Affairs, I
note that among the proposals in Mr. Lang's report are
proposals with respect to improving the operational
aspects of the fight against piracy, economic and
development proposals and proposals to build the
capacities of Somalia's security forces. His report to
the Secretary-General and the recommendations
contained therein are being reviewed by the Secretary-
General and his advisers.
I will now make just a few brief comments on
some of the legal aspects of the report, and also refer

members of the Council to the relevant parts of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2010/394) of 26 July
2010, which dealt with some of the same issues.

First, I would like to underline the Special
Adviser's references to the international legal
framework applicable to piracy. The legal framework
under international law is set out in the 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which also
reflects customary international law. Other instruments,
such as the 1988 Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime
Navigation, may also be relevant to combating piracy,
since some elements of the act of piracy may also
constitute offences under such instruments.

In the context of Somalia, the legal regime is
complemented by a number of Security Council
resolutions. The Djibouti Code of Conduct concerning
the repression of piracy and armed robbery against
ships in the Western Indian Ocean and the Gulf of
Aden is also an important vehicle for cooperation
among regional States.

Regarding the repression of piracy, States remain
bound by other applicable rules of international law.
Clearly, apprehension, detention, prosecution and
imprisonment must all take place in accordance with a
State's international human rights and other obligations.

The Special Adviser has rightly underlined that
the Law of the Sea Convention and customary
international law provide for universal jurisdiction over
acts of piracy; that is, all States are entitled to take
criminal jurisdiction over acts of piracy, no matter
where they occur and no matter what the nationality of
the suspect or the victim. No connection between the
prosecuting State and the act of piracy is required. This
is the broadest possible legal basis for States to
exercise jurisdiction under international law.

Any State may seize a pirate ship or a ship under
the control of pirates, any State may arrest the suspects
and any State may prosecute them. The key to
increasing the number of States that are able to
prosecute acts of piracy, whether they be in the region
or elsewhere, lies in national implementation of this
international legal regime and in the will to take on
prosecutions. This is consistent with the call in
resolution 1950 (2010) for all States to criminalize
piracy under their domestic law and to favourably
consider the prosecution of suspected, and
imprisonment of convicted, pirates apprehended off the
coast of Somalia, consistent with applicable
international law, including international human rights
law.

Given the large number of suspects being
detained at sea by naval forces, the Special Adviser has
emphasized that putting in place adequate prison
arrangements is equally as important as considering the
options for prosecution. The potential size of the
piracy-related prison population and the fact that most
of the suspects are not nationals of the prosecuting
States have certainly contributed to the difficulties
associated with finding a potential host State for any
new judicial mechanism.

The Special Adviser has proposed a three-part
Somali court system, comprising specialized courts in
Puntland and Somaliland and an extraterritorial
specialized court to sit in a third country in the region.
It may be helpful for members of the Council if I
briefly relate those proposals to the options that were
set out in the Secretary-General's report.

The specialized courts sitting in Puntland and
Somaliland, as proposed by the Special Adviser, would
be special chambers, sitting Within a national
jurisdiction. As we understand it, they would receive
capacity-building assistance but would not have United
Nations participation through United Nations-selected
international judges or prosecutors. Those tribunals,
therefore, would fall under option 3, as set out in the
Secretary-General's report of July 2010. That report
identified a number of potential advantages and
disadvantages of such special chambers. Our
understanding is that the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime is already supporting national
prosecutions in the regions of Somalia and working
towards the establishment of such special courts.

The proposal for an extraterritorial specialized
court, applying Somali law, to sit in a third country in
the region, would fall under option 2 in the Secretary-
General's report of last July. Again, the report
identifies advantages and disadvantages of this option.

