Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): I thank Sweden for
convening today's debate. Ialso thank Secretary-General
Guterres for making clear his strong commitment to
conflict prevention and sustaining peace.

We need to see the adoption in April last year of the
two resolutions on sustaining peace (resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262) as a
turning point for the United Nations. Collectively, we
are now charged with the responsibility of bringing the
United Nations back more closely to the reason of its
creation in the first place, that is, to prevent war, rather
than to react once war has been waged, and to solve
conflict, not merely to manage it.

I associate myself fully with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union. I now
offer four additional points in my national capacity.

First, conflict rarely comes as a surprise. Human
rights violations, hate speech and inter-communal
violence are early warning signs of conflict, which is
often in clear sight. The challenge is how to respond
effectively to such signs with timely action. However,
we are making progress. The Security Council has
increasingly used the various tools at its disposal,
including field visits, emergency any-other-business
meetings and statements, to place stronger emphasis on
conflict prevention. In addition, the Human Rights up
Front initiative has allowed quick decisions to be made,
including in the case of South Sudan.

However, more can be done to advance the
recommendations made by the three reviews of 2015
and the subsequent sustaining peace resolutions. We
would like to see a stronger voice given to those best
equipped to flag early warning signs of conflict and
make recommendations for action by the Security
Council. In addition, we must enhance the flexibility and
predictability of the funding needed for interventions
that can prevent conflict. If funding is decided on a
year-to-year basis or is rigidly earmarked, our capacity
to intervene early and quickly to stop conflict from
breaking out is significantly diminished.

My second point is that the root causes ofconflict can
be many and far-reaching. Tackling such root causes is
the smart thing to do and is key to sustaining peace. The
interlinkages among issues such as poverty eradication,
creating sustainable peace, building human security
and combating inequalities are critical underpinnings
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. They
should not be addressed in isolation.
While the implementation of the 2030 Agenda is
not primarily the responsibility of the Council, it is
clear that the successful achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals will over time remove, or lessen,
many of the factors that give rise to conflict and other
threats to international peace and stability. Debates and
briefings in the Council Chamber increasingly recognize
that reality and factor in issues of institution-building,
governance, economic growth, migration and even
climate change.

We applaud the Secretary-General for the emphasis
he has placed on the need to address the root causes of
conflict. He has stressed that the work of sustaining
peace cannot take place in a vacuum. We look forward
to the leadership of the Secretary-General and of the
Council as we all work together to implement the
sustaining peace resolutions in complementarity with
the sustainable development and human rights agendas.

My third point is that conflict affects more than
the warring parties. To address conflict, we must
include everyone, especially civilians. When States and
societies are fractured, we need to listen to civil society
organizations and to ensure their participation in the
achievement of lasting peace. Women must be involved
at all stages along the peace continuum - from
prevention to peace negotiations and post-conflict
governance. Furthermore, the youth, peace and
security agenda should be utilized to support initiatives
on conflict prevention. Sustaining peace is an objective
for all generations.

Finally, the role of regional partners cannot be
overstated. Our efforts towards sustaining peace
will fall short if we fail to draw on the expertise and
experience of regional and subregional bodies.

The United Nations is operating in a constantly
changing world. It is unlikely that those who drafted
the Charter of the United Nations considered phrases
such as "international terrorism", "non-State actors"
or "national reconciliation processes". Nevertheless,
although the times have changed and the terminology is
different, the principles of the Charter remain pristine
and absolute. To ensure that we are all part of a United
Nations that is fit for purpose, our deliberations on
sustaining peace must be conducted in a transparent and
inclusive manner. We must all keep our eyes firmly on
the prize of peace and reach an enhanced understanding
of how lasting solutions to conflict can be achieved.

