Mr. Oshima (Japan): I thank Mr. Pronk, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his informative and very useful briefing today. Japan
commends the efforts of Mr. Pronk and his staff in the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) to
ensure respect for the ceasefire and implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) in the
Sudan, and we shall continue to support their efforts. In
this context, Japan will possibly consider the extension
of the UNMIS mandate, as recommended by the
Secretary-General and the draft resolution to that effect
that the United States of America is circulating.

With regard to implementation of the CPA, we
are gratified to note certain encouraging progress that
has been made, including its security arrangements,
such as the ongoing redeployment of the Sudan armed
forces out of southern Sudan, the completed
redeployment of the Sudan People's Liberation Army
(SPLA) from eastern Sudan and implementation of
other security mechanisms. On the other hand, it is a
matter of concern that there have been considerable

delays in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme, security-sector reform and
north-south border delineation issues. Concern must
also be expressed over the lack of progress in
implementation of the key issues such as those related
to wealth-sharing and power-sharing. We would like to
encourage the parties to make their utmost efforts
towards progress in these areas.

On the question of Abyei, we have noted that the
National Congress Party and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement have agreed to seek a political
solution. We would expect the discussions between the
two parties to lead towards a final solution. On the
other hand, the multiple restrictions imposed on the
activities of UNMIS are a matter for concern, and the
situation must be ameliorated without delay.

While the recent resurgence of activities by the
other armed groups in southern Sudan poses a serious
threat to security in the region, the agreement on the
cessation of hostilities between the Government of
Uganda and the Lord's Resistance Army - the result
of the mediation efforts of the government of Southern
Sudan - is certainly a positive step which, we hope,
will contribute to improving security in southern
Sudan.

With respect to the situation in the east, we are
looking forward to the early conclusion of the ongoing
peace negotiations under the auspices of the
Government of Eritrea.

On Darfur, we fully share the view that the
handling of the Darfur Peace Agreement has a direct
impact on the stability of the Sudan as a whole, and we
therefore support the way that UNMIS has been
responding to African Union requests for assistance
relating to communications, logistics, transportation,
public information and humanitarian issues. We also
welcome the fact that UNMIS is continuing its efforts
to persuade the non-signatory groups to support the
Darfur Peace Agreement and the immediate
implementation of resolution 1706 (2006).

All of this is fine and commendable. However,
the reality that the international community is
confronting in Darfur and the fate of the Darfur Peace
Agreement are, indeed, fairly grim and a matter of
deep concern. Mr. Pronk described the Darfur Peace
Agreement as being in a coma, and set out five
essential conditions for saving it. He said, in part, that
we need to de-link what should be done today to save
the Darfur Peace Agreement from tomorrow's actions
to get a renewed and fully robust peace force on the
ground. I would like to ask Mr. Pronk to elaborate on
what he meant by that and to provide a little more
detail. I would also like to ask him to share with us his
views on what he calls the contours of a plan for the
longer term on Darfur.

In closing, Japan shares the view expressed by
the Secretary-General that continued assistance to the
people of the Sudan is essential if we are to meet their
expectations for a peace dividend under the
Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement. Japan has to date
already fulfilled its commitment made at the Oslo
conference in 2004 by disbursing more than $1 billion.
Japan intends to consider possible additional assistance
for the consolidation of peace, humanitarian
reconstruction and development in the Sudan.

