Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of today's meeting and thank
Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov, Head of
the Office of Counter-Terrorism, for his comprehensive
briefing. We wish to express our support for him and our
willingness to work with him in a coordinated manner.

Our experience in the fight against terrorism leads
us to highlight the need to unflaggingly confront it in
all the many and changing areas in which it operates.
We therefore welcome the fact that the Organization is
being proactive in its response to terrorism. Its efforts
includes the recent establishment of the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and the renewal of the mandate of
the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate, as well
as the sixth biennial review of the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and the summit of heads of counter-
terrorism agencies convened by the Secretary-General.
Peru therefore welcomes the significant progress
noted in the most recent report on the implementation

of resolution 2368 (2017) on combating the so-
called Islamic State and its affiliated organizations
(S/2018/80). With the support of the Organization and
the Security Council, the international community has
succeeded in liberating the greater part of the territory
that they had come to control.

However, the threat remains latent, as Da'esh
changes its tactics or makes them more sophisticated
so as to further undermine international peace and
security. It is necessary to act intelligently and
strengthen international cooperation in order to
prevent and respond effectively to its new forms and
manifestations. I shall discuss to three specific points.

First is the challenge posed by the return of foreign
terrorist fighters to their countries of origin and/
or their relocation to third countries. We consider it
urgent to identify those terrorists. We are relying on
the Da'esh and Al-Qaida sanctions list for that, but
we need to make greater use of biometric information
through INTERPOL and such instruments as advance
passenger information systems and Passenger Name
Record data gathered by the International Civil
Aviation Organization.

Comprehensive strategies must also be devised
to investigate, prosecute and punish such terrorists,
with full respect for the rule of law and human rights.
In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-General's
efforts to operationalize the Investigative Team for the
crimes committed by Da'esh in Iraq. Accordingly, we
underscore the need to incorporate a gender perspective
to support women victims and promote the integration
of young people so as to draw them away from the path
of violent extremism.

Secondly, as the relationship between terrorism,
transnational organized crime and the misuse of
cyberspace becomes increasingly tangible, the
networks established by Da'esh to finance its activities
reflect a worrying reality. It is essential to deepen our
knowledge and cooperation with respect to a dynamic
that includes networks of illicit trafficking in people,
arms, natural resources, drugs and cultural property,
as well as various money-laundering schemes. The
use of information and communication technologies,
in particular the Internet, by terrorist groups is
also a matter of concern. As it loses physical space,
Da'esh has maintained its presence in virtual space,
particularly in social networks. That allows them not
only to coordinate attacks but also to raise funds and
attract supporters.

Thirdly, the need to address the root causes of
violent extremism leading to terrorism is undoubtedly
an issue that exceeds the remit of the Security Council.
However, we believe it is important to recall, in line
with the concept of sustainable peace, that peace and
security, development and human rights are mutually
reinforcing and vital for the implementation of an
effective and integrated approach to counter-terrorism.
The Secretary-General has reminded us in an important
speech in London that in the face of obscurantism
we must build a new age of enlightenment. In that
connection, we welcome initiatives to combat terrorist
narratives and promote peaceful and inclusive societies
capable of preventing violent extremism. We believe,
based on our own experience in the fight against
terrorism, that greater participation by women and
young people in public life is key to confronting and
preventing this scourge.

