Mr. Sareer (Maldives): My delegation would like
to thank the Chinese presidency of the Security Council
for convening today's open debate on a critical subject.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing on the topic this morning.

Acts of terrorism are an issue that currently
besets the entire world and threatens to shatter the
very foundations of international peace and security.
The alarming increase in the number and lethality of
organized terrorist attacks over the past year makes it
clear that assertive and expeditious measures must be
taken to eliminate this threat before any more innocent
lives are lost. On behalf of the Government and the
people of the Maldives, I would like to extend our
sincere condolences and sympathies to all the countries,
communities and families that have fallen victim to
terrorist attacks recently and in the past. It is with great
concern that we note the incidents of terrorist activity
that now occur with increasing frequency all over the
world. We recognize that some countries may never
recover from the physical, social and economic wounds
that such attacks leave behind.

The Government of the Maldives strongly condemns
and denounces all acts of terrorism committed by any
terrorist group or individual. Whether indiscriminate or
targeted,theyarehorrifyinglymisguidedandcompletely
lacking in basic morality and respect for humankind.
In no way, therefore, should they be associated with
any specific religion, nationality or ethnic group, and
that approach must be strictly observed when it comes
to making policy decisions, formulating preventive
measures and sharing information, both domestically
and internationally. Any failure to do so will not only
isolate and unfairly condemn a large fraction of the
world's population, it will also destroy the unity and
trust that the United Nations was built on. Terrorism is
a common threat to us all and can be eliminated only
through solidarity, mutual trust and understanding.

In that spirit, almost 10 years ago we all came
together to adopt the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. The Strategy, which recognizes
the multilayered complexities behind the root causes
of terrorism, is supplemented by various General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions as well as
initiatives targeting specific aspects of terrorism. The
Maldives welcomes one of the most recent of those
initiatives, the Secretary-General's Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism, which resulted in the
Conference on Preventing Violent Extremism held in
Geneva last week and demonstrates that all countries
are united in denouncing and condemning violent
extremism and terrorism in all forms.

Although terrorist attacks are a global issue, the
preventive solutions to them lie in domestic action
within our countries. We must accept that no country
is immune to the threat and ensure that we have robust
legislation in place to address terrorism's root causes and
prevent its spread - legislation that must be effectively
implemented and diligently enforced. In that regard, in
2015 Maldives enacted a revised and comprehensive
anti-terrorism law and launched a number of initiatives
at the national level to prevent the spread of terrorism
and terrorist attacks. This includes the Government's
establishment of a multi-agency counter-terrorism
centre in February this year.

Recognizing that cutting off the channels for
terrorist financing is one of the most crucial steps
in combatting international terrorism, the Maldives
adopted the Prevention of Money Laundering and
Terrorism Financing Act in 2014. I wish to emphasize
the importance of having comprehensive laws on this
matter in each and every country to ensure that no
State inadvertently falls victim as a channel of terrorist
finances. Both of these national legislations arise from
the landmark resolution number 2178 (2014), which
demonstrates the important role that the Security
Council plays in the interaction between international
and domestic law.

From the recent attacks that we have seen, it is clear
that the methods, strategies and targets for terrorist
attacks have evolved over time. Technology, social
media and other resources are being exploited not only
to plan and conduct these attacks, but for recruitment
and public outreach as well. Therefore, it is important
to ensure that the preventive measures and responses
to these attacks are dynamic as well. We must use our
collective resources, intelligence and power to ensure
that we are always one step ahead until this threat is
eliminated. International and regional networking
for the sharing of information and best practices
would be extremely beneficial in dealing with post-
modern terrorism and technology used to commit acts
of terrorism.

For instance, although the Maldives gives the
highest priority to issues relating to terrorism, it is also
important to recognize that the Maldives is a small and
widely dispersed island country with limited resources
and capacity. We need to recognize that each and every
country has unique challenges and vulnerabilities, and
we need to ensure that all countries have the assistance
they require to prevent acts of terrorism from taking
place on their soil.

In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that we must
continue our battle against terrorism with deepened
resolve and determination. These terrorist attacks are
aimed at bringing down not only buildings and homes,
but also our spirits and hope. As long as we do not allow
that to happen, we shall win thie war.

