Mr. Al-Mikhlafi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to convey to the members of the Security
Council greetings replete with hope and peace.

I would first like to congratulate Ambassador
Aboulatta on his wise stewardship of the work of the
Security Council as President during this month, as
well as to thank you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity
to speak to the Council.

I would like to express my condolences to the
victims of the horrific attacks in Spain.

I am delighted to be able to participate in this
exceptional meeting to discuss the political and
humanitarian situation in Yemen. I would like
to stress that my participation reflects our deep
conviction - that of the Yemeni Government under
the leadership of His Excellency President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour - that the only solution to the
situation in Yemen is a peaceful one.

The humanitarian and health situation in Yemen is
dire and complicated. More than two years have passed
since the bloody coup d'e'tat orchestrated by Houthi
militias in coalition with the previous President. We
need a peaceful solution based on the three terms of
reference endorsed by the international community and
the Council. We are committed to durable peace. We
have never called for war; instead, war was imposed
upon us by that rebel gang, which is rebelling against
international legitimacy. We participated in peace talks
in Geneva and Biel in good faith and with high hopes
of achieving peace in Yemen. Yemen was once called
the happy Arab country. While the coup masters did not
implement the confidence-building measures that we
are agreed upon in Biel, we nevertheless participated in
the talks in Kuwait, where we spent 115 days trying to
achieve peace. We did so because we are a Government
committed to peace that is responsible for its people,
from Saada to Mahra.

However, the coup masters" participation in all
those rounds of talks was only a way for them to push
forward their criminal plot to destroy Yemen and to
attack neighbouring countries - part of the Iranian
plot to destabilize the region and gain time in order
to deploy more militias and lead to more death and
destruction. This is a large-scale plot that aims to
destroy the national State and replace it with a sectarian
State and a militia army.

Yemen has become the epitome of the so-called
triangle of death ofilliteracy, poverty and disease. That
is precisely the sort of triangle we have been suffering
from during the authoritarian rule of imams. Our people
reject this rule. They reject tyranny and dictatorship.
Would Europe or the civilized world today accept
a divine right to rule? Of course not. Similarly, the
Yemeni people reject being ruled by the coup masters,
who claim a divine right to rule.

The Yemeni Government has made considerable
efforts at reconstruction and has improved security
and health services, with the support and assistance of
our brethren in the Arab coalition under the leadership
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates. However, the areas under the control of the
coup masters are still suffering from repression, famine
and the cholera outbreak. That is not attributed to a
lack of food, which is indeed available in the markets.

Instead, it is due to the fact that militias have stopped
paying the salaries of civil servants for more than 10
months now, to pillaging funds from the Central Bank in
Sana'a and to trading in food and humanitaran aid - all
of which enables the coup authors - while millions of
Yemenis are dying of hunger and curable diseases.

The Yemeni Government has always been open
to the suggestions of the Special Envoy, as we believe
in peace and did not choose war. However, the coup
masters reject all those suggestions, thereby rendering
the conflict intractable. We accepted all the suggestions
in Kuwait and unilaterally signed them. But the coup
masters did not accept any suggestions. Again, the
conflict is intractable. And the reason is very simple:
the war has become lucrative for the militias. While
the Yemeni people are suffering from famine, Houthi
warlords are making millions. Why would they then
accept peace and lose all that money, which is tainted
with Yemeni blood?

At this juncture I would like to commend the
presidential statement of 9 August (S/PRST/2017/l4)
on the risk of famine in Yemen, Somalia, South
Sudan and the north-east of Nigeria. The statement
condemned certain parties that are failing to ensure
the uninterrupted and unhindered delivery of food and
humanitarian aid. For more than two and a half years,
the Houthi and Saleh militias have besieged the city
of Taiz and prevented the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and medical supplies. They have also been
shelling the city day and night.

We appreciate international appeals for the opening
of the Sana'a airport. Despite our concerns and the
security threat associated with the operation of the
airport by the rebel militias, we are willing to agree to
the opening ofthe airport - so long as the militias leave
the airport's management to official staff affiliated
with the State before the coup, under the supervision of
the United Nations.

We are determined to mitigate the suffering of the
people in our beloved capital of Sana'a. However, we
are surprised that we hear no appeals or tugging at the
human conscience in the context of the siege on the city
of Taiz. The people of Taiz feel that the international
community is applying double standards. Taiz is being
shelled and destroyed day by day. That beautiful and
peaceful city, which was once even referred to as
the cultural capital and a "City of dreams", has been
reduced to rubble. Its buildings, schools, hospitals,
mosques and historical landmarks have been obliterated
by unrelenting, indiscriminate shelling. The shelling
has not only destroyed infrastructure, but it has also
led to civilian casualties, especially among women and
children, who are killed daily and affected by famine
and disease. The siege has exacerbated the situation.
Currently exiting and returning to the city takes seven
hours, whereas it previously only took 10 minutes.
Since the beginning of the war, 4,164 people have died
and 17,911 have been wounded in the city, most of
whom were civilians, including women and children.
The life for residents of the city of Taiz has become
hell. It used to be a city known for its culture, education
and love of the arts.

This tragedy, which is akin to some of the most
horrific that the world has seen, has not received
sufficient attention from humanitarian organizations
and United Nations agencies. Taiz is appealing to
Council members' conscience, before the law, to stand
by it and lift the siege. Lifting the siege should be a
priority for everyone who believes in the right to life
and the right to restore peace in Yemen, including those
who want to end the suffering of Yemenis. Lifting the
siege in Taiz was among the top the priorities during
the previous rounds of peace consultations. We have
reached a number of agreements concerning the siege,
under the supervision ofthe United Nations, the Special
Envoy and the international community; but none of
them has been implemented. The people of Taiz are
waiting for delegations to visit the blighted city so that
they can fathom the gravity of the suffering. I express
my gratitude and appreciation to all those who have
fulfilled, or tried to, their humanitarian obligations
despite the siege.

We are committed to a peaceful and political
settlement to the crisis in Yemen that will maintain
the security, the independence and the territorial
integrity of Yemen based on the three locally,
regionally and internationally agreed-on terms of
reference - the Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation
Council and its Implementation Mechanism, the
National Dialogue Conference outcomes and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 2216 (2015). We reiterate that the Yemeni
Government is willing to make concessions, however
difficult, to restore just and sustainable peace, which
the great Yemeni people deserve. We have therefore
accepted all the proposals put forward by the Special
Envoy, to which he referred today in his briefing. We
reiterate that we support those proposals and that we
are open to any other proposals or ideas.
But, in turn, the Security Council and the
international community must send a clear, strong
and decisive message to the party that rejects those
proposals. It should bring pressure to bear on the
coup masters so that they accept the proposals that
were endorsed by the Council in its latest presidential
statement and participate in negotiations in good faith
and with an open mind, just as we are committed to
participate in negotiations in good faith and with an
open mind. In that regard, I would like to quote the
preamble of the Constitution of UNESCO:

"That since wars begin in the minds of men, it
is in the minds of men that the defences of peace
must be constructed".

I would like to clarify a number of points.

First, the Yemeni Government reiterates that it
will continue to support the efforts of Special Envoy
Ould Cheikh Ahmed. We support his suggestions and
proposals to the President of Yemen, which include
provisions for the withdrawal of militias from the
port and the governorate of Hudaydah based on last
year's peace consultations in Kuwait, as well as the
establishment of a technical committee of economic
and financial experts to help the Government establish
an appropriate and urgently needed mechanism to
pay civil servants' salaries and deal with revenues
generated within the regions controlled by the coup
masters, in order to provide the income needed to cover
such expenses. Unfortunately, however, the Houthi-
Saleh coalition has rejected those proposals.

Second, those gangs would have never been able to
continue rejecting those proposals if they had not been
receiving financial, logistical and military support
from Iran. Thanks to that support and smuggled Iranian
weapons, the militias are now turning into a serious
threat to Yemenis and neighbouring countries, in
particular the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. That country
is being targeted by ballistic missiles, which poses a
serious threat to navigation and international shipping
routes in the Red Sea, including attacks on ships and
mining in the reigon.

Third, we will continue our cooperation with the
international community to combat that scourge, to
which Yemen has one of the first victims. Our latest
success in combating Al-Qaida and liberating the city
of A1 Mukalla from that group in April 2016, with the
support of Arab coalition forces, was a demonstration
of our commitment to combat all terrorist and radical
groups, not only militarily but also culturally and
intellectually. That includes putting an end to the coup
that is fuelling terrorism and usurping the role of the
Government in order to plunge the country into chaos,
violence, murder and destruction. They are preparing
fertile ground for terrorism to flourish.

Fourth, the number of our prisoners and detainees
in Houthi prisons is increasing daily. The international
community has not raised its voice with regard to the
violation of their human rights. Their suffering is
augmented by the fact that their families and children
have no knowledge of the fate of their missing loved
ones - fathers, brothers and bread winners. The
conscience of the international community continues to
manifest itselfin deafening silence.

Fifth, any attempt by a minority or sect to exclude
others and alone control power and wealth in Yemen,
which is exactly what the militias and coup masters
are trying to achieve, will eventuallly fail. Peace will
prevail through the renunciation of violence and the
exclusion of others, through sharing power and wealth,
and through coexistence, civil liberties and political
engagement.

Sixth, leveraging human suffering is a crime.
Finding serioius, genuine and comprehensive solutions
and being open to all proposals and ideas are the
courageous steps our people expect.

Seventh, the coup masters can achieve peace with
all segments of Yemeni society if they adhere to the
terms of reference for peace and what they require.
They should not be rewarded for their crimes.

The militias have turned a blind eye to all the
options for peace and all the concessions and sacrifices
that President Mansour has made in an effort to avoid
this foolish war, in which the first and last to lose are
the great Yemeni people. We will remain committed to
a peaceful solution based on a just and comprehensive
peace according to the terms of reference. We will
not tolerate blackmail or rewarding the militias for
violating State sovereignty.

The Yemeni Government, under President Mansour,
is making great efforts to address the dire humanitarian
situation, especially with regard to the cholera epidemic
and the situation in the areas under the control of the

coup masters. Our responsibility extends to the whole
country. We are coordinating our work with the relevant
international and humanitarian organizations so as
to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian and medical
assistance. According to a statement by the Ministry of
Health of Yemen issued on 15 August, the number of
suspected cases of cholera stands at 508,680. Another
1,970 ofpeople have died from the disease. On the other
hand, those who were successfully treated account for
99 per cent of the suspected cases. That reflects the
success of our common efforts and the effectiveness
of treatment despite the difficult circumstances on the
ground.

However, the situation remains dire and we need
more assistance and support. We are deeply grateful to
the donor countries and organizations that funded the
2017 Yemen humanitarian response plan, but we appeal
to the international community to prioritize this issue
and provide assistance. To date, we have received only
44 per cent of the funding for the humanitarian response
plan, although we are already in the second half of the
year. We therefore call on all States, especially those
that pledged funds to Yemen at the Geneva conference,
to fulfil their commitments.

I cannot fail to express the thanks and appreciation
of the Government of Yemen to Secretary-General
Antenio Guterres, donor countries, the King Salman
Center for Relief and Humanitarian AID, UNICEF, the
World Health Organization (WHO), the World Food
Programme, and aid organizations in neighbouring
countries, including the United Arab Emirates and
Kuwait, for their continuous suport and assistance to
address the humanitarian situation and the cholera
outbreak in Yemen. We have enjoyed the generous
support of the King Salman Center, in the form of 550
tons ofmedicines and fluids, and signed agreements with
WHO and UNICEF to cover the costs of several projects
to prevent the spread of cholera - worth $66.7 million,
in addition to $8.2 million to fund WHO's activities
related to treating cholera cases. This assistance has
contributed to the success of our efforts. We in the
Yemeni Government are fully committed - morally,
humanly and by our Constitution - to fulfilling our
obligations towards our country, our nation and our
people. We are working to provide health services to
all Yemenis without exception or discrimination, and
we are working to overcome all difficulties that stand
in our way.
In conclusion, I am confident that settling the
situation in Yemen genuinely and sustainably lies
in addressing the root causes of the crisis by ending
the causes for war and coup against the State and by
achieving national political consensus. We need to
restore legitimacy and State institutions and normalize
life through a peace process that saves the country from
being hijacked by Tehran's militias and its affiliates in
the region. We need to pressure the Houthi-Saleh to
return to peace talks and engage sincerely and with
genuine willingness to make concessions for the sake
of Yemen. The unity of the Council will increase the
chances of reaching a peaceful solution in Yemen.
We need to revert to the terms of reference and the
resolutions of the Security Council and respect for
international law. We appreciate the efforts of the
Council, the Ambassadors of the group of 18 and the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy to achieve
security and stability in Yemen. We reiterate our
deepest gratitude to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the
United Arab Emirates and all the countries of the Arab
coalition for restoring legitimacy in Yemen. We are
committed to peace. We ask the Council to remain at
our side in order to save Yemen and its people.

