Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Truth be
told, I had prepared a positive, optimistic statement;
that was the spirit that guided me when I was coming to
visit the Council. However, before I read my statement,
I have to say that I find myself forced to comment on
the first part of Mr. Mulet's briefing, on the situation in
Darfur during the reported period.

He said that the situation was very dangerous; that
is an inaccurate description. The deterioration in the
situation and the number of individuals displaced as
a result of tribal violence was presented as a situation
that had arisen as a result of the violence. But there was
an armed group that crossed State borders into another
State. Rather than calling the attention of the Security
Council to this fact or referring to an attack on the very
sovereignty of a State, Mr. Mulet told us only about
the consequences of this incident, to which we had to
respond.

That is why the violence took place. I recognize
that there is tribal violence in Darfur. It has been
happening for a long time as a result of the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons around Darfur. It is a
long story, with the first cases of tribal violence taking
place, according to this report and Mr. Mulet's remarks,
in 1952, while we were still under British colonial rule.
That tribal violence led to the displacement ofpersons at

the time, but the Government intervened and contained
the situation.

However, we should not confuse tribal violence and
its impact with what we are referring to here today. We
should not depict it as an open conflict between rebel
groups and the Sudanese Government. This situation is
being contained, even if there remain a few pockets of
instability in some areas. It is well known that there are
active groups.

Mr. Mulet also referred to the Operation Decisive
Summer, which he characterized as destabilizing
security. This again is the wrong way of depicting the
situation. In December 2013 and January and February
2014, activity undertaken by the remnants of rebel
groups in Darfur, including seven offensives, meant
that we were simply forced to respond to the situation
through the Rapid Support Forces, as part of Operation
Decisive Summer, which we launched solely as a
response to the attacks of the armed groups. In other
words, the situation is being wrongly depicted here. We
acted to impose stability on Darfur. Operation Decisive
Summer did not destabilize the region - quite the
opposite.

And when Mr. Mulet refers to the obstacles
that have hampered the work of the Mission - the
Secretary-General states that during the reporting
period 595 visas were approved while only 7 visas had
been suspended - I wonder here, quite openly, what
sort of obstacles the Assistant Secretary-General is
referring to.

The African Union/United Nations Hybrid
operation in Darfur (UNAMID) is an African Union
operation and one we hold dear. We certainly do not
want to stem or hamper any of its actions. We wish
to cooperate with it and that is all I wanted to clarify
here and now, in order to ensure that the Council fully
understands what is actually taking place, the reasons
why we have deployed the Operation Decisive Summer.
It is an operation that should be praised because it has
contributed to stability in Darfur.

I return now to my statement, and of course I would
like to start, Mr. President, by congratulating you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council this
month. We are confident that your presidency of the
Council, Sir, will provide a different dimension to the
way in which the issue of Darfur is tackled, given that
you are fraternal country, linked to the Sudan through
a long history of relations. We would like to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for his briefing. It is the
first part of the briefing that we disagree with, as I said
previously.

We thank Mr. Abiodun Oluremi Bashua, Deputy
Joint Special Representative for UNAMID. We
are honoured by his presence during the Council's
deliberations, all the more so since these deliberations
coincide with consultations under way on the draft
resolution on the extension of the UNAMID mandate.

I turn to the Council at a time when the Sudan finds
itself on the eve of what stands to be a very promising
phase, one replete with hope. President Al-Bashir won
the elections in February. He garnered an unprecedented
number of votes and was re-elected for another term of
office, which is mentioned in paragraph 38 ofthe report
of the Secretary-General. The report also referred to
the elections that took place in Darfur, which unfolded
in a peaceful manner without any security-related
incidents.

I am sure that the Council followed the inaugural
address of President Al-Bashir before the National
Assembly in which he referred to an amnesty and called
upon all groups bearing arms to engage in the path
of reason and become involved in the comprehensive
national peace dialogue. Moved by the spirit, the new
Government of the Sudan expects more decisive action to
resume the national dialogue without excluding anyone.
We also hope that the Security Council - and the
international community more broadly speaking - will
assume their responsibilities with respect to those who
have rejected the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
and, in keeping with the address made by the President
of the Republic, we intend to bolster our cooperation
with the United Nations and with all of its bodies and
agencies in order to complete the reconstruction and
stabilization process in Darfur.

What should be avoided is wrongful depictions
of the reality in the region, because that undermines
the spirit of cooperation, specifically with the United
Nations entities present in Darfur, with a view to
finalizing the process of rebuilding and reconstructing
the area, including resuming the mediation processes
and fostering reconciliation between the tribes to put
an end to the senseless tribal violence in Darfur and
ensure that efforts are focused on development and on
the rehabilitation of the area.

Turning now to UNAMID's exit strategy, we expect
that the draft resolution that will extend the mandate of
the operation will include a number of clear paragraphs
on that issue. We would remind the Council that
paragraph 7 of resolution 2173 (2014) is quite clear and
direct in its request that the Secretary-General review
the operations of the Mission and its achievements to
implement the strategic priorities in cooperation with
the African Union and all stakeholders, including, of
course, the United Nations.

We are cooperating fully with the working group.
This is not a new request. The Council adopted this
strategy in resolution 2173 (2014), in which it renewed
the mandate and included a number of proposals on
exit strategies and ways to transfer responsibility
from UNAMID to the Sudan country team, as a great
deal of progress has been made in implementing the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. The pockets of
remaining armed groups that are attempting from time
to time to carry out military activities, to hamper and
impede the remaining provisions ofthe Doha Document
and to put an end the exit strategy leads us to ask the
following question: Why are those groups continuing to
carry out such actions? Furthermore, other components
of those armed groups are preventing the overall return
of displaced persons in the five federal states of Darfur.
What the armed groups want is to have the refugees
remain in the camps so that they have a pretext to
continue to bear arms.

As we said in previous statements, in no way
have we referred to an immediate exit strategy for
UNAMID. We have not done so. Rather, we said that
we are currently implementing a gradual strategy in
cooperation with the African Union and the United
Nations that involves immediately reducing the military
component of UNAMID and other components in areas
where security has been restored and which are stable.
I am referring now to East Darfur and three areas in
Central Darfur.

Those drawdown operations are continuing gradually
in other regions, based on benchmarks that we have
all agreed to. That is why I would like to state in this
Chamber that our institutions stand ready to undertake
the operations necessary to restore security, and we
call on the United Nations to strengthen the capacity
of its country team to ensure that it is in a position to
take on the operations that have been transferred from
UNAMID, in accordance with resolution 2173 (2014).

In assessing the security situation in Darfur, we

should distinguish between the tribal conflicts that

have always occurred in the region and other conflicts.

There are no more open armed conflicts between the
rebel groups and the Government, with the exception
of a few pockets of resistance carrying out very limited
sabotage operations. It is incorrect to speak of open
conflict with such groups except, as I just mentioned,
with the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM),
which crossed our borders on 26 April with the aim of
carrying out that kind of destructive activity. Our Rapid
Support Forces responded at the time, but apart from
that there have been no open conflicts with the other
armed groups. As for tribal violence, however, that has
always existed in Darfur, as I have said, and we have all
seen the efforts the Government of the Sudan has made
to contain that violence and deal with its underlying
causes. The Government has been able to use local
tribal chiefs to achieve a number of reconciliations
between tribes, and those efforts continue.

The issue of displaced persons should be addressed
within the framework of development efforts, and to
that end the Government of the Sudan needs support
through the lifting of unfair unilateral sanctions, and
calls on donors to continue their assistance efforts by
implementing the Doha Document. The tribal conflicts
result simply from social causes and development
issues, and the best way to deal with them would be
to lift the sanctions and forgive our debt, which would
help us to resolve the conflicts, which arise over issues
such as water rights and pasturage, which are prevalent
throughout Africa, including the Sahel region.

That is why we reject paragraphs 18 and 19 of the
report, concerning the incidents in the Kass region. The
report distorts the truth, and we have already spoken of
the incident, which was a twofold rather than a single
one. The first was on 23 April, when five members ofa
raiding group seized a UNAMID vehicle near the Kass
water point; the second involved an operation pursuing
the group that had seized the vehicle, in which various
groups fired on the inhabitants of Zaghawa, even
though they had raised white flags, killing two innocent
civilians and injuring several more. The vehicle was
recovered by the Sudanese armed groups following a
clash with those who had seized it, and it was restored
to UNAMID.

We also have reservations about paragraph 28
of the report, which contains incorrect information
regarding the evacuation of an Ethiopian peacekeeper
who was injured in the Mukhjar area. We once again
offer our condolences to our brother Government of
Ethiopia and to the family of the deceased. We treated
him as if he was one of our own Sudanese soldiers. It
appears that when he fell from an observation tower,
his head hit a metal container. His injuries were very
bad, but he was evacuated by airlift thanks to military
intelligence and approval. Unfortunately, this occurred
at the same time as the operation in which the Rapid
Support Forces clashed with JEM. as it crossed our
borders in the Nakhara area, which is not far from the
Mukhjar region.

Again, we offer our condolences and reiterate our
readiness to cooperate with the United Nations and
its entities in Darfur, including UNAMID. We want
to facilitate the work of that very African operation.
The Sudan is an African country and an integral part
of Africa, and no one here in the Council can say that
we are trying to hinder UNAMID's operations or put
obstacles in its way. On the contrary, we greatly value the
security and safety of the Mission and all its members,
and, needless to say, we support the facilitation of its
efforts. That is why last week, when the Rapid Support
Forces recovered five seized vehicles and returned them
to UNAMID, we clearly demonstrated our willingness
to cooperate.

At the same time, we should be implementing the
gradual and flexible exit strategy that was agreed to by
all sides. We would like to send the message to those
who have found themselves in the camps that they
should begin to prepare to return to their homes, take
up their former daily activities and lead normal lives
again. The mere launching of the exit strategy will send
a message to the rebel leaders who have rejected the
Doha Document to set aside their doubts and hesitation,
listen to the voice of reason and become involved again
in the process ofpeace and reconstruction, especially in
the light of the amnesty declaration and the assurances
given by the President of our Republic in his most recent
address to Parliament. We expect a technical decision
on the renewal of the Mission's mandate, particularly
the paragraphs concerning the exit strategy from the
regions that we have agreed on within the framework of
the working group. Those include the states of Eastern
Darfur, as well as three regions of Um Kadada, Tulus
and Malha in Central Darfur.

I would again like to touch on the paragraphs in the
report that state that the Government of the Sudan has
used banned weapons in some areas. That information
has not been confirmed and should therefore not
be presented to the Council as such. It is not true. It
cannot refer to the Rapid Support Forces, which are
flexible, lightly armed troops who do not need heavy
weaponry, as everyone knows, which is why we reject
those allegations. I reiterate that we are at a stage where
we can be far more open than we may have been in the
past, especially in the light of the amnesty assurances
our President has announced for the leaders of the
groups that are still armed. We are on the verge of a
phase in which we will need the Council's assistance
and collaboration. We will spare no effort to cooperate
with the United Nations and its entities, and we ask
the Council to send the right message to those armed
groups that are still reluctant to become involved in the
political process, in order to encourage them to join in
the peace process.

