Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): Joining previous
speakers, I wish to offer Kazakhstan's deepest
condolences to the Government and the people of Iran
for the horrific terrorist attack that took place in Tehran
on 7 June. We extend our sympathies to the bereaved
families of the victims and wish a speedy recovery to
the injured.

I thank the Bolivian presidency for convening
today's briefing, and Secretary-General Guterres for
his comprehensive report (S/2017/467) on the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and their associates. I also wish to express appreciation
to Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his insightful
remarks. My delegation would like to make the
following observations and recommendations.

Terrorism today has become one of the main
threats to international peace and security. While the
military pressure in Syria and Iraq may have somewhat
reduced the strength and numbers of militants in
centralized locations and caused their financial
revenues to diminish, ISIL/Da'esh and Al-Qaida
have intensified their terrorist activities across the
world. The most recent terrorist acts have been as
widespread in Europe - Saint Petersburg, Stockholm,
London - as in Africa, with the attack in Alexandria,
in Asia, with the attacks in Kabul, Manila and Tehran,
and in Oceania, with the attack in Melbourne. They
have all caused unspeakable human suffering and
resulted in appallingly high losses of life.

Kazakhstan condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. We reiterate that all acts of
terrorism - wherever, whenever and by whomsoever
committed - are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless
of their motivation. We therefore call for rigorous
concerted action to control and prevent such brutal acts.
We call for the breaking up of terrorist networks and
the bringing to justice of the perpetrators, organizers,
financiers and sponsors of such violence.

We are seeing members of terrorist groups
relocating to the different parts of the world, including
to the Sahel region, South-East Asia and Afghanistan.
We are also seeing closer interaction and cooperation
among terrorist groups with different ideological
platforms. The recent tragic events show that, at an
increasing rate, foreign terrorist fighters are going from
hot spots to other States or returning to their homeland.
More challenging are the perpetrators who, without
ever leaving their home countries, have become self-
radicalized as "lone wolves" or have made contact with
terrorist facilitators and have copied scenarios they
have found on the Internet.
We fully support Secretary-General Guterres' vision
of giving priority to a preventive agenda and taking
comprehensive measures at international, regional and
national levels to prevent the dissemination of radical
ideology and thereby effectively counter terrorism. We
are convinced that the establishment of a single United
Nations structure for countering terrorism will give a
new impetus for a systematic approach and increase the
effectiveness of United Nations activities in this area.

In his policy address to the United Nations entitled
"Kazakhstan's Concept and Vision on Sustaining Global
Partnerships for a Secure, Just and Prosperous World",
dated 10 January 2017, the President ofKazakhstan, His
Excellency Mr. Nursultan A. Nazarbayev, underlined
that countering terrorism is one of the priority axes
of Kazakhstan's membership in the Security Council.
He called for unity among Member States and the
establishment of a global anti-terrorist coalition under
the auspices of the United Nations.

Soon after the adoption of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in 2006, Central
Asia was the first region to develop ajoint plan of action
for its implementation, which was a good model for
cooperation and one that could be applied in other parts
of the world. We have successfully completed phases I
and II of our plan of action and are going to launch phase
III at the High-level Dialogue on the Implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
for Central Asia, to be held on 13 June in Ashgabat.
We are honoured to welcome the presence of Secretary-
General Guterres at that event. As of today, Kazakhstan
has donated $300,000 to support activities ofthe United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Centre in Central
Asia, which is more than 10 per cent of the funding
for the project. We are therefore both a sponsor of the
Strategy and the leading donor country in the region.

It is crucial to mobilize the United Nations
and all stakeholders, including intergovernmental
organizations and non-governmental organizations,
as well as international, regional and private banks, in
consolidating, integrating and exchanging information
on early-warning signals, financial intelligence,
movements of terrorists and the financing of terrorism.
Equally important is taking further comprehensive
measures to shut down the channels of illegal
transportation of hydrocarbons and the smuggling of
artefacts and other valuables from Syria and Iraq. It is
also crucially important to fully implement Security
Council sanctions resolutions and regimes.
To that end, inter-State cooperation is most
essential. We appreciate the noble efforts of the United
Nations system in that regard. Along with monitoring
progress on resolution 2253 (2015), it is equally
important to monitor progress in the implementation
of related resolutions, namely, resolution 2341 (2017),
on protecting critical infrastructure from terrorist
attacks, resolution 2347 (2017), on the destruction and
trafficking of cultural heritage by terrorist groups in
situations of armed conflicts, and resolution 2354
(2017), on countering extremist narratives.

We need to deter the increasing number of
sympathizers of terrorism, who are lured by false
propaganda utilizing sophisticated digital technologies
and social media. The challenge is not only to achieve a
true balance between the rights and duties ofcitizens, but
to halt such influences. The use of military action alone
will be ineffective. Through interpersonal interactions
and online communication, new revised and inspiring
messages must be presented to the younger generation.
That calls for working with parliamentarians, religious
leaders, educators, the private sector, civil society
and the media. Much work has to be done in families,
schools, communities and prisons, the latter being
a fertile environment for radicalization. Partnering
with deradicalized extremists, who after conversion
can become powerful allies and agents of change, will
improve public diplomacy.

Kazakhstan is fully committed to being a most
engaged partner in the multilateral action to combat
terrorism through the effective implementation of
resolution 2253 (2015).

