Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The acceding
countries, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia, the associated countries, Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey and the European Fair Trade
Association (EFTA) countries, members of the
European Economic Area, Iceland and Norway, align
themselves with this statement.
Justice and the rule of law are at the core of the
peaceful settlement of disputes and of harmonious
coexistence both at the national and international level.
The failure of national systems and the unfolding of
international crises are often consequences of the
collapse of justice, infringements on the rule of law and
the perpetration of heinous crimes and violations of
human rights.

The EU, which is a community built upon
mutually agreed-upon principles of law, remains
convinced that an essential element to sustained
stability in a post-conflict environment is the
strengthening and consolidation of local rule-of-law
capacity.

During the last decade the nature of armed
conflicts has radically changed as the number of
internal conflicts has increased rapidly. In this context
the United Nations has often been called upon to
intervene in the reconstruction of national societies
disrupted by atrocious conflicts.

This in turn has implied a major change, both in
the nature and in the scope of United Nations post-
conflict peace operations. The Security Council has
placed increasing emphasis on the need to restore
justice and the rule of law at the local level when this is
not achievable through intrinsic processes in the short
run.

As a consequence, the United Nations is
increasingly being involved in post-conflict
reconciliation and transitional justice. The results
achieved so far are encouraging in Kosovo, Cambodia,
Timor-Leste, Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Afghanistan. Liberia will be the next
important test case, as the Secretary-General reminded
us last week. The EU is fully aware that each of these
situations has its own characteristics which,
accordingly, must be addressed. Nevertheless, further
efforts must be made to draw lessons from current
experiences in order to assess the effectiveness of
United Nations actions in this area and to identify
guidelines for the future.

The international community is sometimes called
upon to intervene in order to put an end to impunity for
the most heinous international crimes. In such
situations, the establishment of ad hoc international
criminal tribunals or the setting up of national courts
with varying degrees of international assistance has
made an important contribution to reconciliation in
emerging, post-conflict societies.

The EU also strongly believes that the
International Criminal Court provides a powerful,
permanent instrument of deterrence against such
crimes. The EU will remain firmly committed to its
effective functioning. The Court does not aim at
replacing domestic jurisdictions. It may assume
responsibility as a last resort and only when a State is
unable or unwilling to do so. The Court is not just a
judicial institution, designed to prevent and put an end
to the impunity of the perpetrators of serious crimes, it
is also an essential means of promoting respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
thus contributing to freedom, security, justice and the
rule of law, as well as to the preservation of peace and
strengthening of international security.

The EU supports the concrete proposal made by
several of its member States at the ministerial level
meeting of the Security Council on 24 September. It
considers that rule-of-law elements should be included,
as appropriate, in mission mandates. To that end, we
support the strengthening of United Nations capacities
in the rule of law, the enhancing of system-wide
coordination within and outside the United Nations and
the improving of consultations with Member States to
mobilize their available resources and expertise.

Furthermore, the European Union (EU) supports
the formation of legal assessment teams comprised of
civilian police and other rule-of-law elements, as
appropriate, to help in the planning process for new
missions. These teams should participate in
reconnaissance missions in the field to evaluate the
needs of the host country and create an environment in
which the application of and adherence to the rule of
law can be achieved. Specific attention should be
devoted, inter alia, to promoting the establishment of
legislative transparency, reliable civilian police
structures, an independent judiciary, the right to a fair
trial and a penitentiary system. We welcome the offer
by the Secretary-General to provide a report to promote
further consideration of these matters, and we look
forward to assisting him in that endeavour.

Accepting and promoting this new approach
entails the assumption of new responsibilities on the
part of the United Nations. The EU believes that in
accomplishing these tasks, the United Nations should
continue to explore all possible forms of cooperation
with international organizations and institutions that
can provide experience and expertise. In that regard,
the EU seizes this opportunity to reaffirm its readiness
to actively contribute to restoring the rule of law at the
local level in situations where the Security Council
considers that support for such processes by
international organizations might be needed.

Since 2001, the Council of Europe has
consistently recognized transitional justice and the rule
of law as one priority area in the EU's crisis
management operations and has set concrete targets for
developing the relevant capacities. The joint
declaration on United Nations-EU cooperation in the
area of civilian and military crisis management, signed
last week in New York by the United Nations
Secretary-General and the Italian Presidency of the EU,
is intended as an additional tool available to the United
Nations to achieve its targets. It will contribute
deepening cooperation between the United Nations and
the EU and providing it with reliable and sustainable
mechanisms. The EU confirms its commitment to
ensure an early and concrete follow-up to the joint
declaration.

The EU remains convinced that the success of
any mission to establish the rule of law largely depends
on the capacity and readiness of local actors to be fully
involved from the beginning in reaching the objectives.
As a principle, local law should be applied as widely as
possible. Prompt building of capacities and subsequent
hand-over to local ownership are essential.

The EU therefore fully subscribes to the
Secretary-General's statement last week before the
Security Council: "Local actors must be involved from
the start We should, wherever possible, guide rather
than direct, and reinforce rather than replace. The aim
must be to leave behind strong local institutions when
we depart." (S/PV4833)

