Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I would like to thank Ms. Bertini for her
briefing, which impressed us a great deal. We heard not
merely a report, but a very touching story of success.
As the front-line agency in the United Nations system
with the mandate to eliminate hunger, the World Food
Programme (WFP) has, for many years, been doing its
utmost to provide emergency food aid to those States
and people that are suffering, and has helped to
alleviate humanitarian crises. Whenever there is a food
crisis caused by a natural or man-made disaster,
whether in Africa, Latin America or Asia, the staff of
the WFP - including Ms. Bertini - are always
involved. Their timely assistance has not only saved
many lives, but lent strong support to efforts aimed at
conflict resolution in the countries and regions
concerned. It is precisely for that reason that the work
of the Programme has won the widespread praise and
commendation ofthe international community.

The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan has
been an issue of common concern to the international
community for a long time. WFP has overcome various
difficulties and delivered a great deal of food aid and
other assistance, thereby helping to alleviate the
humanitarian situation there.

In the light ofthe changed situation on the ground
after the establishment of the Afghan Interim
Administration, the WFP has adjusted its mode of
operation by shifting the focus of its work from relief
to rehabilitation. In February this year, the WFP
announced a $285 million assistance package for
Afghanistan to provide much-needed food. But the
provision of food aid will also, inter alia, help to
stabilize the civil service, create job opportunities for
women, provide education for children and assist in the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons to
their homes.

It goes without saying that, with such a strategic
adjustment, WFP will not only save Afghanistan from
a humanitarian catastrophe, but contribute to the
rebuilding of that country and to lasting peace there.
We appreciate and support that adjustment.

In conclusion, we would like to pay tribute to the
staff of WFP, who have been working very hard in
Afghanistan, as well as in other hot spots throughout
the world. I pay tribute to Ms. Bertini for her
outstanding, decade-long leadership of the agency. I
believe that her achievement and her leadership cannot
be praised too highly, as she and WFP have, indeed,
done a great deal to spare people from suffering. It is
our hope that her example of selflessness and
dedication will continue to prevail in WFP after she
leaves her post.

I would like to conclude by saying once again
how grateful we are to her. She will be sorely missed
by the international community. I wish her great
success in her new career.

