Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I would
like to thank Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, for the
work he has done to promote peace and security in the
Great Lakes region during his first several months in
that role.

Conflict has plagued the Great Lakes for decades,
but six years following the signing ofthe Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, we have seen
some momentum towards solutions to the drivers of
that conflict. The United States is encouraged by that
momentum. We recognize the positive developments
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo following the
historic Democratic elections that were held this past
December. Specifically, we applaud the formation of a
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
that embraces new leaders, whom we hope will pave the
way for positive reforms while largely excluding those
who have proven themselves corrupt and unfit.

We also recognize the President's efforts to
proactively address the long-held grievances of the
Congolese people, improve conditions for foreign
investment and strengthen relationships with
neighbouring countries. Amidst those developments,
we must underscore that the burdens of implementing
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework fall to
all signatory parties, not just the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We are therefore heartened that the
Secretary-General's report (S/2019/783) details multiple
efforts of neighbouring countries to engage on issues of
mutual concern - regional commerce, illicit flows of
goods that contribute to corruption and the presence of
armed groups.

We commend the initiative that countries of the
region have shown in working toward lasting peace and
stronger economic ties. With that said, the United States
is deeply concerned by several negative trends outlined
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/783).
Insecurity continues to plague the east ofthe Democratic
Republic of the Congo, armed groups still benefit from
the mineral trade, especially in gold, and the Allied
Democratic Forces continue indiscriminate attacks on
civilians, peacekeepers and the Congolese military.

Political solutions, security sector reform and the
demobilization of armed groups into civilian life will
be critical for future stability. For our part, the United
States will continue to identify opportunities to engage
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on how to attain greater security, peace and
prosperity for the Congolese people.

In Burundi, we remain concerned about continued
restrictions on freedom of assembly and expression,
as well as attacks on opposition political parties. We
remind the Government of Burundi that peaceful, free,
fair and transparent elections in 2020 are the basis for
normalization of relations with the United States and
other members of the international community.

Next week, the Security Council will discuss its
need to assume a stronger posture towards preventative
diplomacy and conflict prevention. We are all keenly
aware that elections in this region have been a flash point
for considerable violence in the past. So, with Burundi's
2020 presidential elections fast approaching, and with
recent trends in the country pointing in a concerning
direction, the United States believes that the people
of Burundi need the Council's attention. If we fail to
engage, their lives and the lives of millions of others
throughout that region could be adversely impacted.

As previous meetings on this subject have been
largely pessimistic, the United States is pleased that
the Secretary-General's latest report suggests an
improving situation in the Great Lakes region - yet
we worry that the gains of the last six months will
be lost if the concerns I have expressed today are
not comprehensively addressed. I remind my fellow
Council members that just yesterday we were inspired
by young African leaders who challenged us to do our
part in bringing peace and security to the continent (see S/PV.8629). Therefore, in conclusion, I want to reiterate
their challenge to us and encourage this organ to engage
proactively and preventively as we consider the specific
challenges facing the Great Lakes region.

