Mr. Thoresson (Sweden): I have the honour today
to speak on behalf of the Nordic countries - Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.

First I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Feltman and Ambassador Antonio of the African Union
for their comprehensive briefings.

The Nordic countries stand firmly behind the
United Nations fight against terrorism and organized
criminal activities. We welcome today's discussion
and the focus given by the Security Council to these
pressing issues.

The connection between terrorism and other forms
ofcriminal activity is a serious challenge to international
security. This was first recognized 13 years ago in
resolution 1373 (2001), but it is, unfortunately, still
true today. No country is immune to the effects of this
connection, whether it relates to terrorist acts, poverty
or the illicit trade in arms or drugs.

Terrorism and organized crime generate violence
against civilians. Violence is a universal challenge
to poverty eradication and sustainable development.
There are 1.5 billion people living in countries affected
by conflict, violence and fragility. Those countries
are furthest away from achieving the Millennium
Development Goals. It is estimated that by 2030, more
than 80 per cent of world poverty will be concentrated
in conflict-affected and fragile States. That implies that
violence is likely to be one of the most pressing poverty
issues ahead. Combating terrorism and organized crime
is crucial in order to eradicate poverty. The Nordic
countries are large donors of both humanitarian and
development aid, and we are advocating the inclusion
of a goal on peaceful, inclusive societies and freedom
from violence in the new post-2015 global development
agenda.

The trafficking of weapons fuels armed conflict
and armed violence, and organized crime or terrorist
groups in many cases provide the networks needed to
move this deadly commodity. The entry into force of
the Arms Trade Treaty later this month will add an
important new tool to combat this phenomenon.

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant's illicit
trade in historical, religious and cultural artifacts has
generated considerable income and must be countered.
The Nordic countries are fully behind UNESCO's
efforts in combating this problem.

Trafficking in persons is one of the most heinous
and lucrative criminal activities globally. The funds
generated are often used to fund other forms of
organized crime, such as the smuggling of weapons or
drugs. Around 70 per cent of all victims of trafficking
are women and girls, who are trafficked primarily for
sexual exploitation.

The narrative of terrorism is that of hate, intolerance
and rejection of human rights, in particular women's
human rights. Countering this narrative and creating
resilience is essential. The Nordic countries believe that
our strongest counter-narrative is a firm commitment
to democracy, human rights and equality. We consider
these values as end goals in themselves as well as key
drivers of economic and social development. They are
cornerstones of peaceful and inclusive societies where
no one should feel marginalized or be attracted to
violent extremism or organized crime.

Our response to the challenges that Ijust outlined
must be interconnected and mutually reinforcing.
Multilateral cooperation is essential. Local action is
needed on a global scale. The challenge lies in enabling
efficient coordination among local, regional and
international efforts. Therefore, the Nordic countries
welcome today's debate and wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and the Republic of Chad for your timely
initiative.

The Nordic countries place great value on the
efforts of the United Nations in assisting States in
strengthening resilience against both terrorism and
organized criminal activities. We are strong supporters
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and other efforts to enhance States' capacities
to counter terrorism within the rule of law, including the
protection of and full respect for human rights. We have
been active partners in and long-standing contributors
to the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), including its technical assistance in
the field. We support the efforts made by the United
Nations to explore additional ways to counter terrorism
and organized crime.

The Nordic countries recognize that cross-border
crime has a strategic impact on terrorist groups through
the weakening of State authority and State capacity.
Cross- border crime also strengthens terrorist groups
by increasing their access to illicit markets. To counter
those threats, the Council needs to combine different
types of peace operations, counter-terrorism bodies,
panels of experts and the other tools available, as well
as reach out to relevant institutions such as the UNODC
and INTERPOL. We also welcome further consideration
of a strategic review of the tools available to reduce the
strategic space that cross-border crime affords terrorist
groups, as proposed in the concept note (S/2014/869, annex).

