Mr. Spatafora (Italy): In taking the floor for the
first time this month in a public meeting, Sir, I
sincerely wish you all success as you discharge your
responsibilities as President of the Security Council. I
also thank your predecessor, Ambassador Jones Parry,
for the wisdom and effectiveness with which he
conducted the work of the Council during the month of
April.

I wish also to express my most sincere
appreciation and gratitude to Ambassador Verbeke for
his extremely able leadership during the Security
Council mission. Nor can I fail to express our most
sincere appreciation to the Secretariat: in a mission that
was very complex logistically, its members provided us
with precious assistance. Here, I thank Ms. Norma
Chan of the Council secretariat.

As has been said by others, our mission to the
region was indeed a fruitful and extremely interesting
opportunity to obtain first-hand information on the
ground. The report (S/2007/256) drafted by
Ambassador Verbeke accurately depicts the meetings
and the visits that took place during our trip.

After eight years of administration through the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), the situation in Kosovo remains
complex. Progress has been achieved, but more
remains to be done, particularly in standards
implementation. Our challenge is that of achieving
progress without slowing down the status process,
which needs to be brought to a conclusion.

Indeed, the "overall security situation in Kosovo
remains calm but tense", as the report rightly states
(para. 55). We must be aware that in this context it is
of paramount importance to establish a momentum that
will bring about future status. Special Envoy
Ahtisaari's comprehensive proposal provides us with
an accurate and detailed set of principles, rules,
regulations and procedures that should allow the new
status framework to operate.

Within that framework, the European Union will
be involved in managing particularly critical aspects of
Kosovo's administration, such as the police and the
justice system. We must ensure that the European
Union - together with NATO, which must be
confirmed as a vital element of the international
security setup in Kosovo, and with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe - will be able to
carry out its tasks effectively, with the utmost legal and
international backing.

The European Union is committed to establishing
a large-scale operation in Kosovo - indeed, as others
have recalled, the largest it has ever undertaken,
entailing the deployment of highly qualified personnel
and large financial expenditure. The operation has been
planned this way because stability in the Balkans is
viewed as a strategic issue directly affecting European
security. I might add that this is a particularly relevant
issue for Italy, considering our close links as a country
neighbouring the region. We therefore remain of the
conviction that the long-term solution to all pending
Balkan issues lies in the European perspective of all
the countries of the region. Kosovo's future status must
give impetus to that perspective, not only for Kosovo
itself but also for Serbia and the region as a whole.

We must now endeavour to reach our objective of
finalizing our work here in New York. At the same
time, the dialogue among the parties must remain
intense so that progress can be made in reaching a
mutually satisfactory result. Our attention and our
work must focus on drafting a resolution, which should
achieve the widest possible consensus. I am convinced
that success is possible. We must approach this
problem with maximum goodwill and make an effort to
bridge the existing gaps. I look forward to working
together with all other Security Council members with
a view to reaching the necessary consensus for a
manageable and long-lasting solution for Kosovo.

