Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation supported and voted in favour of resolution
2320 (2016), for we are aware of how important it is to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU). Such cooperation is one of the
cornerstones of the maintenance of international peace
and security, which is further based on the pre-eminent
role of the African Union to sow the seeds for peace
and security in Africa through the peaceful settlement
of conflicts, as well as by providing financing for
peace and security. My country, which is very proud
to be a founding member of the African Union, fully
subscribes to the need to strengthen cooperation
between our two organizations - the United Nations
and the AU 4 in all areas and aspects, particularly in
international peace and security. Such a partnership is
necessary if we are to achieve our commonly set goals
in this area, commensurate with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.

Resolution 2320 (2016) addresses issues pertaining
to United Nations financing of African Union peace
support operations, particularly the Peace Fund.
Resolution 2320 (2016) also refers to the AU resolution
to take responsibility for its share of the financing
of peace support operations, part of the concept of
African ownership of these peace operations, which we
support and would like to underscore the importance
of. Discussions between member States of the African
Union are ongoing in the framework of the relevant AU
mechanisms in order to further expand upon how we
will define the means to ensure the shared financing
decided upon by the African Union Assembly of Heads
of State and Government.

Along the same lines, we shall take actions that
are tangible and can be properly implemented to open
the door to such financing. On this particular point,
my delegation calls for a swift conclusion of AU
discussions so that we are in a position to define and
establish the measures that need to be adopted by the
United Nations in response, so that support that can be
given to peacekeeping and peace support operations.
We hope that this will lead to predictable, flexible and
sustainable financing and support AU peace operations.

