Mr. Maqungo (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to thank Mr. Fausto Pocar, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), and Mr. Dennis Byron, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), for their statements introducing the work of
the International Tribunals. We also wish to thank
Mr. Hassan Jallow, Prosecutor of the ICTR. As this is
the last time we will have this opportunity, we also
wish to express the deepest appreciation and gratitude
of the South African Government to Ms. Carla Del
Ponte, the outgoing Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, for her
sterling service to humanity and for being the
unwavering symbol of the unrelenting force of
international justice. We wish her success in her future
endeavours.

My delegation commends both Tribunals for the
steps they are taking to ensure that they achieve their
completion strategies. In particular, we welcome the
measures taken to increase the efficiency of the
Tribunals in processing trials by holding a high number
of trials simultaneously, making amendments to the
rules of procedure for the purpose of expediting
proceedings and making optimum use of ad litem
judges.

The completion strategies are time-bound and
therefore, notwithstanding the steps the Tribunals are
taking to increase efficiency, there are cases that, due
to the passage of time and, possibly, an inability to
effect arrests, would have to be referred to national
jurisdictions. However, there seems to be an existing
View that there are some cases that, due to their nature,
merit the re-establishment of a Tribunal to deal with
them, even if arrests were made after the courts had
closed. We are studying those issues, as we are
currently yet to be convinced as to whether that would
be absolutely necessary.

We view referrals to national jurisdictions as
central to achieving the completion strategies set in
resolution 1534 (2004), including for any other cases
that may arise due to future arrests of individuals still
at large after the Tribunals have closed. We therefore
commend the various countries that have accepted
cases from the Tribunals. We are, however, particularly
keen to see the situation countries where the crimes
were committed assume the responsibility of accepting
referrals from the Tribunals. We therefore welcome any
efforts to provide technical assistance to the situation
countries in order for them to reform their justice and
prison systems to better absorb the cases from the
Tribunals.

We have heard, with regard to the issue of
acquitted persons, that some of them are still under the
protection of the Rwanda Tribunal in Arusha. Our
expectation is that individuals who are acquitted have
the right to return to their country of nationality. The
issue of whether those countries of nationality might
not be willing to receive those individuals will
therefore be of interest to us. It will also be of interest
to us whether those individuals themselves have any
legitimate fears with regard to persecution, in which
instance their cases will have to be dealt with in a
manner consistent with the relevant laws pertaining to
refugees.

In both Tribunals there are indicted persons still
at large, and some of them are particularly high-level
accused or are alleged to have committed crimes that
ideally should be dealt with at the international level.
For the ICTR, the Prosecutor has mentioned Fe'licien
Kabuga and we have heard at length of the interaction
between the Office of the Prosecutor and the
Government of Kenya regarding that issue. We
encourage this interaction.

As to the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, the fugitives to be mentioned are
Radovan KaradZic' and Ratko Mladic'. We have heard at
length from Madam Carla Del Ponte on this issue. She
has indicated her disappointment with regard to this
problem. It is our hope that these fugitives will
ultimately be brought to justice, and we call for full
cooperation with the Tribunals to arrest and surrender
them for trial.

The fact that the Tribunals are approaching
completion of their task means that we must ensure
that they continue to receive sufficient resources to
enable them to complete their work and their mandate.
In this light, we shall take up the request of which
Judge Byron spoke regarding authorizing the
Secretary-General to take all reasonable measures to
ensure that the Rwanda Tribunal is able to retain its
staff for its Completion Strategy. We must, as States,
continue to extend cooperation with respect to the
travel of witnesses and the arrest and transfer of the
accused, and we should look into the issue of
resettlement of individuals who are acquitted by the
Tribunal.

Furthermore, we need to address the issue of the
legacy that will be left by these Tribunals and ensure
that we preserve their achievements.

