Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Thank
you very much, Sir, for organizing this meeting, which
I believe to be particularly useful. We welcome the
High Commissioner for Refugees, Antonio Guterres,
and would like to start by congratulating him on his
briefing to us today, above all on the integrated vision
he gave us of the work of the Office that he is heading
in such a complex world and his leadership in fulfilling
its mandate.

We believe it is of fundamental importance for
this sort of meeting to take place periodically, as my
colleague from Austria has already stated, because that
would enable us to pay more attention to the aspect of
refugees and internally displaced persons in our
consideration of many conflict situations.

As the High Commissioner stated, there is a need
not only to react to situations that arise around the
world, but also to take a preventative approach in a
timely manner. It is alarming that the decreasing trend
in the number of refugees has not continued but that it
has been reversed, with the number of refugees now

reaching more than 15 million. I believe that the vision
of a future preventative approach that has been
suggested is very interesting, in particular in response
to the impact of climate change, natural disasters and,
of course, the effects of conflicts. I also believe that it
will be very important to bear in mind that we are in
the midst of a global crisis, in which food, energy and
economic crises have combined to have a very severe
impact on the internal political stability of vulnerable
countries. Accompanied by the effects of climate
change, I believe that these conditions may trigger
growing flows of economic refugees or migrants. I
believe it is very important to bear that in mind. In this
context, I should also like to recall that Mexico and
Japan have been working jointly within the United
Nations to promote the consideration of human
security from a preventative perspective, emphasizing
a global approach.

Mexico is deeply concerned by the continuation
of forced displacement, a phenomenon of many
nuances, in which affected populations, in particular
vulnerable populations, continue to come under attack.
I think that, of all the conflicts mentioned, there is not
one in which this is not the case. In this regard, I agree
on the need for robust mandates and clear guidelines
for the protection of refugees. I believe that it is very
important to contribute to this integrated vision and to
remain focused on the attacks suffered by humanitarian
workers and local staff, in particular in their own
countries, as several previous speakers have said.

Mexico has developed a very constructive
collaborative relationship with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
which goes back to the time of the Central American
crisis in the 1980s, when thousands of Guatemalan
refugees sought refuge in our country. Given these
more than 25 years of experience, we believe it very
important to strike a balance between efforts to
accommodate displaced persons and peacekeeping
activities.

The High Commissioner spoke of three
significant challenges. I think the three challenges he
mentioned require an increasingly integrated response
from the United Nations system. UNHCR does not
exist in a world of its own, isolated from the activities
of other United Nations entities. We believe that the
vision of UNHCR has to be present in the Council's
analysis and consideration of specific problems.
Addressing the problem of Gaza without talking about
political issues makes no sense. This question should
not provoke an existential crisis, as we know that these
are very complicated crises in which many different
elements must be addressed. In this regard, I would
like to reassure the Council that, in considering the
conflicts on the Council's agenda, Mexico will bear in
mind the question of refugees and the necessity of
cooperation with UNHCR.

Finally, I would like to reiterate that we believe
that exchanges between the Security Council and
UNHCR should be more frequent, taking place at least
twice a year.

