Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): At the outset, allow me,
on behalf of the Government of Oman, to welcome you,
Sir, to the Council. We are particularly pleased to see you
presiding over this formal meeting of the Security Council,
and we express our appreciation to your country for the
very able manner in which its delegation has steered the
work of the Security Council so far this month under its
able Ambassador, Mr. Kovanda,

On a sad note, I should like to extend, through you,
Mr. President, our heartfelt condolences to the
representative of the United States of America on the death
of innocent people caused by a tragic, horrific crime in
Oklahoma City.

While members of the Security Council welcome the
decision taken by the Belgrade authorities and consider it
a preliminary step in the right direction that will pave the
way for a new relationship between the international
community and that country, on the other hand they
stressed, during the Council's deliberations preceding the
adoption of resolution 943 (1994), the need for the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to take further practical steps to
implement fully all relevant Security Council resolutions
aimed at easing the sanctions against the Bosnian Serbs.
These steps include the following: first, recognition of the
independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and States in the
region; secondly, an end to all military and political
practices of aggression that might place any doubt on the
legitimacy of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
endanger its peace and territorial integrity; thirdly, mutual
recognition of the international borders of all States in the
region; fourthly, the promotion of peaceful coexistence
between all the States and peoples of the region in
accordance with the principles and purposes of the United
Nations Charter; and, fifthly, cooperation with the United
Nations and the International Tribunal for the prosecution
of persons responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law committed in the territory of the Former
Yugoslavia.

Those were the demands of the international
community and the members of the Security Council.
However, seven months have elapsed since we suspended
the international sanctions imposed on the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and to
this very day none of these demands have been met by
Belgrade. On the contrary, we are witnessing a loose
regime of border closure and certain incidents like the
helicopter flights which compel us to question the wisdom
behind the suspension of the sanctions, in the light of the
partial implementation of the relevant resolutions. My
delegation therefore calls on the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to completely carry
out its obligations, in full.

After a thorough examination of the reports of the
Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia, we
would like to commend the work done and the efforts
exerted in this regard, and we look forward to the day
when the Council receives a satisfactory report from the
Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee that will state
right up front that the authorities in the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia are cooperating fully with the Mission
towards an effective and sound implementation of the
border closure. This, in my Government's View, will help
the Security Council to take another look at the
comprehensive regime of sanctions imposed on that
country, with a View to having an indefinite suspension of
these sanctions.

In conclusion, and based on our understanding of the
matter at hand, my delegation, once again, will vote in
favour of a draft resolution on the suspension of the
sanctions, and hopes to see in the coming days more
positive steps taken by the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).

