Mrs. Itoua Apoyolo (Congo) (spoke in French):
Madam President, my delegation is very grateful to
you for having included on the agenda of the Security
Council an issue of such great concern as the
humanitarian situation in Africa. Indeed, this issue is of
concern not only to Africans but to the international
community as a whole, given that the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation is in large part related to the
outbreak of conflicts, combined with the consequences
of natural disasters, which have occurred in many
countries.

My delegation would like also to pay tribute to
Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his responsiveness and his dedication
to his very difficult and hazardous task. I should like
once again to assure him of the support and
cooperation of our delegation.

On the basis of Mr. Egeland's report, prepared
following his visit to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and to Uganda, we have very mixed feelings.
We are happy to hear of the return of many refugees in
general and of the long-overdue signing of a cessation
of hostilities agreement between the Government of
Uganda and the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). On
that score, we are extremely pleased. However, we

cannot remain indifferent to the fact that insecurity and
impunity continue to afflict millions of people, who,
thus deprived, must rely on humanitarian assistance.

It is true that the signing of the agreement
between the Ugandan Government and the LRA is a
promising sign for the peoples of the north, who have
suffered all sorts of atrocities during the last two
decades of war, as well as for stability in the Great
Lakes region as a whole. It is intolerable that women
and girls continue to be raped and that child soldiers
continue to be recruited.

Despite of the progress made in humanitarian
terms in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
Uganda, enormous challenges remain, because not all
factors of instability have been eliminated. For that
reason, my delegation believes that there is a need to
ensure the implementation of the cessation of
hostilities agreement and the peace process that is
under way, which represents an excellent opportunity
to put an end to 20 years of war in northern Uganda.

There is a need also to accelerate the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
and to put an end to impunity with regard to the
perpetrators of serious violations of human rights,
through existing mechanisms. It is vital also to call on
all parties, wherever necessary, to recognize the
neutrality of humanitarian personnel and to ensure their
security. It is also imperative to encourage the
international community to continue its efforts on
behalf of humanitarian assistance in Africa by
mobilizing greater resources so as to address these
enormous challenges.

Finally, I should like to reiterate once again my
delegation's commitment to the implementation of
resolution 1625 (2005) relating to the prevention and
settlement of conflicts, without which international
peace and security will continue to be threatened and
humanitarian problems, which we deplore, will remain
acute.

