Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
supports the convening, on the initiative of the United
States, of this Security Council summit on terrorism
and the adoption today of resolution 2178 (2014). The
resolution, which reflects the common will of the
international community, should be implemented
effectively and in a comprehensive and balanced
manner.

Terrorists defy the fundamental human rights and
challenge the foundations of human civilization. As
such, they are humankind's common enemy. Al-Qaida
launched, 13 years ago, on 11 September, attacks in
this very city. That incident shocked the entire world
and claimed over 3,000 innocent lives. Since the end
of 2013, terrorists have instigated, orchestrated and
carried out numerous violent attacks inside China and
caused numerous casualties. Today, a new terrorist
incident took place. We wish to express our condolences
to France for the French victim and show our solidarity
with France.

At the moment, we are witnessing a resurgence of
terrorism that deserves serious international attention
and vigilance. Wars breed anger. Killings yield hatred.
Conflicts in the Middle East attract terrorists and
extremists into the region from all over the world,
like a magnet, to join in the fighting. Once they return
home, they will pose a serious threat to the security and
stability ofmany countries, regions and indeed the world
as a whole. In this era of rising interconnectedness,
terrorist financing has become easier and more covert.
International corridors have taken shape for terrorists
and extremists to move around across the world.

In the meantime, social media have become a
battlefield for terrorist and extremist groups to spread
their ideology, a tool to plot terrorist attacks and a
platform to recruit terrorists. With the progress of
information technologies, some young people are
susceptible to extremist ideas and demagogy by terrorist
forces. We must stay alert, for terrorist organizations
and extremist ideologies are competing with us for our
future generations. It is indeed a battle bearing on the
future of our world.

With terrorism raising its ugly head once again, we
must adhere to the practices that have proven effective
and abide by international law and norms governing
international relations. First, we must ensure sound
coordination. The United Nations and the Security
Council have to play the leading role in a global war
on terrorism. That is the only way to maintain unity,
achieve effective coordination and take concerted
actions.

Secondly, we must adopt a multipronged approach.
The global war on terrorism should be fought in an
integrated manner, adopting measures in the political,
security, economic, financial, intelligence and
ideological fields, inter alia, with a view to addressing
both the symptoms and root causes of terrorism,
especially removing its root causes and breeding
grounds. Military actions must comply with the Charter
of the United Nations and relevant Security Council
resolutions.

Thirdly, we must follow a consistent standard.
Any act of terrorism in whatever form, whenever and
wherever it is committed, and whomever or whatever it
is targeted against, must be fought. No double standards
should be adopted. Still less should terrorism be
identified with any particular ethnic group or religion.
Faced with the new trends and new developments in
terrorism, we must come up with new thinking and
new steps in response. In that regard, China wishes to
propose the following.

First, we should step up information-gathering and
sharing. Full scope should be given to the advantages
of the United Nations and relevant international
institutions on such matters as establishing a counter-
terrorism database and information exchange platform
so as to step up sharing of information resources and
intelligence analysis.

Secondly, we should strengthen counter-terrorism
on the Internet. Resolute measures should be taken to
stop the use of social media to spread extremist ideas,
especially the release of audio and video materials of
violence and terror. Internet companies and operators
should exercise self-discipline. To that end, it is
imperative to formulate as soon as possible a code of
conduct for the global cyberindustry. China will host
a symposium on countering cyberterrorism within the
framework of the Global Counterterrorism Forum in
Beijing later this year.

Thirdly, we must block the channels of terrorist
movement and financing of terrorism. All countries,
particularly those adjacent to ongoing conflicts, ought
to fulfil international obligations for effective border
control. We must enhance cooperation in financial
regulation, crack down on such illegal activities as
underground banking, and block terrorist financing.

Fourthly, we should promote deradicalization.
While taking actions in accordance with law to
crack down on and outlaw venues and personnel that
are engaged in, advocating and spreading extremist
ideology, we should protect normal religious activities,
promote public awareness and give greater play to the
role of local communities, thus injecting more positive
energy into society. The United Nations should sum
up useful experiences without delay and promote best
practices from around the world.

The countries of the Middle East are on the front
line of the war on terrorism. It is extremely important
for those countries to work in unity and coordination
and put aside their differences. China firmly supports
the countries of the region in their efforts to counter
terrorism. We support Iraq in enhancing its counter-
terrorism capacity-building and we stand ready to
strengthen our cooperation with the various parties,
in such areas as intelligence sharing and personnel
training. In this context, we will provide ¥6O million of
emergency humanitarian assistance to Iraq, including
to its Kurdish region.

Confronted with terrorist threats, all countries
have found their destinies bound together. We have
no choice but to work together to address the common
threat. China has always resolutely opposed all forms of
terrorism and will continue to stand firm and participate
in international cooperation against terrorism. In the
face of justice and unity, terrorism has no place to hide
and it will be thoroughly defeated.

