Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Wejoin our colleagues
in congratulating your delegation, Mr. President, on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month, and would like to assure you of our full
support. We also commend the delegation of the
Netherlands for its excellent work in leading us during
the month of March. I thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing and recent visit
to Haiti.

At the outset, we would like to congratulate the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) and its leadership on its smooth
transition and its launch of a number of important
projects and initiatives in close cooperation with the
Government and civil society of Haiti. Kazakhstan
also commends the efforts that President Moise and
his Government have made over the past year to
promote stability, security, economic development and
social change in their country. We especially welcome
their initiative to begin a political dialogue with all
the key national sectors aimed at determining and
defining negotiated plans for the country's sustainable
development over the next 25 years. It is also worthy of
note that a review process will be launched to assess
Haiti's development aid cooperation mechanism with
the international community, with a view to shifting
from external assistance to external investment.

While we recognize the significant progress that
has been made in improving the political and security
environments, some key issues in a number of priority
areashaveyettobeaddressed,includingtheestablishment
ofa Permanent Electoral Council, improvements in the
justice sector, prison overcrowding, prolonged pretrial
detentions and the overall humanitarian situation. In
that regard, Kazakhstan fully supports the Secretary-
General's call for MINUJUSTH and its partners to
establish a joint programme of work and undertake
joint actions addressing such major issues as reforming
the justice system, enhancing human rights, reforming
the police and prison systems and ensuring the rule of
law in Haiti. Promoting political engagement will also
be crucial, in view of the forthcoming elections.

With a view to consolidating stability and
security, MINUJUSTH should maintain its focus on
building the capacity of the Haitian National Police
and undertaking serious efforts to combat impunity,
ensuring the judiciary's independence and establishing
a transparent and efficient corrections system. We
urge the Government of Haiti to make sure that the
Haitian National Police's strategic development plan
is implemented efficiently and in a timely manner,
with the help of the international community in raising
professional training and experience.

We should now focus on ensuring that the
benchmarked exit strategy is formulated and
implemented in a coordinated manner. It will be
essential to maintain an ongoing dialogue with all
stakeholders, particularly the Haitian Government,
in order to achieve our common goals and a smooth
transition to a non-peacekeeping United Nations
presence in Haiti. In this context, it will be critical for
MINUJUSTH and the United Nations country team to
work in coordination with the United Nations system as
a whole, ensuring that the Organization delivers with
greater efficiency, transparency and accountability as
one United Nations, breaking down silos to achieve
optimal results for sustainable development in Haiti.

The effective involvement of the international
community and regional partners should also have
a positive impact on our joint efforts. Haiti's current
chairship of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
presents a great opportunity for mobilizing
international partnerships to address the most pressing
problems facing the country and the region. In the
past three years Kazakhstan has supported two joint
development projects with CARICOM. We also
provided humanitarian aid after last year's devastating
hurricanes, in addition to supporting Haiti bilaterally.

While we recognize that the fight against cholera
has made significant gains, the issue should remain a
high priority for the entire United Nations community.
In that regard, we welcomed Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed and Special Envoy Josette
Sheeran's visit to co-chair a high-level cholera meeting
with the Haitian Government aimed at achieving zero
transmissions of the disease in Haiti.

In conclusion, we would like to express our full
support for the Secretary-General's recommendation
to extend MINUJUSTH's mandate. Kazakhstan will
continue to firmly support Haiti's efforts to achieve
peace, progress and prosperity.

