Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to express my sincere gratitude to you,
Mr. OlofSkoog, as Ambassador ofSweden and President
of the Security Council, for giving us this opportunity
to address the Council. This is an opportune occasion
for us to express our sincere congratulations to your
delegation and the brotherly delegations of Ethiopia,
Kazakhstan, Italy and Bolivia at the start of the journey
in the Security Council to promote international peace
and security.

It would be remiss of me not to express my sincere
congratulations and good wishes to the Secretary-
General, His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres. We
believe that his competency will enrich the work of
the United Nations. The Yemeni Government and its
delegation in New York are ready to work hand in hand
with the Secretary-General to find a solution to the
Yemeni crisis that would end the coup d'etat against the
authority and legitimate institutions in Yemen, as well
as the aggressive interference by Iran in the affairs of
Yemen and of the wider region.

Today marks two years since the start of the unjust
war launched by Houthi militias that formed an alliance
with the former President against our people and their
Republic. It is clear that that plan is falling apart
because of the determination of our people and their
noble uprising throughout Yemen to eradicate political
factions intent on wiping out Yemen's democratic
federal State project - the vision of His Excellency
President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, backed by
the Yemeni people and its social and political powers.

Since the start of the Houthi coup against our
State and its legitimate institutions, in September
2014, we in the Yemeni Government have remained
resolutely determined to fully reject bullying and
the use of weapons and force. Instead, we must rely
on dialogue and accept the outcome of the National
Dialogue Conference, which our people also accepted.
In the light of the ongoing war of annihilation, which
was launched by Iran for the sake of its expansionist
policies, we reaffirm our position that a solution
must be based on the terms of reference governing a
peaceful political transition in Yemen - terms agreed
upon and supported by Yemen, the United Nations, the
region and the international community - as well as a
commitment to the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative,
the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015).

When it was affirmed that it was difficult to
implement that resolution, we underscored that, in sum,
as perceived by our people and other friendly countries
that yearn for stability in Yemen and full adherence
to international law, that resolution means an end
to the coup d'etat and a restoration of constitutional
legitimacy. Coup leaders must abide by those terms and
accept the presidency of President Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi Mansour - the sponsor of the peaceful political
transition in Yemen. Therefore, any other initiative or
idea that is not in line with those parameters will be
unacceptable and irrational because it will not lead to
peace; it will result only in superficial solutions and the
crisis in Yemen will continue.

The Government of Yemen reiterates its
commitment to peace 4 a trajectory that was started
in Geneva, Biel and Kuwait. We will always be
committed to sustainable peace based on those three
terms of reference. That is why we refused the Kerry
ceasefire plan and called upon the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen to provide a new plan that
is informed by the outcome of the Kuwait meetings and
try to build upon it. For we will not agree to setting an
international precedent by legitimizing the coup d'etat
or sustaining it in any way, shape or form.

During a meeting between the President and
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed in the interim
capital, Aden, on 16 January, the President stressed
that the Government was willing to start work on the
De-Escalation and Coordination Committee, which can
hold meetings in Dhahran Al-Janoub, Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, in line with the Kuwaiti agreement, by which
coup leaders refuse to abide. We, on the other hand,
are committed to the agreement because we believe that
no cessation of hostilities can remain in effect without
activating all local committees.

Accordingly, last December, the Government
accepted the proposal put forward by the Special Envoy
to convene a special workshop on the De-Escalation and
Coordination Committee, which was scheduled to be
held in the Jordanian capital. However, to date the coup
leaders have refused to participate in the workshop.
Mr. Ahmed stressed that the priority for reaching
peace now is to start the work of the De-Escalation
and Coordination Committee. The President has
expressed his willingness to announce a cessation of
hostilities - for the eighth time - if conditions are
conducive to supervising such.

Copious information has been provided on the
humanitarian suffering in regions under the control of
the coup leaders. Unfortunately, there is no talk about
the carnage in Taiz. We would like to point out that
a policy of collective punishment has been carried out
against our people over the past two years in every area
under the control of the coup leaders.

The coup leaders have also been plundering the
State's resources. They have taken all of the money in
the Central Bank and have engaged in, and profited
from, unlawful trading activity. The looted billions
from the Central Bank. That compelled the Yemeni
Government to relocate the Central Bank to the interim
capital, Aden, after the State declared bankruptcy.

Over the past two months, the Government has
tried to generate the necessary liquidity to pay the
salaries of civil servants and military personnel.
Despite the escalation of punishment by the coup
leaders, who threatened any party that cooperated with
the Government in facilitating the payment of salaries,
yesterday we were successful in transferring all Sana'a
salaries to the Al-Kuraimi Islamic Microfinance Bank.
We have provided the Office ofthe Special Envoy copies
of all the pertinent reports, agreements and checks.

On 22 January, the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs sent a letter to the Special
Envoy requesting his urgent personal intervention to
put pressure on the Houthis and Mr. Saleh to ensure that
salaries reached those in need without any obstacles
or interference. It is a humanitarian matter and not a
political issue. We, in turn, call upon the Security
Council to bring pressure to bear on coup leaders in
order to facilitate the transfer of salaries to persons in
areas under their control so that we do not add to the
complexity of the humanitarian situation.

I would like to express my Government's concern
about ongoing Houthi militia exploitation of the
port at Hudeydah, which they control, as well as
other facilities for the provision of fuel, health-care
supplies, medication and food. Unfortunately, they are
manipulating access to such commodities for blackmail
and to subvert trade in order to make enormous ill-
gained profits at the expense of the dire humanitarian
situation faced by the people of Yemen.
The upheaval created by those responsible for
the coup d'etat has reached unprecedented levels, in
total disregard for human dignity. They are recruiting
women and children. Official reports indicate that
the militias have recruited 10,000 children and thrust
them into the line of fire. That is to be expected from
people who have indiscriminately planted in our
territory thousands of anti-personnel mineswhich are
internationally prohibited. Our people will pay a steep
price for such actions after the end of this criminal war.

The continued punishment of Taiz and the
closure of its airport by those responsible for the coup
should also be a cause of concern to the international
community. Thousands of our brave Yemeni people,
including journalists, students, activists, academics
and politicians, continue to suffer under the yoke of
imprisonment and detention by the militias, which
have turned Yemen into a huge jail.

By the end of 2016, the number of detainees had
reached 4,414, with 204 of them children. I have
personally sent letters to the former and current
Secretaries-General, the President of the Security
Council, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, the members of the Panel of Experts on Yemen
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), and
the Office of United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, appealing to their moral conscience to
intervene and pressure the militias to end the suffering of
those detained and set them free without preconditions
or delay. We must allow their relatives to contact them
and learn of their fate. To date, unfortunately, that has
not been achieved. I told the Special Envoy that we,
as the legitimate authorities in the liberated areas, hold
no detainees at all. If there are any, we stand ready to
discuss their release. Why should we punish people by
depriving them of their freedom simply because they
refused to accept the coup d'etat?

As we all know, the Council will meet tomorrow
to discuss the final report (see S/2016/73) submitted
by the Panel of Experts on Yemen. I met with the
members of the Panel yesterday, and they stressed that
their investigations proved that the Houthis and Saleh
had no interest in peaceful solutions; they rely on
violence as an instrument to achieve their ends. Former
President Ali Abdullah Saleh still controls the billions
of dollars that he stole and uses them to destabilize the
country and finance the terrorist cells in Yemen. The
Government has invited the Panel of Experts to all the
areas that it controls. We will work for the success of
the sanctions committee's efforts. I would like to thank
Ambassador Koro Bessho, Permanent Representative
of Japan, for his wise leadership of the Panel.

Before concluding, I would like to underscore the
victories that the Yemeni people and armed forces have
achieved, as well as their courageous resistance in
defeating the militias on all fronts, with the support of
the alliance, to restore legitimacy in Yemen, under the
leadership of Saudi Arabia and with the assistance of
the United Arab Emirates. The latest such victory was
the liberation of the port of Mokha and all areas south
of the Red Sea. We have accordingly stood steadfast
against all threats posed to international navigation.

As everyone knows, those responsible for the coup
have, at the instigation of Iran and by using Iranian-
made missiles, targeted the United Arab Emirates ship
Swift and a Spanish vessel transporting liquid natural
gas, as well as United States naval ships. Our armed
forces achieved further victories in Nihm, near Sana'a.
We have been forced to close the Sana'a International
Airport to protect civilians and passengers. Given the
current military clashes, the Government can in no
measure ensure aerial navigation safety. People can,
however, reach all parts of Yemen and use the airports
in Aden, Seiyun and Riyan, where normal operations
have been saliently illustrated by the resumption of
departing and arriving commercial flights.

In conclusion, I cannot but stress that the
Government firmly believes in the serious work, in
cooperation with Mr. Antonio Guterres, to revive the
effective partnership required to restore Yemen. We
invite the Secretary-General to visit the interim capital
so that he can see the developments on the ground for
himself. We call on all United Nations agencies to return
to the interim capital of Aden now that we can provide
the necessary facilities, including on the security level.

We would also like to renew our full support to
the efforts made by Mr. Ahmed, the Security Council
and the Ambassadors of the group of 18 to bring
about peace and stability in Yemen. Furthermore,
we reiterate our thanks and deep appreciation to the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates,
the Arab Republic of Egypt and all the Arab coalition
countries that are working diligently towards restoring
legitimacy in Yemen. We call upon all members of
the Security Council to continue their unified efforts
aimed at confronting and settling the crisis that began
in 2011. Thanks to this unified stand, much has been
achieved in Yemen. We call upon the Council to
take a firm position against those responsible for the
coup and pressure them to comply with the relevant
international resolutions.
