The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations. After consultations among members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council takes note of the
report to the Security Council dated 23 July 2002
of the Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) (S/2002/938), of the letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 26 July
2002 from the President of the ICTR
(S/2002/847), of the letter to the President of the
Security Council dated 26 July 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of Rwanda, enclosing
the reply of the Rwandan Government to the
Prosecutor's report (8/2002/842), of the letter to
the President of the Security Council dated 8
August 2002 from the President of the ICTR,
enclosing a Note of the ICTR on the reply of the
Rwandan Government (S/2002/923), and of the
letter to the President of the Security Council
dated 17 September 2002 from the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda, enclosing a letter from
the Association of Survivors of Rwandan
genocide (S/2002/1043).

"The Security Council also takes note of the
letter to the President of the Security Council
dated 23 October 2002 from the President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
the

(ICTY) and of the letter to the President of the
Security Council dated 25 October 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of Yugoslavia to the
United Nations, enclosing a Non-Paper.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the ICTR and ICTY (the Tribunals), impartial
and independent bodies, which contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security
and to bringing justice and reconciliation to the
people of the countries concerned.

"The Security Council recalls the mandatory
obligation of all States, including the
Governments of Rwanda and Yugoslavia, under
resolutions 955 (1994) and 827 (1993) and the
Statutes of the Tribunals, to cooperate fully with
the Tribunals and their organs, including the duty
to comply with the requests by the Tribunals for
the arrest or detention of indictees and their
surrender or transfer to the Tribunals, to make
witnesses available to the Tribunals, and to assist
with the Tribunals' ongoing investigations.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance it attaches to the full cooperation by
all States, particularly those directly concerned,
with the Tribunals.

"The Security Council also stresses the
importance of constructive dialogue between the
Tribunals and the Governments concerned to
resolve any outstanding issues affecting the work
of the Tribunals that arise in the course of their
cooperation but insists that such dialogue or lack
of dialogue must not be used by States as an
excuse for failure to discharge their obligations to
cooperate fully with the Tribunals as required by
Security Council resolutions and the Statutes of
the Tribunals.

"The Security Council will remain seized of
the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2002/39.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.
