Mr. Aldahhak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to apologize for taking the floor
again. My country's delegation would like to respond to
the statement made by the delegation of Turkey. I also
want to underscore the content of the statement delivered
at midday today by the Permanent Representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic. In particular, I want to stress
the role of the Turkish regime in supporting terrorism
and as a threat to international and regional peace and
security. It is something that everyone is aware of.

Numerous delegations have addressed the subject
of terrorism and described that phenomenon as the
greatest danger and threat to international peace and
security. It is also a threat to the stability and sovereignty
of States. In that regard, we want to stress the fact that
the various terrorist groups, such as Da'esh, Al-Nusra
Front, as well as the various foreign terrorist fighters,
would not have been able to pose such a threat had they
and other groups linked to Al-Qaida not received such
significant support from many United Nations Member
States, in particular the Government of Turkey.

Various United Nations reports have mentioned
the presence of over 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters,
who have come from over 60 per cent of Member
States - in other words 150 Member States - to the
territory of my country, Syria, and who basically have
been able to carry out criminal terrorist acts. None of
that could have happened in the Syrian territory without
the multidimensional support provided by the Turkish
regime. That support, which Turkey has also granted
to numerous terrorist organizations that are active in
the region of the Middle East and in North Africa, as
well as in Libya, Tunisia, Egypt and other countries, is
something everybody knows about.

The Turkish regime has not stopped there. It has
pursued its illegal relations with Da'esh, in particular
when it comes to commerce and the oil trade and the
pillaging of various antiquities and other assets as
well. Recently there was direct and repeated military
intervention by that regime when it saw that its terrorist
friends had failed in their mission. That is how the
Turkish agenda is developing in the region and how
Erdogan is seeking to see the recreate the Ottoman
Sultanate in order to once again hold the title of
Ottoman Sultan.

In conclusion, my country's delegation reiterates
its demand that the Security Council reject those acts
of aggression by Turkey and put an end to the atrocities
committed by Turkey, which run counter to all the
values of the Charter of the United Nations. Those acts
are a threat to international peace and security.

