Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): I am pleased to
address the Security Council for the first time in my
capacity as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes Region. I take this opportunity
to thank the Council for its support for my mandate
and for the opportunity to present the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/697) on the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region. I am delighted to do so with my friend and
colleague Martin Kobler, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). I want to express the full
support that he and his colleagues have extended to me
since my appointment. I have no doubt that our strong
and close collaboration will continue and will serve to
further strengthen our efforts to ensure the effective
implementation of the Framework agreement.

Upon taking office, I began to visit the countries of
region to listen and interact with senior officials of the
signatory countries, the guarantors of the Framework
agreement and international partners. Leaders of the
signatory countries say they are determined to end the
cycle of violence and lead the region along the path of
sustainable development and stability. They consider
the Framework agreement to be a useful tool that will
speed up and support that transformation. However, for
the region definitively to emerge from the vicious cycle
of violence and instability and move resolutely towards
that destiny of unity and prosperity, it will have to at
long last rid itself of the problems that keep it bound to
its painful past by perpetuating suspicion and mistrust
between countries and peoples. It is therefore evident
that, as a matter of priority, there is a need to address
sensitive security issues inherited from the troubled
history of the region and to patiently restore trust

among the countries. At the first same time, we should
also support efforts and initiatives under way aimed
at harnessing resources and the existing momentum
to ensure integration and speedy socioeconomic
transformation in the region.

(spoke in English)

I am delivering these remarks a month after the
Regional Oversight Mechanism endorsed the first
progress report of the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework. The findings
and recommendations are clear. Overall, there is a need
to accelerate progress, particularly with respect to the
complete neutralization of negative forces operating
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including the Forces democratiques de libe'ration
du Rwanda (FDLR) and the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF), as well as to implement the Nairobi Declarations
on the process regarding the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23).

I am pleased to note that the signatories and
guarantors have taken steps to address those issues. As
regards the FDLR, I would like to recall the conclusions
and recommendations of the recent joint ministerial
meeting of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region (ICGLR) and the Southern African
Development Community on the mid-term review of
the FDLR's voluntary disarmament by the agreed-on
deadline of2 January 2015. I call on all the signatories,
guarantors and international partners to ensure that they
are effectively and promptly executed. While we should
continue to facilitate the conditions for full voluntary
disarmament of the FDLR, we should also set in motion
a credible process for enabling military pressure to
be exerted on those not willing to surrender by the
deadline. We must act now. Failure to bring the process
of neutralizing the FDLR to a successful conclusion in
line with Security Council resolutions and the decisions
of the leaders of the region will potentially exacerbate
tensions, undermine our collective credibility and put
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework under
serious stress.

Another concern I have is about the slow pace
in the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations. I
welcome the recent impetus the process has been given
at the initiative of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and we also appreciate the
cooperation shown by the Governments of Uganda and
Rwanda. A few weeks ago, my Office participated in a
joint mission with the National Oversight Mechanism
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
ICGLR secretariat in Kampala to explore ways of
revitalizing the process. I am pleased to inform the
Council that, further to consultations, a high-level
follow-up meeting, to which I have been invited, will
be convened in Kinshasa on 7 and 8 November. I will
strongly encourage the concerned parties there to seek
solutions to existing bottlenecks and take the urgent
political and operational action required to fast-track
the amnesty and the repatriation process.

The twin process of dealing with the FDLR and
M-23 should continue to receive our full attention. But
so should the resurgent threat posed by the ADF, whose
horrendous recent acts against the people of Beni are a
sad reminder that the security situation remains fragile
and hard-won gains against negative forces can be
reversed.

I am just back from my first visit to the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where I held
very useful consultations in Goma with a variety of
stakeholders. On Thursday, I visited Beni together with
Special Representative Martin Kobler and Ambassador
Boubacar Diarra, Special Representative of the African
Union for Burundi and the Great Lakes Region, to
show our solidarity with the Government and people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo as well as
our sympathy for the innocent victims of the ADF. We
took the opportunity to commend the Forces armees
de la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC)
for their successful military campaign against the
ADF, with the effective support of MONUSCO and
its Force Intervention Brigade. We also encouraged
the FARDC and MONUSCO to further enhance their
cooperation and initiate decisive joint actions aimed at
fully neutralizing the ADF, with the full support of the
local populations.

While I am expected to devote serious attention
to supporting efforts to neutralize negative forces and
promoting an environment conducive to the expeditious
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, I am fully committed to strengthening the
foundation laid by my predecessor, Mary Robinson, in
support of women, young people, displaced populations
and civil society, as well as encouraging economic
cooperation and the promotion of justice, human
rights and the fight against impunity. In that regard, I
am pleased to report that, following the launch of the
Women's Platform, small grants have already been
made to the Global Fund for Women in support of
initial activities designed to enhance women's ability
to advocate for and monitor implementation of the
Framework's commitments. The grants also provide
seed money for improving women's access to clean
energy. Regarding resolution 1325 (2000), I plan to
step up my advocacy efforts for broader adoption of a
regional plan of action that builds on the experiences
of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda and Uganda, all of which I commend for
starting to implement their national plans. With regard
to young people, my Office provided support for
organizing the ICGLR Youth Summit and plans to work
with other partners going forward in support of small-
scale youth projects and budding young entrepreneurs.

Initiatives aimed at promoting the emergence of a
strong regional coalition of civil society are ongoing.
My Office will work closely with the ICGLR and
other stakeholders to convene a regional workshop
in Bujumbura that will bring together civil-society
organizations from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda before the end
of this year. It will lay the foundation for a wider civil-
society constituency whose task will be to increase
awareness of the Framework in cooperation with the
various Governments, as well as to promote solidarity,
a culture ofpeace and tolerance among the communities
in the region.

We are also working closely with all stakeholders
to address obstacles impeding the safe and dignified
return of displaced populations and to provide options
for those who may decide to settle in other parts of
the region. In that regard, I would like to commend
the Government and people of Tanzania for granting
citizenship rights to the roughly 200,000 Burundian
nationals and their dependants who took refuge in
Tanzania decades ago. I also encourage all countries
hosting displaced populations, as well as countries
of origin, to step up their efforts to provide durable
solutions. Together with my fellow envoys, I intend to
support all the parties concerned in promoting political
and security conditions propitious to lasting solutions.

Leveraging the strength of various development
partners, such as the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Bank, the European Union
and others, my Office has launched or supported
various initiatives aimed at rebuilding livelihoods and
creating jobs and peace dividends. In that regard, my
Office is supporting the preparation of a development
partners conference designed to mobilize resources for
development initiatives identified by signatories of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. Similarly,
we are working closely with the country teams in
signatory countries, as well as the relevant regional
United Nations offices, to develop and align strategies
and programmes in support of the Framework. Jointly
with the ICGLR, we are also strongly promoting the
convening in Luanda in early December of a regional
ministerial consultation on private sector investment,
aimed at considering and evaluating a substantial
portfolio of projects. During my tour of the region, I
encouraged the Framework countries to ensure that
they are adequately represented at the meeting, which
will pave the way for a bigger private-sector investment
forum next year that will signal a new era in the Great
Lakes region, advancing towards shared stability and
prosperity.

The Framework signatories are members of
various regional economic communities, which we
must support if we are to unlock the region's vast
potential. In that regard, I would like to encourage the
ongoing efforts to convene a summit of the Economic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries (CEPGL),
as part of the revitalization of that organization
called for in the Framework. In that context, I had a
fruitful meeting last week with the CEPGL's Executive
Secretary and his team, at which we discussed possible
areas of cooperation, including promoting trans-border
security and development programmes that include the
involvement of women.

As I stated at the beginning, I see my role as that
of a catalyst and facilitator. I am committed to working
closely with the signatory countries, the guarantors,
my fellow special envoys and the international partners
committed to the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework.

I am confident that together we can help the region
put an end to the recurring cycle of conflicts and
instability, build mutual confidence and trust, and set
in motion an irreversible process towards realizing its
full potential, in peace and stability.

