Mr. Oshima (Japan): The delegation of Japan
warmly welcomes the presence of the President-elect
of the Republic of Haiti, Mr. Rene Preval, in this
Chamber today, and we express our sincere
congratulations to him on his election.

Today's debate provides a timely occasion to
discuss how the United Nations and the international
community can assist Haiti at such a crucial time in its
recent history, as the country strives forward in its
quest for peace and stability, national reconciliation
and economic and social development.

We thank Argentina for having taken a leadership
role on the issue of Haiti in the Security Council during
past weeks and for having organized the meeting. We
appreciate the fact, Mr. President, that you are guiding
our deliberations.
Although the conduct of the general elections in
February was not without some troubles, it was
completed successfully overall. We commend the
Haitian people on that remarkable achievement.

While the elections were a major gain towards
restoring democracy and stability in Haiti, the fact
remains that the country faces formidable challenges
that President-elect Preval and future Governments
will have to address in order to recover from conflict
and make strides towards nation-building and
sustainable development.

The most important and pressing of those
problems will be to find a way to achieve inclusive
national reconciliation. To that end, it is hoped that the
successful conduct of the February elections will pave
the way for a peaceful electoral process in the second
round of parliamentary elections, in April. The results
of those elections will have to be accepted by all
parties, and conditions should be created by which all
the political parties elected to the Parliament will be
able to participate in the political processes in a free
and democratic way. Any attempt to isolate or seclude
elected parties from the proper decision-making
processes would be destabilizing and should be
avoided, in the interest of preventing the recurrence of
violence, regaining stability in the country and
advancing national reconciliation with inclusiveness.

Secondly, national institution- and capacity-
building, including in particular reform of the national
police and of the judicial system, continues to be a
major challenge for Haiti. The security situation
remains fragile. Unless it is addressed promptly and
effectively, it could lead to serious problems. Although
some progress has been made in registering and
training Haitian police officers, the Government needs
more vigorous reform efforts in that area in order to
strengthen the rule of law. Capacity-building and the
rehabilitation of national institutions, including the
national police and the judicial system, should
therefore be high on the list of priority activities of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). In our view, the review of the
MINUSTAH mandate should appropriately reflect that.

Haiti will be an important test case in
peacebuilding. We should make every effort to ensure
that this will be another success story of a country in
transition, as well as of peacebuilding. For that to
happen it is essential that the people of Haiti feel the
tangible benefits of peace through the economic and
social development of their society, together with
institutional capacity-building. That requires
international support and assistance in both the long
and short terms, including quick-impact projects.
Ensuring speedy and steady implementation of the
projects pledged in the context of the process of the
Interim Cooperation Framework will be critical.

To that end, we commend President-elect Preval
for his many efforts to gain support from the countries
of the region and the wider international community
and to lay the necessary groundwork for the incoming
Government. The international community should
respond generously to Haiti's needs with the necessary
assistance, as regards both immediate and longer-term
needs.

For our part, Japan has provided assistance to
Haiti in the area of humanitarian aid and electoral
assistance. Japan will continue to be a partner in
humanitarian development assistance for Haiti, in full
respect of the importance of the concept of ownership
by the Haitian people of the development process. We
look forward to working closely with the new
Government and the people of Haiti in support of their
nation-building efforts.

Let me conclude by paying tribute to the
contribution of Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdes, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti. Our
appreciation also goes to MINUSTAH and its troop and
police contributors, who have done a good job in
discharging the Mission's important duties under
especially difficult circumstances.

