The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United
Kingdom.

I, too, would like to join fellow Council members
in welcoming the High Representative and Mr. Spiric'
here today. We listened very carefully to what they had
to say, and I should like to associate my Government
with the statement that will shortly be made by the
representative of Slovenia on behalf of the European
Union (EU).

We are delighted to see the adoption of the
important police reform legislation by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliament. As others have noted, that
paves the way to the signature of Bosnia's Stabilization
and Association Agreement with the EU. My
Government will be doing all it can to sign that
promptly and to ensure its adherence. We welcome the
role that the High Representative has played in
particular in making that achievement possible, and we
welcome the recent NATO decision on intensified
dialogue. Bosnia once lagged behind the rest of the
Balkans in European and NATO integration, and we
are pleased to note that this is no longer the case.

I should like to pick up on a few points from what
we have heard today.

We welcome very much what Mr. Spirie said
about cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. We hope that all
countries in the region will redouble their efforts to
arrest and transfer the remaining fugitives, notably
Karadzic and Mladic, indicted for the 1995 massacre at
Srebrenica. We also listened carefully to what the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers said about
constitutional reform and about Dayton, and we note the
comments made by the representative of the Russian
Federation about Brcko and by the representative of
Croatia about the Croatian community.

The Security Council has been engaged with the
question of Bosnia and Herzegovina for at least 16
years, and some of those years have been among the
most difficult that the Council has faced. Since 1995,
the picture has been more positive, with the European
Union (EU), NATO and the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council tutoring Bosnia along
the path of progress, and much has been achieved. But
I think it is also fair to say that much more could be
achieved on NATO and EU integration if political
leaders on all sides set aside language about threats of
abolition or threats of secession. Those threats should
not be used as excuses to prevent further practical steps
from being taken to advance Euro-Atlantic integration,
and constituencies outside Bosnia - including some
within Bosnia's neighbours - should not vexatiously
push those issues for their own ends.

Turning briefly to Kosovo, I was pleased to hear
what the High Representative said rejecting
suggestions of a link. I have nothing further to add on
that, except that we wholly support the remarks that the
High Representative and the representative of France
made about Kosovo and about the fact that it was the
last chapter in the Balkans' sad history and that it is
time to look forward to Europe.

Finally, I would just like to assure the High
Representative of our ongoing support for his efforts.
We look to all of Bosnia's political leaders and other
leaders in the region to fulfil their commitments to
support him as he advances Bosnia's integration and its
Dayton future. We will be doing all that we can to help
him to that end.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on the representative of Slovenia.

