Mrs. Kassangana-Jakubowska (Poland): Poland
considers today's debate to be an important initiative
to reflect on the ongoing process of the review of the
peacebuilding architecture. We fully agree with a
view of Venezuelan presidency that lack of a proper
attitude to peacebuilding contributes considerably to
the resurgence of conflicts.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to offer some additional remarks in my
national capacity.

The social and economic development of countries
in conflict or post-conflict situations is especially
significant for the lasting success of peacebuilding
efforts. That is why it is so important to successfully
implement the ambitious 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1) and to
effectively reflect on why the Millennium Development
Goals were not realized in full.

We are convinced that the maintenance of
international peace and security cannot be discussed
in isolation from the issue of good governance. The
international community should fully acknowledge
that there is a strong nexus between good governance
principles - which include impartiality, transparency,
accountability and combating corruption- on one hand,
and United Nations actions undertaken with a View to
assisting States in preventing, resolving and recovering
from military conflicts, on the other. Promoting good
governance, including through security sector reform,
tackling political, social and economic exclusion,
promoting human rights and opportunities for all are
incredibly important to guaranteeing stability, security
and peace. All such issues should have proper weight
and place in the reflection process on the future of
peacebuilding activities.

The United Nations has a unique responsibility
for sustaining peace and security, but the scale and
gravity of challenges today means that the United
Nations cannot act alone. The role of regional and
subregional organizations in peacebuilding cannot be
underestimated. In that regard, we would like to stress
the importance of coherence and complementarity
in order to ensure better effectiveness of actions
between United Nations and regional actors. We fully
support the idea of partnerships in the peacebuilding
area between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, similar to those that exist
in peacekeeping. Peacebuilding needs just as much
attention.

The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is the most
important element of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. We agree with the conclusion of the report
(see S/2015/490) of the Advisory Group of Experts on
the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture, headed
by Ambassador Rosenthal, that the PBC should improve
its coordination with key United Nations bodies. We
should remember that the deepening of the PBC's
relationship with the relevant United Nations bodies,
such as the General Assembly, the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council, depends upon their
approach to peacebuilding and their eagerness to draw
on the PBC's knowledge. As appropriate, therefore,
those bodies should seek out the PBC's expertise and
assistance with the goal of maximizing the impact of
the United Nations in post-conflict situations.

We recently witnessed avery good example ofefforts
by the Security Council to draw on the PBC's specific
expertise during the open briefing (see S/PV.7624)
on Guinea-Bissau earlier this month. The work of the
Guinea-Bissau country-specific configuration of the
PBC, under the intelligent chairmanship of Ambassador
De Aguiar Patriota of Brazil, is an excellent example
of a much-needed comprehensive approach to
peacebuilding, involving close cooperation between
the PBC, the Secretariat, the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States. We
hope that such a streamlined effort will enable them to
safeguard that country's achievements in stabilization
and development.

There can be no doubt that we need a high level
of coherence and complementarity in all three of the
review processes under way in the area of international
peace and security. The momentum during the
intergovernmental phase must be kept up, and the
role of the General Assembly in that process will be
extremely important. That is why we would like to
commend the initiative of the President of the Assembly
in organizing a high-level thematic debate, to be held in
May, designed to identify synergies between the three
review processes. We believe that will help to improve
United Nations action on peace and security.

