Mr. Mladenov: I regret to inform the Security
Council that the violence that has been erupting in
Israel and Palestine since October of last year shows
no sign of relenting. Some recent incidents may point
to a troubling new phase in the conflict. On 31 January,
a Palestinian security officer traveling in an official
vehicle opened fire at a checkpoint near Ramallah and
injured three Israeli soldiers. This was one of three
incidents to date involving a member of the Palestinian
security forces. Although he was acting independently,
such incidents can be potentially harmful to the
relationship between both security forces. On
3 February, a complex attack took place at Damascus
Gate that resulted in the death of an Israeli border
policewoman. In a worrying advancement in weaponry
and tactics, the three assailants, all of whom were
killed, carried semi-automatic weapons, pipe bombs
and knives. Just a couple of hours before this meeting,
in a supermarket in the West Bank, two Israelis were
stabbed, one of whom later succumbed to his wounds.
The two 14-year -old Palestinian attackers were shot by
an armed civilian. Our thoughts go out to the families
of these latest victims.

As tensions persist, Israelis continue to grapple
with the fear of terrorism just as Palestinians continue
to be killed and injured in clashes across the West Bank.
Once again, the United Nations strongly condemns all
acts of terror and violence. This spiral of violence,
which has to date taken at least 137 Palestinian and
19 Israeli lives, cannot be reversed by security means
alone. It must be addressed at the political level, with
leaders showing a political horizon to their people and
standing up to incitement and the radicals among their
own constituents.

Only genuine progress towards a just peace that
allows the people of Israel and the people of Palestine
to live side by side in safe and secure borders will
end the bloodshed and counter the rise of extremism.
Against the backdrop of radicalisation, terror, sectarian
violence, war and tectonic geopolitical shifts in the
Middle East, peace and security for Palestine and Israel
is imperative now more than ever.

Over the past year, the United States, Russia, the
European Union and the Secretary-General, as part
of the Middle East Quartet, have engaged actively in
seeking a way forward out of the deadlock. Quartet
envoys have travelled to the region to meet with
Palestinian and Israeli leaders. We have consulted
with Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and, most recently,
Norway. Since September of last year, the Quartet
principals have met three times.

We have sought how not only to preserve the two-
State solution, but to create the conditions that would
allow the parties to return to meaningful negotiations
on resolving the final status issues and ending the
occupation that began in 1967. This includes steps on the
groundconsistentwithprior agreements thatbothparties
can take to strengthen Palestinian institutions, security
and economic prospects, while upholding security for
Israelis. We have voiced our common concern that the
current trends on the ground - including continued
acts of violence against civilians, ongoing settlement
activity, and the high rate of demolitions of Palestinian
structures - are dangerously imperiling the viability
ofa two-State solution.

The commitment of the Middle East Quartet to
remaining engaged with the parties and to working
with key international stakeholders, the region and the
Security Council is unequivocal. This is why, at their
latest meeting in Munich, the principals agreed that
the Quartet should prepare a report on the status quo,
including recommendations on the way forward. The
report should focus on the dangers of continuing on the
current trajectory, identify the impediments to the two-
State solution on all sides, and point the way towards
restoring a political horizon. Ultimately, the report
should also help build international consensus on the
way ahead.

Collective international efforts to help establish a
political horizon will all be for naught absent genuine
Israeli and Palestinian motivation to address the chronic
realities endangering the two-State solution. From the
outset, significant policy shifts by Israel, including
increasing Palestinian investment and economic
activity in Area C, are required to strengthen Palestinian
institutions, economy and security prospects.

Israel's settlement enterprise continues to be an
impediment to peace. While 2015 may have seen
a slower overall pace of settlement planning and
construction, the reality is that Israel continues to
push forward with consolidation of its control of the
West Bank. Several moves since the beginning of the
year - such as the classification of new "State land" in
the Jordan Valley and the approval of several plans in
settlements - also appear to point towards an increase
in settlement activities.

During the past few weeks alone, Israeli authorities
in Area C and East Jerusalem have demolished 201
Palestinian-owned structures, including 79 that were
donor-funded. As a result, 320 people were displaced.
Since the beginning of 2016, Israel has demolished on
average 29 Palestinian-owned structures per week,
which is three times the weekly average for 2015. These
actions run directly counter to the idea of peace.

Separately, we also remain deeply concerned about
the deteriorating condition of Mohammed Al-Qiq, the
Palestinian journalist who has been on hunger strike
for over 85 days to protest against his administrative
detention. I take this opportunity to once again join
the Secretary-General and the High Commissioner
for Human Rights in calling for all persons subject
to administrative detention to be either charged or
released immediately.

The challenge of getting back to an environment
conducive to peace also falls heavily on the shoulders of
the Palestinians. Advancing genuine reconciliation on
the basis of non-violence, democracy and the Palestine
Liberation Organization principles is a key priority. I
welcome the recent unity talks in Qatar and urge all
sides to continue their discussions and implement
previous agreements, particularly those brokered by
Egypt. The formation of a national unity Government
and long-overdue elections are vital to laying the
foundations of a future Palestinian State.

The issue of incitement runs to the heart of the
current climate of tension and fear. It is essential
that authorities on both sides do more to address
this scourge. I am particularly concerned that some
Palestinian factions continue to glorify Violence
and terror. Such acts only contribute to tensions and
violence. Governance reforms must also remain a
central commitment of the Palestinian Authority.

Volatility persists in Gaza amid a tenuous security
situation. The collapse of another fourtunnels-bringing
the total to date this year to five - and the continued
test-firing and launching of rockets at Israel indicate
that Hamas continues to directly threaten the security
of Israel. Such actions risk not only people's lives but
also the fragile reconstruction process in the devastated
Strip. The population of Gaza is squeezed from all sides.
With little prospect of seeing public sector salaries paid,
increased informal taxation and a strangled economy,
tensions are rising. I have just returned from Gaza,
where I Visited the Al-Shujaiya neighborhood that had
been devastated during the conflict in 2014. It was
encouraging to see the visible positive changes and new
construction as life is reborn out of the rubble, but I am
all too well aware that work is yet to start on the homes
of some 74 per cent of families displaced in 2014.

Rebuilding these houses, however, will not be
enough. We must secure peace and focus on building
Gaza for the future. This means providing clean water
and sufficient energy, creating jobs and a sustainable
economy, restoring free movement for people and
goods and, above all, ensuring integration between the
West Bank and Gaza under a single democratic and
legitimate Palestinian Authority.

Turning to Lebanon, in a positive sign the
Cabinet of Prime Minister Salam resumed sessions
on 28 January and 2 February and approved several
decrees. However, I remain deeply concerned that
the presidential vacancy impairs Lebanon's ability to
address the many challenges facing the country. On
behalf of the Secretary-General, I call on members of
the Lebanese Parliament to convene urgently and elect
a President.

The recent Syria donors conference in London
yielded important commitments of international
support to reinforce Lebanon's stability in the face of
the refugee crisis. The United Nations will continue to
work closely with Lebanon to monitor and implement

commitments on the basis of the Government's
statement of intent.

With respect to the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon, at the first tripartite meeting since the
20 December and 4 January incidents, Israel and
Lebanon concurred on the need to maintain calm and
stability and to ensure security along the Blue Line.
Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace, however, have
continued on an almost daily basis.

Turning briefly to the Golan, the situation in the
vicinity of the ceasefire line continues to be of concern
as fighting between the Syrian armed forces and
armed groups, and between different armed groups
themselves, continues. These developments have the
potential to escalate the situation in an already tense
regional environment.

In closing, let me return to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict and appeal to the leaders ofboth peoples and all
international stakeholders. There are clear avenues out
of the current political morass, but they require unity
of effort and bold, creative and courageous work on
the part of many. Despite the work that has been done,
the cold reality for the Israeli and Palestinian people is
that all have failed them. The conflict has now arrived
at a pivotal point. Israelis and Palestinians must now
actively shape their future, with the dedicated support
of the international community, before the opponents of
peace decide their fate for them.

