Mr. Musambachime (Zambia): On behalf of my
delegation, I wish to take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. We have no doubt that with your immense
experience, the deliberations of the Council are in good
hands. In the same breath, we would like to extend our
appreciation to Ambassador Stefan Tafrov, Permanent
Representative of Bulgaria, for the able manner in
which he steered the work of the Council for the month
of September.

My delegation also welcomes the very important
statement by the Secretary-General made to the
Council last Friday. We also welcome the report
submitted by Sir Jeremy Greenstock, Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), for its depth and
analytic perspective. We also thank the Vice-Chairmen
and the experts for their commitment and dedication.
The work of this Committee has been exemplary.

Mr. President, my delegation thanks you for
calling this timely meeting to allow Member States to
contribute to this very important debate on threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts. Zambia is committed to international efforts to
eliminate terrorism in all its aspects.

As most members of the United Nations are
aware, my country paid dearly in life and infrastructure
at the hands of the apartheid and Rhodesian regimes for
more than two decades, when, for geographical
considerations, my country supported the noble
aspirations of the Southern African region to self-
determination and independence. Therefore, we have
the experience and are an example of how a vibrant
economy can be undermined by acts of terrorism.

Terrorism is real. It has very grave consequences
for life, business and development. The statistics from
the aviation industry regarding the impact of the tragic
events of 11 September 2001 on international travel are
only the best-documented of the consequences of
terrorism. Terrorism can undo gains it has taken many
years to achieve. Above all, international terrorism can
very often create hostilities between and among
nations, thus endangering international peace and
security.

It is against this background that my country has
always condemned acts of terrorism in all their aspects,
no matter by whom committed, or where. Zambia has
worked through the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and the newly launched African
Union to promote collective efforts in the fight against
terrorism. It is also against this background that my
country welcomes the commendable work of the
Security Council, which, in response to the tragic
events of 11 September 2001, adopted resolutions 1368
(2001) and 1373 (2001) on this subject. When the
General Assembly expressed its position on the matter,
Zambia worked with other Member States in adopting
resolution 56/1.

The fight against international terrorism is a
global effort that requires the support of all countries.
The question of countering international terrorism in
all its aspects should be the concern of all countries. It
is, therefore, appropriate that the Security Council hold
public debates on the subject to enable Member States
to share views on the issue with the Council.

My Government believes that multilateral efforts
carried out within the framework of the United Nations
will be more effective than efforts taken at the national
level. The horror of international terrorism threatens all
States without exception. Strengthening multilateralism
should be the core principle in the ongoing reform of
the United Nations to make it more effective and
relevant to the changed times.

Zambia stands ready to cooperate with the other
countries in the southern African region, the African
Union and the United Nations to enhance the efforts
against terrorism. Therefore, I wish to reiterate my
country's appeal to all countries to ensure that terrorist
groups are prevented from gaining access to nuclear
and other weapons of mass destruction. The United
Nations and regional organizations are the institutions
that should take the lead in this effort.

Threats to international peace and security posed
by international terrorism are real. The proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction is increasing. There is an
urgent need for the Security Council to ensure that
collective efforts are not based on emotion and other
previously conceived notions that only serve to make
global efforts even more difficult. It is my
Government's deep conviction that increased
international efforts towards the effective elimination
of international terrorism would secure international
peace and security.

As a developing country, Zambia is concerned
that the fight against international terrorism will
overshadow efforts against poverty and disease, such as
HIV/AIDS. We urgently require foreign direct
investment, which is so badly needed to make a
difference to many millions of people who live on less
than one dollar per day.

The fight against international terrorism should
also be extended to its breeding ground, poverty. Our
efforts must not, I repeat, be confined to military
options only. Rather, the efforts of the United Nations
should be concentrated on a thorough examination of
the phenomenon of terrorism, including its roots, its
support bases and the different forms it has taken
around the world.

If well executed, the fight against terrorism might
unlock the puzzle surrounding the failure to achieve
socio-economic development. As many in this room
are aware, terrorism and its infrastructure are financed
through illegal activities, including arms smuggling,
drug production and trafficking. The profits made from
these illegal activities are ultimately used to purchase
weapons of terror. In other words, for the United
Nations to win the war against terrorism, the efforts
must not be confined to one country or region, because
terrorism is a common enemy of all countries and
peoples. Above all, it is the number one enemy to
stability, peace and democracy.

From what I have said, it is clear that all
countries, religions, beliefs and cultures are vulnerable
to terrorism. The fight against terrorism should,
therefore, unite, not divide, our resolve. Terrorism must
be defined with reference to its acts, and not to its
perpetrators. International law should not support the
impunity of terrorists, because terrorism is contrary to
any legal norms. Terrorists are criminals of the highest
category because of the indiscriminate nature of
terrorism and its negative impact on society.

As a country that upholds the sacredness of the
right of peoples to self-determination and
independence, Zambia knows very well the difference
between a freedom fighter and a terrorist. Liberation
movements are legal bodies with clear objectives and
programmes of actions that are available to all those
who are interested. On the contrary, terrorists have no
missions, their activities are illegal and often they
claim to represent mysterious forces that exist only in
the minds of the perpetrators.

I wish to conclude by underscoring the
importance of working together on this question within
the framework of the United Nations.

The work of the General Assembly's Ad Hoc
Committee through the Sixth Committee Working
Group requires the support of all States. Supporting the
work of the Ad Hoc Committee will promote the early
conclusion of a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism. This will further expand the
frontiers of our war against international terrorism. It is
our firm conviction that the elaboration of such a
convention would provide a universal definition of
terrorism that would apply in all situations.

It is the hope of my delegation that the Security
Council will strengthen and not weaken multilateralism
in our fight against terrorism.

