Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like to welcome and
thank the Special Representative and Head of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, for his
extensive and informative presentation.

On behalf of my country, I would like to commend
the progress and positive results that we are seeing
in West Africa. We appreciate the continued support
and efforts of UNOWAS and other regional and
international entities in the areas of conflict prevention,
peacebuilding, democratic transfers of power, respect
for human rights, inclusivity, women's participation
in political, social and economic processes and
constitutional order in the region. The challenges
facing the region are significant, but the serious
political commitment and great desire on the part of
national and regional actors to overcome them, with the
support of the international community, give us reason
to believe that in the long run, all of us who fight for
peace will prevail.

We are going through a very difficult and critical
time, owing to the precarious security situation and
instability in Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger and Nigeria.
Terrorist groups, and Boko Haram in particular, are still
in that area and continuing their indiscriminate attacks
on civilians and the military. Despite the increase in
military operations in the north and east of the Niger,
there are daily incidents of violence that pose ongoing
challenges to the defence and security forces. Conflicts
between farmers and shepherds are getting worse,
despite the continued calls for collaboration between
UNOWAS, the Economic Community of Central
African States and officials responsible for agriculture,
livestock and security in the regions concerned,
with a view to establishing effective mechanisms for
preventing, mediating and resolving conflicts, which
could bring a new dimension of peace and security to
the region.
It is important to stress that the humanitarian
situation in West Africa and the Sahel remains
worrying, especially with regard to food security
and forced displacements in the Lake Chad basin,
where many people live in subhuman conditions. The
international community must redouble its efforts to
contribute to the 2019 humanitarian response plan for
the Lake Chad basin in order to help the people in the
area who are most vulnerable and defuse the cholera
epidemic, which has been claiming lives since 2010. As
we might expect, terrorist activity is both a cause and
consequence of that desperate situation.

Equatorial Guinea strongly supports the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and its
Support Plan, and welcomes the link it establishes
between the political, security and humanitarian fronts.
We therefore consider very important the progress
of regional initiatives, such as the official launch of
disarmament, demobilization and socioeconomic
reinsertion programmes, as well as the signing in
Niamey on 30 October ofa partnership protocol between
the Permanent Secretary of the Group of Five for the
Sahel and the Sahel Alliance that provides a framework
for collaboration and operational mobilization aimed at
implementingjoint projects quickly and flexibly.

The fight against piracy and maritime crime is one
of my country's regional security policy priorities. That
is why during our presidency of the Security Council
next month we will hold a debate on transnational
organized crime at sea. However, we would like to take
this opportunity to commend the effective work that
UNOWAS is doing in the Gulf of Guinea in that area,
in collaboration with other specialized agencies such
as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. In
that regard, together with C6te d'Ivoire, my country is
intending to lead an official Security Council mission
to West Africa very soon to support UNOWAS's efforts
for conflict resolution and peacebuilding in the region.

