Mr. Zarif: This Council meets today at a key
juncture in Kosovo's history. Last December, after a
prolonged political impasse, a new Government was
established in Kosovo as a result of an alliance between
the Democratic Party of Kosovo and the Democratic
League of Kosovo. The new Government, led by
Prime Minister Isa Mustafa, declared its commitment
to economic reforms, strengthening the rule of law,
European and Euro-Atlantic integration and a continued
dialogue with Belgrade.

Over the past weeks, however, the Government had
to focus on responding to public protests in Pristina on
24 and 27 January involving up to 7,000 people, which
turned violent and caused injuries and destruction
of public and private property. The protests were
largely organized by the opposition movement called
Vetevendosjel, or Self-Determinationl, to demand the
dismissal of a Kosovo Serb Minister for Communities
and Returns for the controversial remarks attributed
to him in reaction to the protests in Gjakove/Dakovica
against visiting Serbian internally displaced persons on
the occasion of the Orthodox New Year, on 6 January.
The protesters in Pristina also demanded the reversal
of the Government's decision to withdraw a draft law
concerning the transformation of one of the largest
industrial entities, Trepca Mines, into a publicly owned
enterprise. In addition, the protests appear to have been
fuelled by a lingering wider public discontent with
the economic situation and a drastic increase in the
migration ofpeople out ofKosovo in recent months. The
27 January protest was particularly violent and resulted
in over 50 protesters and 100 police officers seeking
medical assistance. Some 160 persons were arrested
and most of them subsequently released, including the
mayor of Pristina, a leader of the Self-Determination!
movement.

While peaceful protest is an essential right, the
criminal violence and vandalism that accompanied
the protests on 24 and 27 January are deplorable.
Employing such methods in the guise of pressing for
any particular political change or agenda is nothing less
than a backward-looking choice - backwards from the
voters' aspirations expressed in the elections of June
2014, which were organized throughout Kosovo under
a single legal framework.

I commend the prompt and unequivocal public
condemnation of those acts by responsible political and
civil society leaders in Kosovo. In that context, I wish
to acknowledge the decision of some political parties,
unions and civil society organizations to publicly
distance themselves from the violent acts that took place
during the demonstrations. Unfortunately, however, a
small number of other political figures, mostly from
the opposition, attempted to exploit the situation and
deflect their own responsibility for what happened.
While the Kosovo police had to resort to the use of tear
gas and water cannons, its response was professional
and proportional in the face of determined attempts by
some elements among the protesters to assault the main
public Government buildings, including by throwing
stones and petrol bombs at the buildings and those
protecting them.

In that context, I appreciate the efforts made by
leaders both in Pristina and Belgrade to restrain political
acrimony surrounding the highly complex matter
related to the future of the Trepca mining enterprise.
I hope that a similarly measured approach will be
adopted by all sides with regard to the dismissal of the
Kosovo Serb Minister for Communities and Returns on
3 February. The new Government's stated objectives
and resolve to undertake the serious work required at
this critical juncture should not be undermined by such
short-term challenges.

Despite those developments in Pristina, leaders in
both Belgrade and Pristina are determined to continue
with their high-level dialogue, which will be resumed
next Monday, 9 February, in Brussels. In fact, those
who initiated and initialled the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations in
April 2013, Mr. Daeic' and Mr. Thaci, are in the Council
Chamber today. I urge both of them to continue to be
active supporters of the full implementation of the
agreed provisions and of the further tough core decisions
that are required for a comprehensive normalization of
relations.

From its inception, the dialogue facilitated by
the European Union has been about making hard
choices - between the past and the future, between
stagnation and progress and between consolidating
political power and doing what is in the best interest
of all people in the region. The meeting on 9 February
presents an opportunity to reaffirm the commitment to
a constructive and purposeful dialogue, with a view to
shaping a better future for all affected communities in
the region. I welcome therefore renewed statements of
determination by both Belgrade and Pristina to resolve
outstanding differences concerning the implementation
of the existing agreements. In that context, I wish to
highlight the need for the Kosovo Government's early
commitment to the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities during
the coming period. That is one of the core provisions
of the April 2013 Agreement. I also hope that the
relations between Belgrade and Pristina will delve into
new important areas as the next round of the dialogue
unfolds.

Both the new Kosovo Assembly and the new
coalition Government in Pristina have made sensible
choices in their priorities, and appear to be acting
apace. The formation by the Government of a technical
team tasked with preparing the necessary legislation
for the establishment of the specialist court is critical.
I add my own voice to those of many others in the
international community who have urged the Assembly
and the Government to move swiftly to complete all
the required steps, given the fundamental importance
of this issue to justice and reconciliation in Kosovo.
The new Government has taken early and prudent steps
on some other immediate priorities, such as planning
viable economic development and enhancing the rule
of law. Both are essential to creating new and equal
opportunities for all, and to building confidence in
public institutions to promote good governance and
protect the rights of all.

I also applaud the swift action taken by the Kosovo
Assembly in considering a draft law criminalizing
participation in armed conflicts outside Kosovo. I
urge further consideration of the draft, in consultation
with concerned representatives of the international
community. Kosovo's security institutions have
already taken active steps by arresting dozens of terror
suspects and confiscating weapons and ammunition,
and this legislation will help provide a more tailored
legal framework for handling the problem in the
future. As ever, however, it should be recognized that
law enforcement measures alone are not sufficient to
address the phenomenon in question. The continuous
engagement of political and religious community
leaders is vital to deterring youngsters from being
lured into violent extremist movements. I note with
appreciation that such work is already ongoing.

I welcome the Government's commitment to
addressing the root causes of social inequality and
high unemployment in Kosovo, but am also alarmed
at the growing numbers of irregular, illegal migrants
to Western Europe. Many of the issues I have
highlighted here trace their roots to a widely perceived
dearth of economic and social prospects, especially
among Kosovo's young people. In this respect, I note
the steps taken by the Kosovo authorities in recent
days, including the establishment of an executive
commission to carry out an analysis of unpaid debts
and review the possibility of debt forgiveness. These
steps include a Kosovo Assembly resolution proposing,
inter alia, the creation of a special fund for preventing
irregular migration, as well as President Jahjaga and
Prime Minister Mustafa's initiative to engage both the
Government and international stakeholders in a broader
discussion of this troubling issue. I urge the Pristina
authorities to proceed judiciously in these matters and
to continue to avail themselves of the many sources of
advice the international community can offer.

Notable progress has been made since my last
briefing (see S/PV.7327) in respect of the protection
and promotion of cultural heritage. The Council for the
Protection of the Village of Hoce e Madhe/Velika Hoca
was established on 30 January, some two years after the
law mandating its creation came into force. Incidents
of thefts and vandalism affecting religious sites across
Kosovo remain too frequent and demonstrate the need
for continuous efforts on the part of the authorities to
promote public awareness and appreciation of the value
of the rich and diverse cultural heritage of all people
in Kosovo. While authorities have made efforts to
react to and prevent illegal construction within special
protective zones, in particular around the Visoki
Deeani monastery, the sensitivity of this matter and
its possible impact on intercommunity relations should
warrant even swifter action by officials. Incidents
between visitors to Serbian Orthodox sites and local
demonstrators, such as that which took place on
6 January in Gjakove/Dakovica, need to be addressed
through enhanced local dialogue, beyond simple law
enforcement measures.

Finally, with regard to progress in the critical
process of establishing the fate of missing persons, I
urge both sides to muster the political will necessary
to bring about a swift closure of the 1,655 outstanding
cases, in order to help heal the wounds of the conflict
and its aftermath, alleviate the grief and suffering of
the families, bring the perpetrators to justice, provide
compensation to the affected families, and facilitate
reconciliation. In light of all the developments I have
discussed today, I trust that leaders at all levels in both
Belgrade and Pristina will courageously embrace their
responsibility at this critical moment in the historic
process of the normalization of relations and will not
shy away from making the often trying choices they are
likely to face in the dialogue process.

In conclusion, I wish to express my profound
gratitude to Council members for their support to the
work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo. We will continue working
intensively and constructively with our local and
international partners, in accordance with our mandate.

