Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel,
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, for his briefing. Likewise,
we thank Ms. Monique Barbut and Ms. Hindou Oumarou
Ibrahim for their briefings, as well as Mr. Jean-Paul
Laborde, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate.

Last 25 November, the Security Council
convened a meeting (see S/PV.7566) that related to
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. At that time, the security
situation in the region was described as highly unstable.
Transnational organized crime, trafficking in small
arms and light weapons and narcotics and the emergence
of the scourge of terrorism have left a particular mark
on the region, even amid major efforts by countries and
subregional organizations through various initiatives
for national and regional security, the value of which
we acknowledge and encourage.

The grave political and military situations that have
developed in Mali and Libya have been determining
factors in defining security strategies to combat
the presence and expansion of terrorist groups such
as Boko Haram, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
Al Mourabitoun and Ansar Eddine, among others.
Venezuela reiterates its concern to the Council over
the impact of armed violence and increasing violent
extremism and instability triggered by the military
intervention in Libya in 2011.

The environment generated since then has
exacerbatedcross-bordercriminal activity, transforming
the region into a magnet for groups that threaten social
stability and State authority, primarily because of the
lack of resources and social stability, thus generating
a climate of violence and fear. We note the progress
and will of the Governments to cooperate in combating
the threat, in which the international community plays
important role in preventive action and implementation
of sustainable development initiatives, over and above
the military solutions.

Today, almost a year after it was signed, we remain
committed to the success of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali and appreciate the role
played by the international partners, especially the
African States and the Algerian mediation team. The
best way to overcome festering conflicts such as that
is by way of a political accord between the parties,
prioritizing national ownership with the appropriate
involvement of third parties in pursuing dialogue and
harmony. Similarly, we value the work of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, while remaining aware of the difficult
environment in which it is mobilized.

On the other hand, we are concerned about the
presence of the Boko Haram terrorist group in the Lake
Chad basin and nearby areas. We commend the efforts
of Nigeria, Chad, the Niger and Cameroon, as part of
the Multinational Joint Task Force, to fight that terrorist
organization and hope that the threat will shortly come
to an end. We also welcomed the regional security
summit held in Abuja on 14 May, which brought together
the political will of regional and international actors in
favour of strengthening a common security strategy
with a focus on preventing the spread of terrorism.

From the Venezuelan perspective, structural
solutions to the problems of peace should be promoted,
with a vision of sustainable development and a focus on
achieving the economic and social progress of societies
as a whole. Of course that is a long-term task, but it
must begin by prioritizing development projects that
will, in turn, impact on other sectors, including peace
and security.

The particular geographical features of the region,
which is predominantly a desert climate, impact on
other social and economic activities, as well as access
to water and food, but it is not a new phenomenon.
We do not believe that there is necessarily a direct or
automatic relationship between environmental change
and armed conflicts; rather, conflicts are fueled by
the destruction of State capacity and the interests of
third parties in promoting instability, which results in
increasing terrorism and crime.

We believe that the major challenges of climate
change and its impact on the daily lives of millions
of people, as exemplified by the El Nifio phenomenon
and its terrible floods and droughts, must be addressed
through full compliance with the recently signed Paris
Agreement and through the organs authorized for that
goal by their broad and democratic character - like the
General Assembly - avoiding jeopardizing the climate
agenda while focusing on addressing the causes of the
conflicts. While we welcome the initiative to address
the challenges ofpeace and security affecting the Sahel,
we believe that this Council is not the appropriate
political forum to address environmental issues arising
from climate change.

The complex humanitarian situation in the Sahel
today is affecting more than 20 million people. It is the
result of armed conflict; displacement; lack of access to
services, water and food; diseases and natural disasters.
It calls for strenghtening State capacities, fulfilling
commitments made by the international community to
support the region, and new commitments in favour of
the most critical sectors.

Venezuela takes note of the attention focused on
the region, through various national, multinational
and international initiatives to improve the security
situation in the Sahel, particularly States' policies to
strengthen their own security sectors. We reiterate our
strong support for the Group of Five Sahel - composed
of Mauritania, Burkina Faso, Chad, the Niger and
Mali - the Ministerial Coordination Platform for
the Sahel and the Nouakchott Process, which have
actively contributed to the implementation of social and
security initiatives with significant success, including
in the political sphere. We call for the harmonious
coordination of those policies, together with the
international community, to advance the common goal
of a safer region, always bearing in mind the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly with regard to the sovereignty and self-
determination of peoples.

The situation and geographical conditions of the
Sahel and the extent of recent events have made it a
particularly sensitive region, used as a channel or
route of migration flows having an extraordinary
human impact in the Mediterranean region. We call
for the renewed impetus that motivates us to fight the
human trafficking mafias to also lead to thought and
consistency on the part of some international actors
so as not to compromise the security situation in the
African States through military interventions and
armed conflicts whose characteristics have a global
scope and particularly affect the most vulnerable
civilian population on all continents.

Africa has been a historical victim of ambition
and of the plundering of its natural resources by more
powerful countries. It has paid the consequences
through decades of violence and armed conflict, almost
always driven from the outside. We affirm our belief
that the path to peace in Africa, and in many other parts
of the world, will come by ensuring that development
projects and strategies, and the proper administration
of policies and natural resources, are the sovereign
responsibility of each people and each Government and
aimed at achieving peace and sustainable development.

In conclusion, we would like to express our support
to Mr. Mohammed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel,
and our full confidence in the road map laid out in the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and
in the projects of the specialized agencies and regional
organizations, such as Office for West Africa of the
Economic Commission for Africa and the African
Union, as sustainable political and economic paths
towards peace in the Sahel.

