Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I wish, Sir, to congratulate
your country on its assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of December. Your presence
here this morning and your organization of this
important debate demonstrate the importance Burkina
Faso attaches to the issue of drug trafficking. They also
illustrate the commitment of African countries to fight
this plague with determination and political will.

The participation of the Secretary-General earlier
this morning shows that the United Nations is fully
aware of the need to address the issue as a matter of
priority, given its potential consequences for affected
countries and regions. I also thank the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, for his
informative presentation.

By its very nature, the fight against international
drug trafficking requires a concerted effort by all
countries affected by it. A consensus approach has
already been devised by the international community to
deal with this scourge. It recognizes that countries of
production, transit and use of illicit drugs have shared
responsibilities in preventing and combating the
problem. Any sustainable effort against this threat can
succeed only if it properly addresses all the links of the
international drug trade. Real solutions require
multidimensional actions, with the engagement of key
players at the national, regional and international
levels.

09-6381]

That is why international drug trafficking is, first
and foremost, a matter for international cooperation
against transnational organized crime. The 1961 Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs, the 1971 Convention
on Psychotropic Substances, the 1988 United Nations
Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances and the 2000 United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime constitute the primary framework for this
endeavour. Institution-building and support for the
development of law enforcement capacity are key
elements to ensure their implementation. In some
armed conflicts, and even in countries emerging from
conflict, transnational organized drug trafficking may
affect national and international peace and security. An
example that easily comes to mind is the financing of
terrorist or rebel groups through drug trafficking. If
and when confronted with those extreme situations, the
Security Council will have to determine the most
appropriate measures to address them, taking into
account the specificities of each case. It goes without
saying that national Governments and the international
community as a whole should do their utmost to
prevent the problem from reaching such alarming
proportions.

Drug trafficking tends to thrive in a context of
socio-economic deprivation. Economic growth and
employment, especially for youth, are therefore
particularly relevant in addressing some of the
underlying conditions that allow the problem to
develop in vulnerable countries. It is essential to act
vigorously both in the fight against drug trafficking
networks and in the promotion of alternative
livelihoods for disenfranchised populations that may be
pushed into the drug economy.

Support for the fight against drug trafficking has
been designated as one of the priority areas in the
Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in Guinea
Bissau, adopted last year in the country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, which
the Permanent Representative of Brazil has the honour
of chairing. The ongoing review process of that
strategy has confirmed the importance that the country
itself and the members of the Commission attach to
this issue. It is noteworthy that the country-specific
configuration for Sierra Leone has also taken up this
issue as an important challenge to the peacebuilding
process. Those two configurations organized a joint
meeting earlier this year dedicated to this matter. That
initiative highlighted the importance of coordinated
action at the regional level.

In this regard, we look forward to the
implementation of the regional operational plan of the
Economic Community of West African States, an
initiative that deserves unwavering support. We also
very much appreciate the West Africa Coast Initiative,
developed by UNODC, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the United Nations Office
for West Africa and INTERPOL. The engagement of
the African Union will strengthen this process of
regional cooperation.

We are all aware that progress in combating drug
trafficking, preventing it from further threatening our
societies and addressing its root causes will be made if
national Governments, the various parts of the United
Nations system and non-governmental organizations
not only act with common purpose but also improve
the coordination of their respective actions. This is no
small challenge. If we succeed in this collective effort,
however, we will be able to avoid situations in which
the Security Council needs to be involved. That should
be our common goal.

