Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing.

I will address in order the following topics: the
Israeli-Palestinian peace process, the situation in Syria,
and finally Lebanon.

After nine months of intensive efforts, the talks
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority are now
suspended. We are at the end of the nine-month period
envisaged by Israel, the Palestinian Authority and United
States Secretary of State John Kerry to reach a solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Mr. Kerry and his
team have spared no effort to advance the negotiations.
We welcome that outstanding commitment.

Despite those efforts, non-compliance with
commitments made in July resulted in the suspension of
talks, following a scenario that has been repeated many
times over the past 20 years. On the one hand, the fourth
group of pre-Oslo prisoners was not released; on the
other, the Palestinian Authority joined 15 international
conventions. The announcement ofa freeze ofpayments
of taxes and customs duties collected by Israel to the
Palestinian Authority exacerbates the impasse and
poses a major threat to the stability of the Palestinian
territories.

Those developments have occurred while the
situation on the ground continues to deteriorate.
Settlement has continued and accelerated; it more than
doubled in 2013. Tensions worsened in Jerusalem,
including on the Temple Mount and around the Church
of the Holy Sepulchre. Motivated by its historical
responsibilities with respect to Christians in the Holy
Land, France reaffirms its commitment to respect for
places of worship, to which access must be guaranteed,
particular during Easter, the most sacred period in the
Christian calendar.

It is in that context of crisis that the inter-Palestinian
reconciliation agreement was concluded. We believe
that the agreement could be a real opportunity,
if it results, as announced by President Abbas, in
the formation of a national consensus Government
composed of independent personalities, under his
direct authority, and in the organization of elections
in the Palestinian territories. It is not possible, on the
one hand, to assert that Israeli-Palestinian agreement
is impossible as long as the split between the two
Palestinian movements persists, and on the other hand,
to consider the inter-Palestinian reconciliation to be an
obstacle when it occurs.

France is ready to work with a Government of the
Palestinian Authority as long as it clearly expresses
its rejection of violence, its commitment to the peace
process and acceptance of all agreements, in particular
with Israel. Reconciliation defined on that basis would
be a step towards achieving a two-State solution.

The talks today are merely suspended. Mr. Abbas
has undertaken before the leadership of the Palestinian
Liberation Organization that the future Government
rejects violence and recognize Israel. He has
made a significant gesture of opening by publicly
acknowledging for the first time that "the Holocaust
was the most heinous crime in modern history". Those
statements must be put to his credit, as they are a
gesture of openness that can serve as a basis for the
resumption of dialogue between the parties and to the
revival of the peace efforts.

We have just heard yet again from both sides the
same arguments that try to pin the responsibility for the
stalemate on the other. In truth, that repeated rhetoric,
Council meeting after Council meeting, underlines
once again - as if that were necessary - that the
two parties are incapable of moving towards peace by
themselves, even if the United States supports their
efforts. Sooner or later, we will have to conclude that
either we have to give up and leave the conflict to them
or the international community will have to decide to
intervene with all its weight to reach an agreement
whose fundamental parameters are, after all, well
known. It is a paradox that, on the one hand, we are
able to draft a possible peace treaty in broad strokes,
whereas, on the other, every peace initiative has failed
one after another.

I now turn to Syria, where the regime adds the
absurdity of a parody of a presidential election to the
infamy ofthe denial ofhumanitarian access. The second
progress report of the implementation of the resolution
2139 (2014) presented last week is incontrovertible
(S/2014/295). The situation of the civilian population
has not improved. The sieges ofthe cities, three-quarters
of which have been led by the regime, have not been
suspended or even cut back. Indiscriminate bombing
and the policy of terror against civilians continue. All
of that is unacceptable.

At the political level, despite calls by Joint Special
Representative Brahimi and the Secretary-General
himself, Bashar Al-Assad will hold his triumphant
re-election on 3 June, when the tragic parody of a
presidential election will take place. The decision
to hold such an election is contrary to the spirit and
the letter of the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex). Meanwhile, civilians continue to be bombed
and massacred. No legitimacy will come out of that
phantom election in a country devastated, which takes
Syria further and further away from a political solution.

France shares the concern of everyone, as expressed
by Ms. Kaag last week, with respect to the alleged
use of chlorine gas in Kfar Zita which caused several
casualties and many wounded. It goes without saying
that the responsible party for the use of chemicals will
be held to account, as required by resolution 2118 (2013).
I would remind the Council that we want all those who
have committed mass crimes in Syria to be referred to
the International Criminal Court for judgement. We are
continuing our efforts in that direction.

Finally, we must also send a message of support
for Lebanon. In the light of the Syrian crisis, France
welcomes the generosity of Lebanon and acknowledges
the burden it has taken on in hosting more than a million
refugees. It also notes that violations of civil peace in
Lebanon and its sovereignty are unacceptable. Lebanon
must not be drawn into the cycle of the Syrian civil
war. We also recall the importance of the fight against
impunity and welcome in that respect the role of the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon.

We are pleased that the National Unity
Government formed on 15 February was sworn in
by the Parliament and that the latter has resumed its
legislative activity. We welcome the new momentum in
relaunching institutions, which should be sustained and
consolidated, so that Lebanon can meet the enormous
challenges it faces. In that context, it is crucial that
the Council reiterate its support for the stability,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon by
calling for presidential elections to be held on schedule,
in accordance with the procedures and the Constitution
and recalling the importance of avoiding any vacuum
at the head of the Lebanese State; by supporting the
dissociation policy initiated by President Sleiman which
should provide a framework for the future; and calling
on the international community to mobilize alongside
Lebanon so that it can cope with its crisis on its own.

The meeting of the International Support Group
for Lebanon in Paris on 5 March allowed for the
reaffirmation of the international consensus in favour
of unity, stability and sovereignty of Lebanon and for
the reiteration of its support for Lebanon as it deals
with the multiple impacts of the conflict in Syria. That
commitment should be continued in humanitarian,
economic and security spheres.

