Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to thank our briefers. I thought Dan Smith's briefing was particularly interesting. It is a helpful reminder that it is rarely the case in States like Somalia that all of a country's problems can be fixed through a top-down political process in smoke-filled rooms in the capital city and that actually a bottom-up community-based wider contextual understanding is important. I thought Mr. Smith's point around the need for the Security Council to think about conflict prevention is something that we struggle with sometimes. Thinking climate risk is part of that. The data input is also a very important aspect; I hope we can take that forward collectively. Let me start with one of the most positive elements to arise recently and congratulate the Government of Somalia on reaching the major milestone of eligibility for debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative, and let me commend the cooperation between the Federal Government and the federal member states on the financial reforms that have enabled them to reach this milestone. It is vital now that this cooperation between the Federal Government and the federal member states deepens and extends to political and security reform, which will allow Somalia to fulfil the criteria necessary for debt relief. Let me also welcome the recent enactment of the electoral law, which President Farmajo has noted was "a chance to execute democratic rights for one-person one-vote in the forthcoming 2021 elections". Butthat is only the first step. There are essential aspects of the elections that are still unresolved, and we are concerned about spoilers trying to push the process off track. It is therefore vital that the Somali Parliament take urgent steps to make progress on the passage of the amendments to the Political Parties Law, which will allow parties to register for the elections and to address other unresolved questions in the electoral law, including the definition of constituencies, the allocation of seats to constituencies, how the 30 per cent quota of seats for women - to which Somalia has committed - will be implemented and the management of seats in Banaadir and Somaliland. These questions need to be answered in order to make the electoral law technically implementable and fundable if we are to deliver peaceful, inclusive, credible and transparent one-person one-vote elections, in line with the provisional Constitution of Somalia. We regret that the National Independent Electoral Commission (NIEC) is unable to operate freely in all federal member states. The NIEC is an independent and impartial technical body empowered by the Constitution, and we call on Somali authorities at all levels to cooperate fully with the NIEC, to admit the registration of political parties and to take steps to ensure media freedoms. That is an example of one of the problems currently facing us in Somalia. We believe that it is primarily through dialogue and cooperation between the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member states that a resolution can be reached. That is simply essential to achieving a peaceful and agreed process for the transition of power. Elections are a crucial step towards a political settlement in Somalia and a broader constitutional review. We therefore call on the Federal Government and the federal member states to engage constructively and urgently in consensus building in order to agree on how the electoral model will be implemented. In order to ensure broader stability in Somalia, we urge all stakeholders in Galmudug state to engage in dialogue on local reconciliation so as to preserve the significant efforts and progress of the last seven months. We are concerned that a divided Galmudug with multiple claims to leadership will be harder to govern, and compromise must be made to avoid the risk of instability and conflict. We also urge all parties in Jubaland to ease tensions and address differences through dialogue and compromise. Let me turn to security and security reform. We are at a critical juncture in discussions on the long-term future of international support to Somali security and how we can support Somalia in taking the lead. The Council mandated an independent review of Somali security after 2021, and we urge regional partners to engage in consultations with Somalia, the United Nations and the African Union to help deliver a joint and unified solution for a post-2021 security model in Somalia. Rapid progress on security reforms is vital, including commitment to the delivery of a Somali-led transition plan and the implementation of a national security architecture. It is crucial that the drawdown of troops of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) happen in line with the threat assessments on the ground. This approach was not taken last time and it had a negative impact, so better consultation is important. We remain concerned about the ongoing climate- and conflict-induced humanitarian crisis. The current desert locust crisis in Somalia and the wider region is extremely worrying and the United Kingdom is coordinating closely with partners to limit the locust infestation and mitigate the impact of crop losses through surveillance and spraying operations. We call on the international community to provide more funding for the humanitarian response and to step up efforts to build resilience and long-term climate-mitigation initiatives in Somalia. I note that in the past 12 months, the United Kingdom has given over $400 million to the various humanitarian, political and security requirements in Somalia. Finally, let me pay tribute to the United Nations for its continued support under the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia. We pay tribute to the ongoing commitment and sacrifices of AMISOM troop-contributing countries and, of course, the Somali national security forces in their fight against Al-Shabaab. They are brave and tenacious men and women who are fighting for the security not only of Somalia but of the region and us all. Somalia and its international supporters face a huge task in the coming years in delivering inclusive national elections and a transition to Somali-led security. The United Kingdom will continue to stand firmly alongside Somalia, the United Nations and the African Union in those efforts. But without substantial progress, both on elections and on consensus-building between the different levels of Government, there is arisk that our next discussion on Somalia will be a much more difficult discussion. So, let us do everything we can to prevent that from happening.
