Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I wish to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to you, Mr.
President, for holding this open debate on the question
of small arms. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his substantive report (S/2005/69) on this
issue, and to support the recommendations contained
therein.

In our view, the United Nations Programme of
Action on small arms, which was adopted in 2001, is
the most comprehensive framework to deal with the
illicit trade in small arms. The Programme is a
significant, but only the first, big step towards
achieving the goal of controlling that scourge. We hope
that the follow-up process will find ways to strengthen
and further develop the measures contained in the
Programme.

Ukraine shares the view that efforts to combat the
illicit trade in, and proliferation of, small arms and
light weapons are greatly hampered by inadequate
national, regional and international capacity to trace
the sources and supply lines of illicit arms. While
recognizing the vital importance of international
cooperation, we believe that States bear the primary
responsibility to solve the problems associated with the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. States
should make their best effort to ensure that the
production, export, import, stockpiling, marking and
transfer of small arms and light weapons, as well as
record-keeping, are carried out in strict adherence to
international and national laws and regulations.

We are of the view that each element in the tracing
of illicit small arms and light weapons - marking,
record-keeping and international cooperation - should
remain a national prerogative. Any arrangement to be
established or further strengthened by a new
international instrument on tracing should not
duplicate, complicate or diminish the effectiveness of
existing mechanisms and arrangements, including
customs cooperation and mutual legal assistance.
Ukraine fully supports the view that any new
instrument should conform to the existing
commitments of States under the relevant bilateral,
regional and international arrangements and should
fully reflect national security interests. Above all, we
believe that a future instrument should be viable, effective
and workable, so that it can enjoy the broadest possible
support from the international community.

It is evident that promoting long-term conditions
for development and security is impossible without the
resolution of ongoing conflicts and the taking of
adequate measures aimed at ensuring stability in post-
conflict situations. The Council has made considerable
progress in that regard. However, we still have some
distance to cover in the areas of detailed monitoring
and working with businesses, financial institutions and
other actors on the implementation of arms embargoes.

The series of innovative measures taken by the
Security Council to enhance compliance with arms
embargoes, including by establishing independent
panels of experts and monitoring mechanisms, has
resulted in some positive outcomes. The problem
nevertheless persists. We fully support the Council's
consideration of action against States, entities and
individuals that deliberately violate United Nations
arms embargoes.

It is also important to review the lessons learned,
in order to ensure the effectiveness of further measures
that could be taken by the Security Council. It will be
useful to focus on the financial sources used to
purchase illegal weapons and to define the role that
international organizations, business and financial
institutions and other actors at the regional and local
levels can play in implementing arms embargoes.

Ukraine would also like to propose some
additional elements concerning illicit small arms and
light weapons for further exploration as the issue is
discussed: placing restrictions on the supply of
ammunition to areas of instability; and destroying
excessive old stockpiles of small arms and light
weapons. Ukraine believes that the effective
destruction of excessive old stockpiles of small arms
and light weapons in affected countries may prove to
be an important development.

In our view, the successful implementation of
NATO's Partnership for Peace trust fund project in my
country, which aims to destroy 1.5 million small arms
and light weapons and 133,000 tons of ammunition, as
well as future destruction programmes to be carried out
in Ukraine under the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Document on
Stockpiles of Conventional Ammunition, will make a
considerable contribution to international efforts in this
area.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that Ukraine
conducts a responsible policy in the field of arms
control. Ukrainian legislation envisages strict measures
to prevent the illegal manufacture, possession and
trafficking of all types of armaments, including small
arms and light weapons. A national export-control
system provides for effective procedures for licensing
imports and exports. Measures have also been taken to
improve national legislation in this field. One of the
latest steps was the adoption by the Government of
Ukraine of a set of practical measures to implement the
2001 United Nations Programme of Action and the
2000 OSCE Document on Small Arms and Light
Weapons.

Let me assure the Council that Ukraine will
continue to play an active part in international efforts
to combat the illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons and to rein in their uncontrolled proliferation.

