Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Iwould
like to begin by thanking Martin Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, as well as
John Ging, Director of the Coordination and Response
Division, United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, for their informative briefings
and their commitment, as well as that of their teams.
They have our full support.

In response to their interventions, I would like to
return to two points: first, the situation in Al-Hudaydah,
which necessitates the protection of civilians and
the guarantee of safe, complete and unhindered
humanitarian access; and, secondly, the essential need
for a negotiated political solution - the only way out
of the crisis in Al-Hudaydah and, more broadly, the
conflict in Yemen.

First, the situation in Al-Hudaydah remains very
fragile and the recent upsurge of violence is worrying.
We are extremely concerned about today's two-
pronged attack near the main Al-Hudaydah hospital,
which caused many casualties among civilians. We
once again reiterate the priority of France for the
protection of staff and medical facilities, as recalled in
the political declaration of 30 October 2017. We would
like that the circumstances surrounding that attack be
fully clarified.

We again call on all parties to fully respect
international humanitarian law, in particular
the principles of distinction, proportionality and
precaution. That is essential in order to prevent the
civilian population, who is already suffering the
worst current humanitarian crisis, from becoming
the primary victim of the clashes. Many have fled
the fighting in Al-Hudaydah, with nearly 121,000
displaced persons, according to the figures of the
International Organization for Migration and of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
It is absolutely essential that the displaced be able to
safely cross the front lines and have unhindered access
to humanitarian assistance. All ports and airports,
including Al-Hudaydah and Saleef ports and Sana'a
airport, must be kept open and operational.

On Houthi territory, international and local
humanitarian partners must also have safe access to
those in need. We reaffirm our commitment to the
freedom of movement in the Bab Al-Mandab strait,
which must be ensured. In that regard, we condemn
the Houthi attacks that targeted two Saudi tankers
on 25 July. We have noted the announcement by the
Houthis of the temporary suspension of their military
activities in the Red Sea. That is a first step in the right
direction. The high level of Violence in Al-Hudaydah
and elsewhere in the country threatens to undermine
over the long term the political momentum of the efforts
of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths.

Secondly, as the Security Council regularly
reiterates, there is no military solution in Yemen. The
political process remains the only possibility for the
country to emerge from a conflict that has lasted too
long. The United Nations mediation plays a central role
in reviving the peace negotiations. France renews its
full and complete support for the efforts of the Special
Envoy to relaunch the dialogue between the parties
with a view to an agreement on the management of
Al-Hudaydah port, the resumption of talks, a lasting
cessation of hostilities and the definition of the
parameters ofa political resolution.

We therefore call once again on the parties, for their
part, to commit in good faith to a comprehensive and
inclusive political agreement, particularly in the run-
up to the Geneva conference, in which it is essential
that all parties participate. We also encourage Yemen's
regional partners to constructively support that process.
The objective of the Security Council must be to ensure
a cessation of hostilities and to maintain the pressure
on the parties in that regard in order to promote the
momentum launched by the Special Envoy.

