Mr. Lucas (Angola): We are grateful to the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for presenting the forty-eighth
report on the implementation of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace on Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2015/84l, annex). The High Representative referred
to the remarkable progress achieved during the first
10 years of the implementation of the Agreement.
However, according to the report presented today, the
initial impetus has waned, and the challenges facing
the country seem enormous indeed.

Angola reaffirms its strong support for the
unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and for the General Framework
Agreement. However, we are particularly concerned at
the decision taken by the Republika Srpska National
Assembly to hold a referendum on jurisdiction and on
the High Representative's authority. Also of concern
is the threat by the Republika Srpska ruling party to
hold an independence referendum in 2018 if certain
demands of the entity are not met, as well as statements
by several high officials calling for the secession and
dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Those acts
undermine the cohesion of that multi-ethnic society
and hinder national reconciliation.

The decisions and subsequent actions taken and
the official statements made by the Republika Srpska
authorities constitute a violation of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and a threat to the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Bosnia and
Herzegovina pursuant to the General Framework Peace
Agreement.

We call on the political leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to refrain from the use of divisive rhetoric
and to make efforts to advance national reconciliation
and the integration of all ethnic communities.

Security incidents such as the one that took place
during the period under review have the potential to
negatively impact the overall political situation in
the country and become a serious challenge to the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. We regret
that only limited progress was made by the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina towards meeting the
benchmarks for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative, the escalation of verbal attacks and
the denial of access to the official information and
documentation required for the fulfilment of his
mandate. The leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
in particular the leaders of Republika Srpska, must
cooperate fully with the High Representative and abide
by his authority.

Regarding the positive aspects of the situation,
we welcome the entry into force of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the European Union leading to the
adoption of the Master Plan for Integration into the
European Union and the adoption, in July 2015, of the
Reform Agenda, including the new Federation Labour
Law. It is our hope that these concrete steps will set
Bosnia and Herzegovina on the path towards integration
into the European Union and contribute to making it a
united, sovereign, multi-ethnic, stable, prosperous and
developed country.

The reports on the participation of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina armed forces in international peace
operations and the country's commitment to participate
in peacekeeping missions in various countries
demonstrates its ability and determination to fully
integrate into the international community.

The visit paid by His Holiness Pope Francis to the
country was of particular relevance. It is our hope that
his message of healing and reconciliation will resonate
positively in the hearts and minds of the peoples of the
region.

Finally, we acknowledge the important role played
by the European Union military operation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, EUFOR Althea, in supporting the
country's efforts and maintaining a safe and secure
environment. We therefore supported the renewal of
the EUFOR Althea mandate for an additional period of
12 months, as set out in resolution 2247 (2015), adopted
today.

To conclude, we commend the work accomplished
by the Office of the High Representative in support
of peace, security and development in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We are confident of a better future, in
the expectation that the leadership of the country will
be able to look beyond the divisions of the past by
advancing political, social and economic reforms and
moving towards a peaceful and prosperous future.

