Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): First of all, I
would like to commend you, Mr. President, on your
timely initiative to hold this open debate on the impact
of illicit small arms trafficking on peace and security in
the Central African region.

We all come to this debate with our own regional
and geographical perspectives. Some of those speakers
who have spoken this afternoon have, of course,
demonstrated a much deeper knowledge of the
situation in Central Africa than Australia has. I would
like to take this opportunity to formally congratulate
those States on the specific measures they have listed
for us here today. But equally, we all share a common
purpose, as reflected in Article 1 of the United Nations
Charter, to maintain peace and security, including
through taking effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to peace.

The achievement of these goals involves building
confidence between nations and developing an
effective international security system. In part, this
requires concerted international efforts to prevent the
excessive accumulation and proliferation of
conventional weapons, including the eradication of the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.

But regional solutions to regional problems are
also critical. In this regard, Australia recognizes and
commends the efforts being made in Africa to bring
about sustainable peace and security. These efforts
include the Economic Community of West African
States Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons,
Their Ammunition and Other Related Materials; the
Southern African Development Community Protocol
on Control of Firearms, Ammunition and Other Related
Materials; and the Nairobi Protocol for the Prevention,
Control and Reduction of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in the Great Lakes Region and the Horn of
Africa. As my Foreign Minister, Stephen Smith, said
just today in a speech at Sydney University, it is
difficult to imagine making progress on global issues,
including disarmament, without working closely with
African countries and the African Union.

In our own region, Australia, in partnership with
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
hosted a Pacific regional meeting last year to further
the goals of the United Nations Programme of Action.
In doing so, we recognized that national security
cannot be achieved in isolation from regional or global
security. We also realized the importance that
confidence-building and effective collective action
among States plays in the pursuit of these goals.

Regional arms control arrangements, including in
Africa and the Pacific, are important examples of
collective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to peace and security. They also underpin, in
practical ways, the broader international security
framework, including the key United Nations
initiatives, such as the Programme of Action on Small
Arms and Light Weapons and the prospective arms
10-28131
trade treaty, in that they seek to prevent the illicit or
irresponsible transfer of arms.

It is in these broader international security
frameworks that all Member States can contribute to
strengthening cross-regional security. As United
Nations Members, we have valuable opportunities this
year to build on regional arms control initiatives and to
further strengthen international measures. As has been
mentioned by speakers before me, the Fourth Biennial
Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of
the United Nations Programme of Action on Small
Arms and Light Weapons, and also the first Preparatory
Committee meeting on the arms trade treaty, provide us
with an opportunity to buttress existing regional efforts
and to make real international progress.

Broader efforts in the General Assembly should
not be ignored either. As my colleague, the Deputy
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea,
mentioned just a few moments ago, Australia and the
Republic of Korea will once again be together
sponsoring a draft resolution on preventing and
combating illicit brokering at the Assembly's sixty-
fifth session. The resolution encourages States to
implement the domestic controls necessary to counter
illicit trafficking, and also recognizes the key role of
regional and subregional cooperation in countering that
threat.

We believe that we all share the same goal. The
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research
identified it in the context of the arms trade treaty in its
summary report on the regional seminar for countries
in Central, Northern and Western Africa, but this goal
is applicable across the entire arms-control agenda.
The goal I refer to is working towards freeing people
from fear. We look forward to working with other
Member States to further advance this objective and
the goals of the United Nations Programme of Action
on Small Arms and of the arms trade treaty. The United
Nations membership's continued and active support for
these initiatives will send a strong message to would-
be proliferators about the strength of international
resolve to stop the illicit and irresponsible trade in
conventional weapons, particularly small arms and
light weapons. In doing so, we will be living up to our
United Nations obligations to the maintenance of peace
and security.
10-28131

