The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the Under Secretary of State of Italy.

This open debate today confirms the consistent
commitment of the Security Council to effectively
address the issue oftrafficking in persons and the serious
violations of human rights related to it. The unanimous
adoption of resolution 2388 (2017) is a concrete step
forward in preventing and countering this scourge. The
Security Council thereby builds upon resolution 2331
(2016), and the comprehensive report (S/2017/939) of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of this
resolution to reaffirm the paramount importance of
aligning national legislation to the international legal
framework set by the Palermo Convention and other
relevant international instruments.

It also moves forward by emphasizing the urgency
for Member States to strengthen identification,
registration, protection and assistance for displaced
persons falling prey to trafficking. Timely detection
of routes and victims is key to effectively countering
this plight while addressing the specific needs of the
most vulnerable, especially women and children, who
make up the vast majority of the victims of trafficking.
The importance that the Council attaches to a victim-
centred approach is also testified by the special attention
given to unaccompanied and separated children, whose
increasing number is a matter of great concern.

The resolution also endorses the comprehensive
approach promoted by the Secretary-General to make
the United Nations system's action more effective and
coherent and, to that end, opens the way to further
discussions on the role of United Nations peacekeeping
and special political missions in supporting host State
efforts' to prevent and combat trafficking in persons.

As proven by our action as a member ofthe Council,
we strongly condemn trafficking in persons, especially
when it involves women and children, and we remain on
the front lines in combating it, as we do on a daily basis
in the Mediterranean, while prioritizing the protection
of human rights.

Trafficking in persons is a complex phenomenon and
a crime with a global dimension that must be prevented
and countered through an effective and coordinated
response by the entire international community. In
fact, as highlighted in the Global Report on Trafiicking
in Persons of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) in 2016, within the massive migratory
movements of the past few years - the largest ever seen
since the Second World War - figures related to the
exploitation by smugglers and traffickers of vulnerable
children, women and men are increasingly concerning.
International efforts should follow a victim-centred,
gender-specific and child-sensitive approach and should
take into consideration the links between transnational
organized crime, terrorism and trafficking networks.

Equally, the response of States should be based on a
common understanding of trafficking in persons and a
widely accepted legal framework. We therefore confirm
and support the importance of a universal ratification
and implementation of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, especially Women and Children.

Increased international, regional and bilateral
cooperation with countries of origin and transit
of migrants is of paramount importance, as many
speakers have underscored. As a concrete contribution
to that process, our country decided to support the two
projects implemented by UNODC aimed at enhancing
legal cooperation in the fight against traffickers in
West, North and East Africa. As stated in the political
declaration on the implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons, adopted by the General Assembly at the
high-level meeting in September, human trafficking is
often more likely to happen in situations where social,
economic cultural, political and other factors make
people more vulnerable to trafficking.

We should therefore insist on a comprehensive
approach aimed at addressing high-risk factors, such
as poverty, unemployment, inequality, humanitarian
emergencies, social exclusion and marginalization.
Human trafficking is a multidimensional phenomenon
that entails threats to respect for fundamental human
rights and to international peace and security. For those
reasons, the Council should continue to keep that issue
high on its agenda. We all need to make additional
efforts, to work to prevent and to counter it and to give
to its victims relief and new opportunities to rebuild
their lives.

In that regard, we recently contributed to the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.

I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate through the lunch hour, as
we have a large number of participants.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

