Allow me to begin by congratulating you, Madam President, on your presidency of the Security Council this month. I wish you and your delegation every success, and I wish everyone the best of health. The Yemeni Government, led by President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, is still working intensively to fulfil its aspiration of bringing an end to the war imposed on the Yemeni people by the armed Houthi militias. The war has caused a dire humanitarian crisis and shattered the dreams and hopes of Yemenis to build a future that would bring about their dream of a modern, civilian democratic State and thus fulfil its aspirations and safeguard its dignity. The social fabric of Yemen has been torn apart. Sectarian and racist ideas have been spread. Yemenis have been displaced in waves. They have been repressed, detained and subjected to enforced disappearance in flagrant violation of the rules of international humanitarian law and human rights law. Under the President's leadership, the Yemeni Government is determined to bring an end to the suffering of the Yemeni people in this futile and unjust war. The Government has made concessions and done everything it can to let the language of dialogue and peace prevail over the language of war and destruction. It has responded positively to the endeavours of the United Nations, acting through the Special Envoy for Yemen, to achieve a just and comprehensive peace based on the agreed terms of reference, namely the Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the All-Inclusive National Dialogue Conference and the resolutions of the Security Council on Yemen, particularly resolution 2216 (2015). It has responded in a spirit of firm conviction to all invitations and proposals intended to achieve the peace to which the Yemeni people aspires. These include the proposal of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Martin Griffiths, for a draft joint declaration, to which it reacted positively from the very first draft, out of determination to facilitate his efforts in that regard. Unfortunately, at every turn, the Houthi militias made new conditions to the draft. They proved intransigent, they delayed, and they hampered the efforts of the United Nations and its Special Envoy with regard to the political process and the economic and humanitarian dimensions. Turning to the issue of prisoners and detainees, the Yemeni Government has endeavoured to ensure the release of all prisoners and persons detained arbitrarily, subjected to enforced disappearance or under house arrest on the basis of the all- for-all principle, including the four individuals mentioned in the Security Council resolution. However, the Houthi militias have hampered the full implementation of the agreement and engaged in blackmail for political gain. Nevertheless, the Government has worked to make the agreement reached in October 2020 a success. With support from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Yemeni Government has worked to implement the Riyadh Agreement and the mechanism to accelerate its implementation, at a time when our Yemeni people is facing exceptionally complex circumstances that necessitate a unified effort to engage in a national project to revive State institutions, achieve security and stability, overcome economic and development challenges, and work under the legitimate authorities, led by President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, to restore State authority, put an end to the coup, provide services and a dignified life for citizens, and alleviate their suffering. We highly appreciate the support of Saudi Arabia at every stage, and we are fully confident in the role of Saudi Arabia in moving forward in order to make the Agreement a success. The Iranian rogue regime has continued to undermine security and stability in Yemen and the region by supporting the Houthi militias with funds, weapons and military expertise, which they use to kill Yemenis, attack navigation lines and civilian targets in Saudi Arabia, and endanger international peace and security. The regime does not respect the rules of international law or the resolutions of the Security Council. It recently announced the appointment of officer of the Iranian Republican Guard as so-called ambassador to the Houthi militias in Sana'a. That decision flagrantly violates the rules of international law, the Charter of the United Nations, the two Vienna Conventions on Diplomatic and Consular Relations, and Security Council resolution 2216 (2015). It sets a dangerous precedent that a rogue state can send its representatives to rebel coup militia groups. Such conduct is one more sign of Iran's expansionist agenda in Yemen and the region, and of its bare- faced interference in the affairs of sovereign States. Once again, we call on the Security Council to assume its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security by condemning and putting a stop to the irresponsible behaviour of the Iranian regime. My Government will continue working to achieve economic stability and pay public sector salaries regularly in all regions of Yemen, including by preserving the value of the national currency. However, it faces a great many difficulties and obstacles. The Houthi militias have continued to prevent the circulation of new banknotes in the national currency. In so doing, they have further exacerbated and complicated the economic situation. Their intention is to maximize their profits by boosting the black market in currency and fuel in the areas under their control. They have also bankrolled their factional, sectarian project by imposing illegal, racist levies, such as a supplementary 20 per cent religious tax to prop up the oppressive, racist regime. All the revenue from that tax goes to a given faction. They have continued to misappropriate revenue from petroleum products at the port of Al-Hudaydah and to hamper the entry of vessels carrying fuel to areas under their control. Despite those violations and obstacles, the President has instructed the authorities to cooperate in order to alleviate the suffering of Yemenis in areas under Houthi control. He has supported the efforts of the Special Envoy and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs. The Houthis have breached the agreement brokered by the Special Envoy and taken more than 50 billion Yemeni riyals from the account intended to collect fuel revenue for the payment of salaries. Nevertheless, the Government continues to make numerous concessions and to take measures to ease the situation. For instance, in the last six months, it has granted transit permits to fuel trucks carrying more than 1,337,000 tons of fuel headed exclusively for areas under the control of the Houthis. That quantity is enough to meet the needs of those areas until the end of 2020. We call on the Security Council to put pressure on the Houthis to desist from such practices, make the economy a neutral space, stop creating artificial oil crises, and lift restrictions on the circulation of national currency. More than four months have passed since the Security Council held a special meeting to discuss the oil tanker FSO SAFER (S/2020/721). Every month, we keep hearing how the Houthi militias have clearly hindered the efforts of the United Nations to send a technical team to inspect and maintain the vessel and unload its cargo of oil. The Houthi militias' intransigence and their imperviousness to the appeals of the international community - not to mention the potential catastrophic effects of an oil leak or an explosion on board the vessel - merely confirm the nature of their conduct and their agenda. They seek to destroy all that is beautiful in Yemen, and to increase the suffering of Yemenis, flagrantly defying the efforts of the international community and the Security Council to avoid the environmental and economic disaster that looms closer with every passing day. We appreciate the contributions of numerous States to the fund for the maintenance of the tanker. We reiterate our call on the Security Council to shoulder its responsibility and adopt a decisive position in order to spare Yemen and the region a catastrophe whose effects could be felt for decades. The Council should exercise pressure on the Houthis, who continue to procrastinate and to manipulate the situation to use this issue for political blackmail.
