Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would first like to thank
the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, President
Clinton, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Hedi Annabi, for their
briefings. Let me also extend a warm welcome to
Prime Minister Pierre-Louis and thank her for her
insightful presentation. We also thank her for the
excellent hospitality accorded to the Security Council
mission in March this year.

I would further like to take this opportunity to
express our deep appreciation to President Clinton for
his involvement in the advancement of peace and
development in Haiti. His special role in helping to
generate a broader awareness of the challenges facing
Haiti, as well as in further motivating the international
community to address the needs and expectations of
the Haitian people, is most commendable.

Today's debate, the second within the past five
months, and the wide interest that it has drawn from
the Member States stand as testimony to the
importance that we all attach to nurturing the promise
of that country. In fact, much has already been
accomplished to that end, and this year in particular
has been an extremely encouraging period regarding
Haiti's prospects. As such, today's meeting gives us a
good opportunity to take stock of the progress made so
far and to reiterate our resolve for continued
engagement.

In that regard, the appointment of and visits by
President Clinton, as well as the Security Council
mission to Haiti, have helped us streamline our
endeavours towards that country with renewed focus
and dedication. The donors conference in Washington,
D.C., in April also provided a much-needed political
and financial boost to our collective efforts.

We observe with great pleasure that the Haitian
people and Government have also been most
responsive to those efforts, vindicating the investment
of the United Nations and the international community
in Haiti. In that context, we are particularly glad to see
increased political cooperation among the parties, as
evidenced by the partial senatorial elections having
being held without major incident and by the security
environment preserving its calm.

All those developments point in the same
direction - the security situation in Haiti is clearly
evolving from the risk of a major social outburst to a
less massive, but still relatively precarious condition,
requiring first and foremost policing tasks. As such, it
is noteworthy that the Secretary-General has
recommended downsizing the military component of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) by 120 troops, while adding the same
number of police officers to the formed police units.

It also explains why the Haitian authorities are
also considering the re-establishment of a special
gendarmerie-type force with domestic security
responsibilities. As a country that has long-standing
experience and expertise in such forces, Turkey stands
ready to cooperate with the Haiti Government if and
when it is ready to take further steps in that direction.

That said, the positive developments in the field
of security should not make us forget that the
underlying causes of instability in Haiti - extreme
poverty and the unstable socio-economic environment -
are still there. Although there has been a clear
improvement in the macroeconomic indicators, the
relative recovery of the economy has not yet fully
translated into tangible progress in the everyday lives
of Haitians, and thus there is still a long way to ensure
a sustainable development track.

That is why we think that the socio-economic
assistance efforts of President Clinton must be
advanced in tandem with MINUSTAH's stabilization
endeavours in order to create the conditions conducive
to the maintenance of peace, security and prosperity in
Haiti. That is also why Turkey, in addition to its
continued police contribution to MINUSTAH, will
explore new avenues of assistance to and cooperation
with Haiti in a way that will address the most pressing
needs of the Haitian people.

In conclusion, we are pleased to see that some
progress has been achieved in Haiti and we are

confident that a brighter future awaits the Haitians. To
that end, a functioning judiciary system, improved
collaboration between the State branches, the
continued development of the Haitian National Police
both in numbers and capabilities, and, above all, a
substantial improvement in the living standard of the
Haitians are key benchmarks for a complete
normalization in Haiti.

Accordingly, we believe that there is still a need
for MINUSTAH to remain in Haiti and thus fully
support the recommendation of the Secretary-General
to extend its mandate until 15 October 2010.

