Mrs. Haley (United States of America): In this
meeting, I will not use the Council's time to address
where a sovereign nation might decide to put its
embassy, and why we have every right to do so. Rather,
I will address a more appropriate and urgent concern.

This week marks the first anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 2334 (2016). On that day in
December 2016 (see S/PV.7853), the United States
elected to abstain in the voting in the Council, allowing
the measure to be adopted. Now it is one year and a new
Administration later. Given the chance to vote again
on resolution 2334 (2016), I can say with complete
confidence that the United States would vote "no". We
would exercise our veto power. The reasons are very
relevant to the cause of peace in the Middle East.

On the surface, resolution 2334 (2016) described
Israeli settlements as impediments to peace. Reasonable
people can disagree about that and, in fact, over the
years the United States has expressed criticism ofIsraeli
settlement policies many times. But in truth, it was
resolution 2334 (2016) itself that was an impediment
to peace. The Security Council put the negotiations
between the Israelis and the Palestinians further out
of reach by injecting itself yet again in between the
two parties to the conflict. By misplacing the blame
for the failure of peace efforts squarely on the Israeli
settlements, the resolution gave a pass to Palestinian
leaders who for many years rejected one peace proposal
after another. It also gave them encouragement to avoid
negotiations in future. It refused to acknowledge the
legacy of failed negotiations unrelated to settlements.
Furthermore, the Council passed judgement on issues
that must be decided in direct negotiations between
the parties.

If the United Nations history in the peace efforts
proves anything, it is that talking in New York cannot
take the place of face-to-face negotiations between the
regional parties. It only sets back the cause of peace,
not advances it. As ifto make that very point, resolution
2334 (2016) demanded a halt to all Israeli settlement
activity in East Jerusalem, even in the Jewish quarter
of the Old City. That is something that no responsible
person or country would ever expect Israel would
do and, in that way resolution 2334 (2016) did what
President Trump's announcement on Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel did not do - it prejudged issues that
should be left to final status negotiations.

Given the chance today, the United States would
veto resolution 2334 (2016) for another reason. The
resolution gave new life to an ugly creation of the
Human Rights Council: the database of companies
operating in Jewish communities. That is an effort to
create a blacklist, plain and simple. It is yet another
obstacle to a negotiated peace. It is a stain on America's
conscience that we gave the so-called boycott,
divestmen and sanctions movement momentum by
allowing the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016).

To the United Nations shame, this has been a
disproportionately hostile place for the Middle East's
most enduring democracy. The United States refuses to
accept the double standard that says we are not impartial
when we stand by the will of the American people by
moving our United States Embassy; but somehow the
United Nations is a neutral party when it consistently
singles out Israel for condemnation. For decades, Israel
has withstood wave after wave of bias in the United
Nations and its agencies. The United States has often
stood beside Israel. We did not on 23 December 2016.
We will not make that mistake again.

This week marks the one-year anniversary of a
significant setback for peace in the Middle East peace,
but the United States has an undiminished commitment
to helping bring about final-status negotiations that
will lead to lasting peace. Our hand remains extended
to both parties. We call on all countries that share this
commitment to learn the hard lessons of the past and
work to bring Israel and the Palestinian people to the
peace table in good faith.

