Mr. Danforth (United States of America): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.

We welcome the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2004/888) on the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET) and Special Representative
Hasegawa's presentation to the Council. We support
the Secretary-General's recommendation to extend
UNMISET for a final six months, until 20 May 2005.

During the last six months of the mandate,
UNMISET personnel should continue transferring
skills and should prepare to transfer responsibility for
civil administration, justice, and security to their East
Timor counterparts, bilateral donors and other United
Nations agencies. As we approach the end of a very
successful peacekeeping mission, we must consider
outstanding issues that remain unresolved. Most
important, the international community should consider
what measures should be taken to ensure accountability
for the atrocities committed in East Timor in 1999.

As we have stated numerous times, there must be
accountability for the human rights violations
committed in East Timor. The international community
has a responsibility to address this issue. The recent
ruling by an appeals court in Indonesia overturning
another ad hoc tribunal conviction, bringing the total of
those convicted down to a single individual, directly
impacts the larger issue of achieving this
accountability. The ad hoc tribunal process was
seriously flawed. It failed to provide a full and credible
accounting for the crimes committed in East Timor in
1999. There must be some level of accountability for
those atrocities to create a climate conducive to the
development of democratic institutions in both
Indonesia and East Timor.

Given the limited jurisdiction of the Serious
Crimes Unit and its inability to address crimes already
perpetrated by the Indonesian military, and given the
failure of the Indonesian ad hoc tribunal process,
additional remedial measures may be required. We
believe that the Secretary-General should send an
expert assessment mission to East Timor and Indonesia
to examine the current processes and make
recommendations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

In order to optimize the use of our time, I will not
individually invite speakers to take seats at the table.
When a speaker is taking the floor, the Conference
Officer will seat the next speaker as well.

I call first on the representative of Timor-Leste.

