Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): More
than five years after the start of the conflict in Darfur,
we are in a critical situation, with significant progress
being made in the political process and the deployment
of the hybrid operation. Actions taken by the Sudan,
the countries of the subregion and the international
community will, to a large extent, define the future of
that region.

In this context, we consider the recent visit to the
Sudan and Chad by Under-Secretary-General John
Holmes to have been timely, and we thank him for his
detailed briefing on his visits. We are also grateful to
the Permanent Representative of Chad for his
comments and welcome his presence here in this
Chamber.

There is no doubt that we must achieve a
permanent ceasefire and political settlement to the
conflict in Darfur. Nevertheless, protecting the
population is a matter of immediate importance. For
this reason, Panama welcomes the cooperation of the
Government of the Sudan in speeding up bureaucratic
procedures relative to humanitarian actors, and we are
confident that these will be duly implemented.

Despite efforts to improve the humanitarian
situation, the recurrence of crimes committed against
humanitarian personnel and operations in Darfur and
eastern Chad is reason for concern. We strongly
condemn these attacks and underscore the need to
bring those responsible for these crimes to justice.

We reiterate that protecting civilians and
humanitarian workers is primarily the responsibility of
the Governments of the Sudan and Chad, but this does
not exempt armed groups from their obligations under
international humanitarian law. We urge the parties to
the conflict to grant unrestricted access to humanitarian
actors, so that they can provide humanitarian assistance
to the communities that need it.

The scale of the conflict in Darfur must not
distract us from the civilian population in southern
Sudan. We applaud Mr. Holmes' visit to Abiye and
Juba aimed at encouraging the donor community and
the Government of southern Sudan to deal with the
most pressing humanitarian needs of the population
there. We encourage Mr. Holmes and Members of this
Organization to continue to devote their best efforts to
hasten the return of displaced persons and to promote
development in the region.

Furthermore, and with a view to minimizing the
impact of the Darfur crisis on the security and
humanitarian situation in eastern Chad, close
cooperation between the Government of Chad and the
international community is essential. We wish to
highlight the tireless efforts in this regard carried out
by the European Union-led peacekeeping force
(EUFOR) in Chad and the Central African Republic
and the elements of the Detachement integre de
securite, which is already deployed. The security
vacuum that could occur upon the completion of the
EUFOR mandate could place civilians at risk. We
believe that, given the fragile security situation, it is
essential that a robust United Nations military force
replace EUFOR at the end of its mandate in March
2009.

