Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
After the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding
between Iraq and the United Nations on 23 February 1998,
the relationship between the two sides continued to be a
good one. Everything seemed to be going smoothly and
naturally. That relationship was free of any problem
whatsoever; during that period no problems, in the full
sense of the word, were created.

Everyone hoped that this situation would continue.
However, Iraq's decision of 5 August this year has caused
much damage to that relationship. That was followed by
the decision of 31 October, which further complicated the
situation.

My delegation finds those decisions by Iraq
unfortunate. Even as the Security Council was preparing,
over the last two months, to undertake a comprehensive
review, the latest Iraqi decision put an end to all those
strenuous efforts made by the members of the Council.

It is in Iraq's interest to rescind those two decisions
and resume its cooperation with the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We hope that this will
be done as soon as possible. My delegation believes that
there is still a chance, and it should be seized. The
international community should make a greater effort to
convince Iraq and to encourage it to rescind its two
previous decisions.

Iraq's decision to rescind these two decisions to
cease cooperation with UNSCOM. and IAEA would pave
the way for the comprehensive review which was
prepared by the Council and contained in the letter of its
President addressed to the Secretary-General on 30
October.
The review consists of two phases: that of destroying
weapons of mass destruction and that of freeing Kuwaiti
prisoners and restoring Kuwaiti property. We hope that
through this review, Iraq will commit itself to meeting its
obligation. Then the lifting of the long-lasting embargo
could begin, an embargo that has caused the Iraqi people
much suffering and much material and moral damage.

In conclusion, my delegation supports the draft
resolution that we are about to endorse today, and we
hope that it will have positive effects. At the same time,
we hope that consultation and dialogue will continue so
that a way out of the present crisis can be found. That
would enable Iraq to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions and thereby devote itself to the
economic and social development that it so sorely needs.

