Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would first like to remind my French
colleague that there is no Russian-Ukrainian conflict.
There is an internal Ukrainian conflict and a crisis
in the relations between Ukraine and Russia that was
created by the former Ukrainian leadership. In the
context that the representative of France referred to, it
does not exist. Ifhe continues to repeat it, Iwill continue
to remind him of that. Secondly, the law that we are
discussing was approved on 15 May, not 25 April. The
law was enacted on 25 April by the Verkhovna Rada.

The Russian Federation asked for this meeting to
be convened in connection with the signing on 15 May
by Ukraine's outgoing President, Petr Poroshenko, of a
law establishing the status of the Ukrainian language
as the country's national language. It is true that the
law does not come into force until mid-July, and it
will be a number of years before some of its provisions
come into force at all. However, that does not negate
its essence. That is why we consider it essential for
the Security Council to give its opinion of the law
today, pre-emptively, because we firmly believe it is a
direct violation of the spirit and letter of the package
of measures for fulfilling the Minsk agreements,
which the Security Council approved and supported
through its adoption of resolution 2202 (2015) and its
presidential statement of June 2018 (S/PRST/2018/12).
We are therefore talking about a violation of Security
Council decisions.

It may appear to some that a violation of the
language provisions of the Minsk agreements is less
significant against the backdrop of the Ukrainian
armed forces' daily shelling of the peaceful citizens
of Donbas and of Kyiv's unwillingness to establish
a lasting ceasefire, legislate special status for parts
of the Donetsk and Luhansk areas, finalize prisoner
exchanges and so forth. However, the importance of
the issue at hand goes far beyond the framework of
this Ukrainian law. We want to point out that it is not
accidental that the right to language self-determination
is directly established in the package of measures. If
we consider it carefully, the language issue is precisely
what triggered the centrifugal trends in Ukraine in
2014.

As we know, one of the Maidan authorities' first
decisions was repealing the law on the status of the
Russian language, officially entitled "On the principles
of the State language policy", which had come into
force on 10 August 2012. It was after that decision that
people's silent dissatisfaction with the Maidan events
began to be transformed in Ukraine's eastern regions
into a struggle to preserve their national and cultural
identity. In other words, the language issue is one of
the underlying causes of Ukraine's internal conflict.
We believe that it is essential that the Security Council
send a clear message to Ukraine's new leadership on
the importance of setting a course of inclusion, aimed
at unity and bringing Ukrainians together rather than
dividing them. After all, a united society is the best
guarantee of a lasting political settlement. As far as
we can judge, that was the central message expressed
today by Ukraine's newly elected President, Volodymyr
Zelensky, at his inauguration. However, for the time
being that is far from everyone's view, and the calls
from nationalists for ousting the Russian language are
as loud as ever.

We hope that Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs Rosemary DiCarlo and
Lamberto Zannier, High Commissioner on National
Minorities of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, will provide an honest and
objective assessment of Mr. Poroshenko's swan song
and the possible consequences of his actions and plans
for a settlement in eastern Ukraine.

We know that not all the delegations around this
table are dying to hold today's meeting. I would like to
remind them that a month ago (see S/PV.8516), when it
was proposed that we discuss President Putin's signing
of a decree on the modalities of granting Russian
passports to the citizens of Donbas, the Russian
delegation did not object, despite the fact that the issue
is strictly internal to our country and has nothing to
do with the parties' fulfilment of their obligations
under the Minsk package of measures, as the ensuing
discussion eloquently demonstrated. We firmly believe
that every Council member has the right to submit for
the Council's consideration any issue that it believes
could be a threat to international peace and security.
A refusal to have that discussion today would not only
be a gross example of double standards, it would also
undermine the authority of the Security Council.

