Mr. Hetesy (Hungary): I wish at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on South Korea's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council, and I thank you
for having convened this important debate.

Hungary aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union.

Given the lateness of the hour, I will concentrate
on one important aspect of the protection of civilians,
namely, the issue of accountability.

While the Security Council's primary responsibility
is the settlement of disputes, which constitute a threat
to international peace and security, in situations where
civilians are being targeted the Council must also
take all measures at its disposal to protect the civilian
population until such settlement is reached. Such
measures must include ensuring that the perpetrators
of serious crimes are held accountable in cases where
national authorities fail to prosecute them.

Political reconciliation and accountability are
closely interlinked and mutually reinforcing. It is not
an either/or question. All political solutions, in order to
become lasting ones, must be based on accountability.
There can be no peace without justice. Furthermore,
accountability can serve as an effective deterrent and
may contribute to the prevention of future attacks
against the civilian population.

It is on the basis of the aforementioned principles that
Hungary joined the initiative of Switzerland and signed
a letter, along with 56 other Member States - almost
one third of the United Nations membership, from all
corners of the world - requesting the Security Council
to refer the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We are heartened to note that
the initiative is now supported by additional Member
States, including members of the Council. It is now the
collective responsibility of the Council to act on this
request when addressing the situation in Syria.

In a similarly disturbing armed conflict situation,
we note with appreciation that based on the request
of Mali, the ICC is now investigating all crimes
within its jurisdiction committed in that country
since January 2012. Key regional and international
organizations have acknowledged the need for justice
as part of the resolution of the crisis in Mali.
It is our fervent hope that in future the Security
Council will increasingly look at the ICC not only
as an important ally that may assist the Council in
its task related to the protection of civilians, but also
acknowledge its indirect role in the prevention of
conflicts.

