Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): It gives
me great pleasure to address the Council today on the
situation in Afghanistan, which is an issue of great
significance to us, our region and the world.

I wish to express my thanks to the Secretary-General
for the report contained in document S/2012/907. Let me
convey my warm welcome to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Kubis. We thank him
for presenting a comprehensive report on the work of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and for his analysis of the situation in
Afghanistan.

Recently, there have been notable political,
economic and development changes in Afghanistan, as
elaborated by Afghan Ambassador Zahir Tanin earlier
in the meeting. On the political scene, one important
development has been the reduction of foreign forces
as we head towards the target date for the complete
withdrawal of foreign combat troops.

On the issue of the national reconciliation process
in Afghanistan, we believe that it should be an Afghan-
owned and Afghan-led process. National reconciliation
is an important component in settling the internal
conflict in Afghanistan. In the light of resolutions
2082 (2012) and 2083 (2012), adopted by the Council
on Monday, 17 December, and while supporting the
Afghan Government's peace and national reconciliation
efforts, we believe that there is a need to draw a fine
line with extreme diligence. The Afghan people have
endured a great deal of suffering, caused by extremist
policies and terrorist acts, for so many years. Rebuilding
Afghanistan and a new Afghan society requires, inter
alia, repudiating those policies and acts. Thus, any
efforts towards national reconciliation should be
undertaken without appearing to be rewarding the
perpetrators of those acts and policies.

In the economic field, international and regional
partners should concentrate their efforts on laying
the foundations for sustainable economic growth and
better employment conditions in Afghanistan. For that
purpose, there is a need for accelerated progress on
economic cooperation with regional and international
partners, in accordance with the national objectives set
forth by the Afghan Government. It goes without saying
that the expansion of infrastructure and industrial,
agricultural and transportation projects have priority.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is ready, as before, to
undertake its share in implementation of such projects.

The production of and trade in narcotic drugs is
still rampant. According to thejoint Afghanistan Opium
Survey 2012 carried out by the Afghanistan Ministry
of Counter Narcotics and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), opium cultivation in
Afghanistan has risen by 18 per cent in 2012. UNODC
warns that the rise in cultivation occurred despite the
Afghan Government's recent increased efforts to destroy
poppy fields and help farmers find alternative sources
of income. The Survey sends a strong message that the
international community should not remain complacent
in the face of the problem. A strong commitment is
needed on the part of Afghan and international partners
alike to curb the menace of drug cultivation and drug
trafficking, which breed extremism. In that regard,
we commend the initiatives launched to fight drugs,
with the help of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, particularly because drug production has
been a major source of funding for terrorist activities
in Afghanistan.

The issue of refugees remains a challenge not only
for Afghanistan but for neighbouring States and the
international community as well. Additional efforts
must be undertaken to repatriate refugees and ensure that
they are reintegrated into Afghan society. At present,
more than 1 million Afghan refugees are registered
in Iran, while an even greater number of unregistered
Afghans are also living in our country. Afghan nationals
have continued to enjoy Iran's educational and welfare
facilities, among others, and to benefit from the same
subsidies that our own people receive. We urge the
international community to continue to strengthen and
expedite its efforts to create the conditions conducive
to the sustainable repatriation of refugees and their full
rehabilitation and reintegration in their homeland.

The Islamic Republic of Iran has always firmly
supported Afghanistan in its efforts to maintain its
national sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity and to realize enduring peace and stability.
We hope that the international community will adhere
to the principle of an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
process and continue to support the Government and
the people ofAfghanistan in their efforts towards peace
and stability.

In that regard we emphasize the United Nations
role in coordinating issues related to Afghanistan. As
our officials indicated in their meeting with Mr. Jan
Kubis during his visit to Tehran, we support UNAMA
in fulfilling its mission to provide assistance for
peace and the reconstruction of the country within its
mandate and through a robust regional engagement
with neighbouring countries on issues such as border
security, immigration, refugees and drug control.

Building a sustainable, stable Afghanistan is
crucial not only for the future of the Afghan people but
also for peace and stability in the region, Asia and the
world. It is our sincere hope that we will soon witness
more development, progress and prosperity for the
people and Government of Afghanistan.

