Mr. Brammertz: I thank Council members for
this opportunity to address them on the Office of the
Prosecutor's progress towards the completion of our
mandate.

In this reporting period, we completed our work
in the trial of Radovan Karadzie, having submitted
our final trial brief and presented our closing oral
arguments. Over the course of the trial, more than
550 witnesses testified and over 10,000 exhibits were
submitted, totaling 165,000 pages of transcripts and
documentary evidence. It is an immense record of
the crimes and of those responsible for them. The
judgement, as has been mentioned, is expected next
fall. The Office of the Prosecutor remains grateful to
all victims and witnesses who participated in the trial
and contributed to ensuring justice and accountability
for those horrific crimes. Without their courage, that
trial, like all others, would not have been possible.

There are now only two remaining courtroom
trials, Mladic' and HadZic'. In both, the defence is
currently presenting its evidence. Appeals proceedings
are ongoing in five cases. During the reporting period,
the multi-accused Prh'c' et al. case was a major focus
for the Appeals Division of my Office. Convicted at
trial, the six accused have submitted 168 grounds of
appeal, for which the Appeals Division in the Office
of the Prosecutor is preparing responses, in addition to
preparing the Prosecution's four grounds of appeal.

However, as events during the reporting period
have demonstrated, the ultimate conclusion of trials and
appeals is beyond our control. In Hadiic', the Prosecution
closed its case in October 2013. Unfortunately, time
saved in the Prosecution case has since been lost, as the
proceedings are now further delayed by newly-arisen
concerns regarding Hadzie's health. The issuance of
the trial judgement in the Seselj case has been delayed
again, as the replacement judge has indicated he will
require an additional year to prepare for deliberations.
The Office of the Prosecutor understands and shares
the frustration of many that the trial judgement has not
yet been issued. knowing that the last witness testified
in July 2010 and the trial closed in March 2012.

The Trial Chamber took the initiative to
provisionally release Seselj under limited conditions.
His disregard of the Tribunal's orders and insults to
victim communities made it necessary for my Office to
ask the Trial Chamber to revoke his provisional release.
That motion is currently pending. The intensity of the
reactions to Seselj's release and his revival of rhetoric
from two decades ago remind us that reconciliation
remains fragile. It should encourage us to redouble our
efforts to ensure accountability for serious violations
of international humanitarian law and to firmly stand
against all forms of revisionism.

Day-to-day cooperation between the Tribunal and
the countries of the former Yugoslavia continues to
meet our expectations. We thank national authorities for
their cooperation and fully expect it to continue in the
next reporting period. In relation to national war crimes
prosecutions, however, my written report (S/2014/827, annex I) notes that further improvements are needed.
Regional cooperation agreements have been signed, but
have not yet been widely put into practice. Fugitives
continue to avoid accountability by finding safe haven
across borders. While cases continue against low-level
perpetrators, there needs to be a greater focus on cases
against senior- and mid-level suspects. We recognize,
however, that in recent days prosecutors in Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina successfully carried out a
joint cross-border arrest operation in preparation for
prosecutions in both States. That is a very positive
development that demonstrates how much more can
be achieved through effective cooperation. We urge
prosecutorial authorities in the region to build on that
important success.

During the reporting period, I undertook two
missions to Bosnia and Herzegovina to discuss national
war crimes prosecutions with the Chief Prosecutor
and other officials. Five so-called category 11 cases
remain unresolved. Cases continue to be broken up
into individual indictments, and some of the previous
undertakings to correct these issues remain unfulfilled.
More generally, the Steering Board of the National War
Crimes Strategy and the State-level judiciary reported
their concerns that the work of the Prosecutor's Office
is not moving in a positive direction. They fear that
quality is being sacrificed to increase the quantity
of indictments. They also believe that far more
indictments should charge crimes against humanity.
Nonetheless, while the list of challenges is long, good
management and leadership in the Prosecutor's Office
can put matters back on the right track to build upon
past achievements.

We will continue to support accountability efforts
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and other States in the
former Yugoslavia through the transfer of information
and evidence to national prosecutors, as the Security
Council has directed. Our liaison prosecutors project
remains an important component of our support
and serves as a precedent for cooperation between
international and national prosecutors.

During my missions to the region the many victims
I met with reminded us that prosecutions are not the
only issue that deserves attention. Reparations for
victims of the conflict have not yet been fully and
fairly addressed. While the discovery of the mass grave
in Tomasica last year was an important success in the
search for missing persons, many families throughout
the region still do not know the fate of their loved
ones. Efforts to search for missing persons must be
maintained and intensified.

At this time last year, I reported that the relationship
of trust between the Tribunal and the public was under
strain. Unfortunately, among victims and the Tribunal's
supporters many do not believe that the situation has
improved. They point to cases that have been delayed
time and again. Many express their view that not
enough information is provided to explain what they
see as controversial decisions. Critical reflection is
still needed at the Tribunal. And, as in national courts
around the world, at international tribunals there
should be no tension between judicial independence
and efficient case management.

The Tribunal's legacy, however, should not be
measured by the past few years alone. There have
been many important achievements in ensuring
accountability for crimes committed during the
conflicts in the former Yugoslavia. As members
know, we are currently prosecuting some of the most
important cases in the Tribunal's history. In just a few
years, the Tribunal will complete all its outstanding
work and close its doors. Only then can its legacy be
fully assessed.

In conclusion, finalizing our work in accordance
with the completion strategy continues to be the primary
objective of my Office. We remain fully focused
on completing our remaining work as efficiently
as possible, and we will continue to implement our
downsizing in line with the completion of trials and
appeals, while supporting our staff as they transition
to new careers.

