Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): We are once again
assembled, for the second time today, to consider another
extremely grave situation in the Middle East. My
delegation, like all others, is deeply concerned over the
recent escalation of hostilities along the Israel-Lebanon
border and inside Lebanon, which has resulted in deaths
and injuries to innocent civilians. We find this extension
of the conflict reprehensible and deplorable and call for
all such acts to cease. The escalation of hostilities is

 

neither justifiable nor in keeping with the objective of
attaining a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East. As already conveyed in detail by the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon, these aggressive
actions committed by the Israeli authorities are only
exacerbating tensions and resulting in the deaths of even
more innocent civilians. Pakistan deplores such objectives
and condemns the targeting and killing of civilian
populations.

Pakistan has consistently affirmed that, in order to
achieve a durable and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East, it is vital that successful progress be simultaneously
achieved in resolving the Israeli-Syrian and the Israeli-
Lebanese conflicts. We share the view that unless these
fundamental issues are also adequately addressed, peace
will continue to elude the region. Throughout the Middle
East conflict, Pakistan has consistently endorsed the point
of view that Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 425 (1978) continue to provide a viable and
just framework for the resolution of the problems of the
Middle East and Palestine. We firmly believe that during
the transitional period, Israel, as the occupying Power,
remains duty-bound, under the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949, to respect fully and implement the provisions of
the Convention and relevant Security Council resolutions
in the occupied Arab territories. Resolution 425 (1978),
particularly, called for the unconditional withdrawal of
Israeli forces from Lebanon and remains unimplemented
almost 20 years down the line.

The Government and the people of Pakistan are
deeply concerned over this latest escalation of hostilities
in Lebanon, which is seriously undermining the peace
process. It is our understanding that these military actions
are continuing, even as we speak here. We would
therefore urge the Security Council to remain actively
seized of this matter until a satisfactory resolution is
found to the crisis.

