Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): Before I begin, I would also like to express my country's solidarity with the Government and people of Haiti 10 years after the devastating earthquake and express our condolences to the Government and people of the Niger. We thank you, Mr. President, for acknowledging those events with moments of silence earlier. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines extends a warm greeting to Her Excellency Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, and Mr. Emilio Archila, Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation, and welcomes their participation in today's meeting. We also thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, for his briefing and very important work. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes the progress highlighted in the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/988). We acknowledge the advances made during the reporting period, such as progress in the "peace with legality" strategy; the convocation of the first local and department elections since the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, in particular the participation of former combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and the active participation of women in the political process; the development of programmes with a territorial focus for conflict-affected municipalities; the valuable contributions of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace; the 12 new collective productive projects approved by the National Reintegration Council; and the increase in the number of former combatants pursuing academic studies. We also wish to highlight the reported progress in discussing the bill to extend the law for victims and land restitution. Indeed, the issue of reparations is an important component of restitution and reconciliation. Notwithstanding those positive developments, my delegation notes significant encumbrances to the comprehensive implementation of the Final Agreement. We are concerned about the lack of progress in the process of accreditation of former combatants, as well as the difficulties in ensuring security guarantees for some communities. Those legal and security guarantees are paramount for the holistic reintegration of former FARC-EP combatants. Similarly, permanent solutions for the former FARC- EP combatants who reside outside former territorial areas for training and reintegration (representing 70 per cent of those who have been accredited) are crucial for the full implementation of the Final Agreement. Equallycrucial is the need for agricultural reforms and the full implementation of the programme for the substitution of illicit crops, which will serve to discourage participants from entering the illegitimate economy. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is concerned about the reported threats to participants involved in that programme. Fundamentally, my delegation is disturbed by the continuing acts of violence, especially against women and children; the attacks against communities; and the killing of indigenous people and Afro-Colombians. We condemn those acts of violence and call for the perpetrators to be brought to justice. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines agrees with the Secretary-General's call for the parties to the Final Agreement to overcome their differences regarding its implementation through sustained dialogue, as well as his recommendation to fully capitalize on the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement to resolve their disputes. It is important to underscore that the process of consolidating lasting peace in Colombia is at a very important stage. There is no space for complacency or selective implementation of the Agreement. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines calls on all parties to honour their obligations and comply with the comprehensive implementation of the Final Agreement. The Colombian peace process remains an exemplar in our multilateral system, underscoring that one must never foreclose on dialogue in seeking to resolve conflict, no matter how difficult and entrenched a conflict may be. In closing, we reiterate our support to the Government and people of Colombia in their pursuit of lasting peace, as well as the United Nations Verification Mission and country team in assisting with the comprehensive implementation of the Final Agreement.
