Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's important meeting.

Before addressing today's topic, on behalf of the
people and the Government of Japan, I would like to
express my sincere gratitude for the messages from the
Secretary-General and the leaders of many Member
States, including a number of my colleagues here
in the Council, expressing their sympathy for and
solidarity with the people of Japan in the wake of the
major earthquakes that struck the Kumamoto region in
western Japan. They have taken the lives of more than
40 people and injured more than 1,000, while more than
1,000 are now living anxiously in evacuation centres.
Our Self-Defence Forces, police, fire deparments and
medical units are working around the clock. We are
grateful for the offers of assistance made by many
countries and organizations. On 16 April, a major
earthquake also struck Ecuador. On behalfofthe people
and the Government of Japan, I would like to express
our solidarity with the people of Ecuador.

In order to save time, I will limit my statement to
its salient points and circulate the full text later.

The region of Middle East and North Africa is
facing outbreaks of conflict, social unrest and violent
extremism. Since January, when Japan became a
member ofthe Security Council, I have listened to many
reports on tragic humanitarian situations. We must
address the best way for us to contribute concretely to
the maintenance of international peace and security
in the Middle East and North Africa. In Syria, Yemen
and Libya, we have recently seen glimmers of light and
hope for the possibility of bringing a permanent end to
the conflicts in each of those countries.

In Syria, the cessation of hostilities that began in
late February has created the conditions necessary for
facilitating immediate humanitarian access to besieged
and hard-to-reach areas, an improvement conducive to
the political process. The new round of intra-Syrian
talks has just begun in Geneva. We greatly appreciate
the tireless efforts of Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, and his team. Japan has
been giving aid to Syria for providing food, improving
living conditions and implementing vocational training.
In that regard, I am pleased to announce that Japan has
decided to provide additional assistance amounting to
$11 million as grant aid for rehabilitating three existing
electricity facilities in Syria through the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP). Notes to that effect
were exchanged last Friday here in New York between
Ms. Sima Bahous, UNDP's Assistant Administrator,
and myself. Electric generators provided by Japan
to Syria during the 1980s and 1990s through our
development fund continue to furnish more than 56 per
cent of the entire electricity supply in Syria. I believe
that project will help to strengthen the resilience of
Syrian society and thereby create conditions enabling
the Syrian people to feel like staying in their country.

Turning to Yemen, Japan welcomes the nation-wide
cessation of hostilities in place since 10 April. We have,
however, received the disappointing news that the
scheduled peace talks in Kuwait, facilitated by Special
Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, have not yet begun.
We urge all the Yemeni parties to engage in the peace
talks as soon as possible.

As Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), I have
always stressed that sanctions are meant to support
a political solution. The resumption of direct talks is
therefore a long-awaited step forward. Since September
2014, Japan has extended $85 million in grant assistance
to Yemen. One of the projects includes assistance to the
constitution-drafting process. I believe that, once an
agreement is reached through the Yemen peace talks,
the spending assistance programme will continue, and
the parties will be able to arrive at an early formulation
of the constitution.

Despite some encouraging signs in the region of the
Middle East and North Africa, almost no positive change
has occurred in the Middle East peace process since the
previous open debate in January (see S/PV.7610). As
peace talks have stalled, desperation and violence have
spread. As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon recalled
today, settlement activities, which are illegal under
international law, are in direct contradiction with the
goal of a two-State solution. We reiterate that no act
justifies violence, and we call on leaders to denounce
violence without exception. Japan will continue
to provide economic assistance to Palestine in the
firm belief that a sustainable economy underpins the
Viability ofa two-State solution. We also stand ready to
participate in initiatives that can lead to peace between
Israel and Palestine, including the one put forth by the
Government of France.

I will end my statement by paying tribute to the
tireless efforts on the part of Special Envoys and
Representatives of the Secretary-General stationed
in the region of Middle East and North Africa, and
by expressing my hope that, with the strong political
will of the international community, we will see more
positive developments in that region during the next
debate on this agenda item, slated for July, when Japan
will have the honour to preside over the Council.

