Mrs. Malenga (Democratic Republic ofthe Congo) (spoke in French): I would like to ask the interpreters
to listen carefully to my statement, as I will try to
skip details in view of the limited time available. At
the outset, I would like to say how pleased I am, Sir,
to see you presiding over the Security Council for the
month of June. My delegation is grateful to the Council
for putting on its agenda an issue that particularly
affects the Democratic Republic of the Congo, that of
children and armed conflict. I would also like to take
the opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
latest report on the issue (S/2013/245). And I thank
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Mr. Herve Ladsous, Ms. Yoka
Brandt and Mr. Gregory Ramm for their work on the
problem of children and armed conflict.

On 28 June 2012 Mrs. Radhika Coomaraswamy, the
former Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, stated in her annual
report to the Human Rights Council in Geneva that

"thousands of children continue to be killed,
maimed, abducted, subjected to sexual violence,
denied humanitarian access and deprived of health
care in many countries" (A/HRC/21/38, para. 2).

She went on to say that in several countries children
were also "used as suicide bombers and human
shields". That description corresponds exactly to the
purgatory that Congolese children endure daily owing
to the presence of various foreign and domestic armed
groups, particularly the rebels of the Mouvement du
23 Mars (M-23), the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda, the Allied Democratic Forces-National
Army for the Liberation of Uganda and others who
plunder the western part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

In fact, the language of weapons and violence has
resurfaced in North Kivu since the M-23 rebels who
deserted from the ranks of the Congolese army in
April 2012 turned their weapons on the regular army.
The conflict situation currently prevailing in that part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and more
specifically in and around North Kivu, has led to a
resurgence in violence and crime, the primary victims
of which are women and children.

Massive displacements due to violence continue in
North Kivu, where it is well known that many children
are kidnapped by the rebel forces of M-23 and pressed
into forced labour for mining. Children are also used
to break up rocks to make gravel in quarries. Once
broken up, coltan is used in electronic devices. The
highly radioactive nature of that substance explains the
frequency of respiratory ailments, which are sometimes
fatal, among those who handle it. Many Congolese
children have been used to transport and mine coltan.
Those who survive are traumatized by the acts of
vandalism and barbarity committed against them by
M-23 rebels.

Thousands of child victims of violent attacks by
M-23 have suffered serious physical and psychological
damage. Adequate reparations are needed to cover
emotional damage, for example in cases of depression,
loss of self-esteem, stress, involuntary abortions for
young girls who were raped, infant mortality and
sexually transmitted infections.

In areas affected by insecurity, education has been
suspended because dozens of classrooms have been
destroyed, and some schools are overcrowded due
to the arrival of displaced children or are serving as
temporary housing for persons displaced within their
own countries.

My delegation is speaking on behalf of children
whose families, usually in dire economic straits,
cherish the hope that concrete steps will be taken to
provide them with reparations. In terms of education,
children displaced by fighting have virtually no access
to school, which makes them more vulnerable to being
recruited by armed groups. We also note that many
schools have not resumed classes following the clashes
provoked by armed groups in South Kivu. Moreover,
it remains true that in recent years the armed forces
and non-State armed groups have used schools and
universities for military purposes in violation of the
right to education laid out in the main international
instruments on human rights. Their acts constitute war
crimes or crimes against humanity.

My delegation takes this opportunity to appeal
to the armed groups operating in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo to put an end to their mistreatment
of children and to comply with their international
obligation to protect the safety and rights of children.

In terms of security, the Security Council must
take into account the protection of children's rights,
including in peace negotiations, and the urgent need to
end impunity for crimes against children. It must also
support the development of programmes and policies
to protect children and improve their living conditions.

In conclusion, my delegation protests the intentional
and generalized targeting of schools, teachers and
students as a tactic of war. In his 2013 annual report
on children and armed conflict (S/2013/245), the
Secretary-General recognizes that the military use
of schools is widespread. Of the 22 cases covered in
the report, 19 involve violations related to education,
including schools being bombed and razed by the
warring parties and students and education personnel
being threatened, kidnapped and killed.

Finally, my delegation welcomes the Security
Council's commitment to working for the protection
of children from serious violations committed against
them in armed conflict.

