Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): We commend your
delegation, Mr. President, for organizing this very important
meeting.

Let me also welcome back from Africa my colleague
and friend, Ambassador Holbrooke. We look forward to
discussing in more detail the findings of his trip.

With the Security Council at risk of gradually losing
credibility in Africa, there is a need, inter alia, for
innovation in addressing African issues. You have given us,
Mr. President, three elements to discuss, and I shall address
them briefly and as candidly as I can. Let me start with the
question of how to meet the needs of African peacekeeping
more effectively.

The members of the Security Council should separate
their national interests from the needs of those affected by
conflict. Peacekeeping operations in Africa should not be
treated differently from those in other parts of the world.
The size and mandate of peacekeeping operations should be
dictated by the magnitude of the conflict, and not by
geographical location. Of course, I have taken note of what
my neighbour to my left said before me.

When a peacekeeping operation is anticipated, the
Council should make advance preparations to that end. The
Secretary-General and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations should be viewed as complementary to the work
of the Council. The efforts of the Secretary-General should
be supported. The Security Council and the Secretary-
General are not in competition.

In addition, timely action by the Council and the
international community is a must if we are serious about
conflict prevention. We cannot overemphasize the
importance of timely intervention in order to avoid the
escalation of conflicts. This requires Council members to
exercise the necessary political will - and I would like to
underline necessary political will - and for all Member
States to provide such intervention with the required
resources, be they human, material or financial. Of course,
trust funds are helpful. But we believe they should not
replace regular funding.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example, if decisive action had been taken at the beginning
of the conflict, we would not be faced with the massive
human suffering being experienced in that country today.
Even now that it is evidently clear what the real causes of
that conflict are, there is still a lot of hesitation, foot-
dragging and lack of political will from some quarters. We
can continue to express concern about the humanitarian
situation and find excuses for inaction, but we are all
aware that the situation will deteriorate further. We must
find the ways to pursue our national interests. The
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
test case for the Security Council. Words alone will not
work; they will not help. What we should do is act -
and act now.

The United Nations needs to support financially and
logistically operations initiated by the Organization of
African Unity (OAU). In the absence of that flexibility,
the situation will continue to deteriorate.

When Africa speaks to ask for help, the Security
Council should listen. One of the effective ways to
achieve that is through coordination and cooperation
between the Security Council and the OAU subregional
organizations. In our view, the level of information
between the United Nations and the OAU on conflict
situations is not always even. Therefore, it would always
be of help if the Council could benefit from direct
exchanges of views with representatives of the OAU.

In this connection, we support the proposal made by
the Secretary-General that the Security Council should
hold a meeting in Africa at the appropriate time. This
proposal should be further explored by the Council.

In addition, we know that through cooperation
between the United Nations and the OAU a mechanism
has been established whereby regular meetings are held
between the United Nations Secretariat and the OAU,
including on issues of peace and security. From the
viewpoint of the OAU, can the Security Council benefit
from the outcome of such discussions?

Furthermore, cooperation with subregional
organizations should be enhanced. Subregional
organizations need support. In this connection, we also
agree with your idea, Mr. President, that the Security
Council should consider sending a mission to the region
to address the problems there.

On the additional steps that the Council can take to
help solve, and even prevent, conflict, let me say
that, while acting within the provisions of the Charter, the
Council should make use of the good offices of the
Secretary-General; for example, when his special envoys
are sent to visit conflict situations in potential trouble
spots. In this respect, the services of eminent African
personalities should be enlisted.

 

In the end, it is the political will that I talked about
earlier, on all of our parts, which will help to put an end to
conflict in Africa. We must send a clear message to rebel
movements in Africa and to their supporters that we have
made enough noise and that now we mean business. It is
time for us to take action.

Here I agree with what you said, Mr. President, and
with what Ambassador Fowler said with regard to Angola.
That situation has been going on for a long time. UNITA
is there and is getting support from Member States of this
Organization - Member States that are supposed to ensure
the full implementation of the sanctions imposed by the
Security Council. If there is a need, and I am sure there is,
those who support UNITA must be exposed and shamed.
We look forward to the report by the panels in February,
and we hope that the Council will take appropriate steps in
this regard.

Finally, let me thank you, Mr. President, as a fellow
son of Africa, for presiding over this very important
meeting. Your presence here testifies to your personal
commitment and that of your country to Africa.

