Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand welcomes
the commitment to the rule of law shown by the Security
Council and thanks Lithuania for convening this very
important debate.

We now have a substantive body of Council
resolutions, presidential statements and mandates
emphasizing the importance of the rule of law as a key
element in conflict prevention, peacekeeping, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. The real challenge
for the Council, and for the broader United Nations
membership, lies in the substantive, effective and
timely implementation of those principles. And that
challenge is stark.

For New Zealand, it is no longer acceptable to
confine such discussions to an abstract legal principle.
We must focus on the practical actions of the Council
and the impact of those actions on creating and
sustaining international peace and security. In that
regard, we recall that a major theme from last month's
open debate on "War, its lessons, and the search for
permanent peace" (see S/PV.7105) was the importance
of building a genuine rule-of-law environment for
sustainable peace.

It is New Zealand's view that the rule of law must
be a core priority in all mission planning. The initial
phases of planning all peacekeeping operations must
include effective early peacebuilding initiatives, not
least by mainstreaming rule-of-law activities. New
Zealand urges an integrated, flexible and mobile
approach, supported by personnel capable of carrying
out the functions required by very complex missions.

Through our participation in peacebuilding
activities in our own region, New Zealand has learned
that an early focus on building effective and accountable
rule-of-law institutions is central to success. It helps
shift power from those who might gain from conflict
to those who would uphold good governance and the
rule of law.

Strengthening rule-of-law institutions also
requires a long-term focus. Fundamental change, such
as building the capacity of genuinely independent legal
institutions and staff, moving law reform forward and
strengthening engagement with traditional justice
systems, requires a commitment lasting decades
rather than just months. It is therefore vital that the
Council provide the strategic direction and oversight
that is needed to ensure that efforts are coordinated
and sequenced, and are adapted to the context. In that
respect, New Zealand welcomes recent coordination
efforts between the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Development
Programme; plans by the Rule of Law Coordination
and Resource Group to increase cooperation and
coordination; and the Secretary-General's suggestion
that the Council consider mandating rule-of-law
evaluation capacity in all of its missions. Such efforts
will help the United Nations to focus on activities that
have the greatest actual impact.

To be effective, efforts to strengthen the rule of
law must be tailored to the culture and traditions of
the host country. In our practical experience, three
key features contribute to a successful mandate. First,
support for the rule of law should be in partnership with
the host country and must accommodate the needs and
traditions of the various groups that might be involved.
Secondly, support should include regional expertise,
endorsement and participation. Thirdly, support should
be provided under a clear legal framework, including
a strong emphasis on consultation and coordination.
Operating in such a manner would also focus rule-of-
law activities on building the host country's capacity to
meet its own protection obligations towards its citizens.

Accountability is a critical element of the rule of
law, as has been emphasized by many Member States.
The lack of accountability undermines not only the rule
of law itself, but also any prospects for reconciliation
and sustainable peace. No two cases are the same. A
model that works in one place may not be right for
another. But the Council must never lose sight of the
need to address individual accountability in some
manner.

The International Criminal Court (ICC), ad hoc
tribunals, regional courts and domestic institutions all
play an important role. New Zealand supports the ICC,
but we are looking for it to perform in a more sensitive
and appropriate manner under its newly amended rules
of procedure. Its ability to ensure accountability relies
on its being not only independent, but also flexible
enough to respond to the needs of its constituents.

The Council also has an important role to play. It
must be more supportive of the ICC in a practical way,
so that the Court remains an effective accountability
tool. But the Council must also be wise when it comes
to exercising its power ofreferral, and more sensitive to
regional concerns when considering issues of deferral.

New Zealand is a strong supporter of models such
as the hybrid courts in Cambodia and Sierra Leone.
They have played a Vital role in developing national
legal systems, in promoting the rule of law and in
ensuring accountability. These and other models placed
in a local setting allow far greater local ownership
and participation, and can enable a greater level of
reconciliation. New Zealand would therefore welcome
their wider use in appropriate circumstances.

