Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome to our meeting His Excellency Sheikh Hamad
bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani, Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Qatar, the Secretary-
General of the League of Arab States, and the
Ambassador of Syria. I welcome their briefings to the
Council.

Syria is an important country in the Middle East.
Its stability affects the security and stability of the
entire Middle East region. Like other members of the
Security Council, China has closely followed the
developments in Syria.

China is of the view that the Syrian people's
request for reform and safeguarding their interests
should be respected. It is imperative to put an
immediate end to all violence in Syria and to stop the
killing of innocent civilians. At the same time, an
inclusive political process for the wide participation of
all Syrian parties must be started without delay, to
speed up reform and resolve differences and disputes
peacefully through dialogue and consultations, so as to
restore stability to Syria and to enable it to embark on
the path of all-around development.

We believe that Syria and its people are capable
and resourceful enough to find a way to resolve their
issues and to find a political system and a degree of
economic growth suited to Syria's national conditions.
The international community can play a positive and
constructive role in this regard and can provide
assistance for a peaceful political settlement of the
Syrian issue through dialogue.

Syria is a member of the Arab world. China hopes
to see a proper settlement of the Syrian crisis within
the framework of the Arab League. We support the
League's efforts to seek a political solution of the
Syrian issue and to maintain stability in the region. We
hope to see the success of its mediation efforts.

The Arab League observer mission plays a
significant role in helping the international community
learn about the real situation in Syria. We attach
importance to the report submitted by the that observer

mission (S/2012/71, annex, enclosure 4). We hope the
mission will continue to fulfil its mandate and carry
out objective and impartial investigations. We call on
the Syrian Government and other parties concerned to
provide full cooperation to the mission in that regard.

China has repeatedly stressed that the actions of
the Security Council on the Syrian issue should comply
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, help ease tensions in Syria, promote
political dialogue and defuse disputes, and help
maintain peace and stability in the Middle East region.

In the meantime, China has consistently taken a
cautious approach to sanctions. Sanctions, rather than
assistance in resolving an issue, often lead to further
complications of the situation. We firmly oppose the
use of force to resolve the Syrian issue, as well as
practices, such as forcibly pushing for regime change,
that violate the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter and the basic norms that govern
international relations.

China supports the draft resolution proposed by
Russia on the Syrian issue and takes note of the new
text that has been distributed by Morocco in the
Security Council. China is ready to act in accordance
with the aforementioned principled position, to engage
actively and constructively in consultations, and to
work with all parties concerned to push for an
appropriate settlement of the Syrian issue through
peaceful dialogue.

