Mr. Petritsch: Let me start by saying how much I
appreciate the continued interest of the Security
Council and of its individual members in the affairs of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and in particular their interest
in my Office and the work that it is trying to do with
respect to peace implementation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Since the hour is late, I should like to respond
quickly to some of the questions that were raised. First,
the representative of Ukraine asked about the status of
national minorities. I can say that there is a draft law
on national minorities now before the House of
Representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina for
discussion. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in particular, along
with my Office, is watching very carefully, and is
consulting with the House of Representatives and the
local authorities with regard to the content of the law.
So I am expecting a positive outcome, an outcome that
will be commensurate with European standards for
minority rights.

Regarding the implementation of the
Constitutional Court decisions, the approach taken by
the international community was reflected in the June
meeting of the political directors of the Steering Board,
where it was basically said that what we are expecting
is a symmetrical approach in the two entities, both in
substance and in principle, to the implementation of
those decisions and to the changes in the constitutions
of the two entities.

I turn now to Jamaica's question on the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia. The Tribunal plays a very important, and
lately also a very dynamic and proactive, role in Bosnia
and Herzegovina a a very positive one - and I would
say that it is important to stress that through the work
of the Tribunal, guilt and responsibility are being
individualized. It is not the Serbs, it is not the Croats, it
is not the Bosniacs who are guilty. It is individuals, and
that is a very important part of the work of the
Tribunal, which will contribute enormously to an
eventual reconciliation process, which is so necessary.

With respect to the Russian Federation's concerns
regarding the imposition of laws, I fully agree with the
Ambassador. That is indeed a big problem when a too-
forceful and too-robust approach is used. As he clearly
indicated - and rightly so - it is necessary in order to
overcome procrastination and in order to overcome -
as it was put by the Ambassador or Norway and echoed
in the statement made by the Ambassador of Singapore
- this incremental rather than fundamental progress;
therefore imposition from time to time is necessary.

However, at the same time, the concept of
ownership, which I had put forward two years ago, is a
necessary one. This indicates that we are looking
forward to a more proactive approach on the part of the
local authorities, which I think is now increasingly the
case. This is what the international community wants to
see, and I expect more legislation to be passed by the
local authorities. The adoption of the election law is an
excellent case in point.

Let me turn to some of the other issues that were
put forward. Of course, the Kostic genocide case was a
landmark decision, so to speak, because for the first
time the issue of genocide was included in a verdict.
That, of course, is indeed a very remarkable situation
and gives the whole process a new quality, ifI may say
so.

Concerning the return of refugees, there is no
breakdown according to ethnic communities, because
we are intentionally not doing this kind of ethnic
analysis after return. There are returns into areas in
which the three constituent peoples constitute a
minority that is not a minority as such 7 that is, either
the Serb constituent people returning to the Federation,
where they constitute a minority; or Croats and
Bosniacs returning to Republika Srpska, where they, in
turn, are faced with a minority situation.

However, with respect to these same constituent
rights to which the Ambassador of Bosnia and
Herzegovina has referred, it is a fact that since 11
January, through a decision which I took, the three
constituent peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina are
constituent throughout the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That decision will, hopefully, be
supplanted very soon by the constitutional amendments
that are now being discussed and which, I hope, will be
implemented in the course of the fall season, when
politics in Bosnia and Herzegovina will be back in full
swing.

Finally, I should like to underline what the
representative of the United States said: that we need
more than ever to instil a sense of urgency in the local
authorities. That is why I urge the Council to support
me in getting the message through to the local
authorities that time is running out. There are other
issues, there are other countries - neighbouring
countries and countries in the region- and other
regions that are coming to the fore and that urgently
require attention from the international community.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is in a much more
competitive situation now. Aid used to arrive more or
less without any conditions; but that time is over now.
Bosnia and Herzegovina now needs to compete with
the region and the neighbouring countries for foreign
investment. That is the only way forward. That needs
to be understood very clearly by the local authorities
and needs to be supported unanimously by the
international community.

Regarding restructuring, I should like to point out
that the reasons why we have broadened our approach
also have to do with the fact that many United Nations
agencies are already active in the region and, of course,
in Bosnia and Herzegovina as well. We also need to
talk to them about what they can take on as their job,
because, after the period of streamlining, many of the
issues will remain unresolved and will need continued
attention.

Let me give one example: that is the reason why I
invited the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) to be part of the streamlining exercise,
because I believe that Bosnia and Herzegovina is now
in a phase in which UNDP in particular can help a lot
when it comes to transition issues. These transition
issues, of course, are very similar in other neighbouring
countries, so the regional approach again is something
that should come increasingly to the fore.

Yesterday I had an excellent meeting - the
second in a couple of months - with the Associate
Administrator of UNDP in order to discuss UNDP's
role in more detail. This is just an example; there are
other agencies, of course - the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) and so on, and European agencies as well,
which will in future play a larger role.

This is also an indication that Bosnia is
normalizing. It is becoming more and more of a normal
country, and that is, of course, very welcome.

In regard to the overall restructuring and
streamlining process, let me just reiterate what the
Steering Board pointed out at last week's meeting
concerning the action plan of the international
community. This action plan will be very strict,
inasmuch as it will include clear benchmarks and an
assessment of matching multiyear funding
requirements. It will be concrete, because it will
identify core requirements and functions for the
international community. It will recalibrate its
mandates and additional tasks, and streamline its field
presence. It will be inclusive, because it will include
proposals on structural reforms aimed at the integration
of the various international agencies in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and it will come up with a concrete
vision for an end state. It will project a refocused and
accelerated implementation period for 2002 to 2005; it
will pay special attention to justice and home affairs;
and it will present options for a follow-up police
monitoring mission in due course.

