Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to make a brief but sincere statement
expressing our appreciation and congratulations to you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council this month, and to wish you every success
in the implementation of the Council's intensive
programme ofwork. We address the same sincere words
to Ambassador Gert Rosenthal and his team for the able
manner in which they conducted our work last month.
Finally, I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for
her clear and comprehensive briefing on developments
in the implementation of resolution 1970 (2011).

I would like to express our sincere pleasure in
seeing the brotherly Libyan people take one step after
another on the road to establishing modern, democratic,
independent and credible Libyan institutions.
Multilateral and transparent elections have taken place
in Libya after 40 years of tyranny. A Government has
been established that enjoys the confidence and trust of
the people and that is leading the Libyan people once
again to establish a democratic State that meets the
aspirations of all its citizens.

While we stress our full support for and readiness
to cooperate with the new Government in the
implementation of its urgent tasks in extremely fragile
security conditions, we appeal to the international
community, represented by the Council, and to the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya to provide the
necessary assistance to that new Government so that it
may be able to meet the challenges facing it, particularly
with regard to problems of security, arms, border
control, the integration of fighters, displaced persons
and refugees, and the creation of a system capable of
establishing peace, stability, national reconciliation
and human rights.

The new Libyan authorities, beginning with the
National Transitional Council and the General National
Congress, have repeatedly reiterated their readiness to
work and cooperate with the International Criminal
Court (ICC) to establish justice for the victims of
atrocious crimes, as reflected in the report of the
Prosecutor on the implementation of resolution 1970
(2011). The scope of that cooperation has widened
through the investigation missions that have visited
Libya, the encounters between the ICC Prosecutor
and high-level Libyan officials, and the coordination
between the two parties in dealing with the ICC officials
who were arrested by a brigade in Zintan.

Libya has formally expressed its intention to address
attacks against Libyan nationals without distinction. It
has also become involved in launching justice reform
by enacting laws that guarantee the independence of
the judiciary, the formation of a national reconciliation
commission and fact-finding inquiry, and transitional
justice.

Libya is also endeavouring to focus its investigations
on high-level officials accused by the independent
International Commission of Inquiry and has laid the
foundations of a general plan to establish transitional
justice, national reconciliation and civil peace.

With regard to the trial of SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and other members of the Al-Qadhafi regime, the
Libyan authorities have reiterated that the Libyan
judiciary is capable of conducting fair and just trials of
those accused, in accordance with international criteria,
guaranteeing the accused their right to self-defence
and enabling the Libyan people to find the truth and
deal with their painful past. The request of the Libyan
authorities to conduct national trials of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and others, and its commitment to ensuring
that these trials will be serious and effective, reassure
us that no one in Libya who has committed violations
of human rights or atrocities will be able to enjoy
impunity. This has been the position of the Security
Council in granting Libya the right to conduct its own
trials of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi in accordance with
international judicial standards and the statute of the
International Criminal Court.

The conduct of the trials by the Libyan national
authorities is necessary for the following substantive
reasons. First, the Libyan judiciary respects
international judicial standards and the basic tenets of
human rights and fundamental freedoms. Secondly, it
is capable of trying people for crimes against humanity
and violations of human rights in a manner that
ensures justice, fairness and victims' rights. Thirdly,
it is capable of trying other crimes and establishing
all necessary measures to prevent impunity or the
commission of such crimes in the future. Fourthly, it
is capable of doing the work necessary to achieving
national reconciliation in Libya so that it can overcome
the painful past and lay the foundations of a new State.

The Libyan people are now more determined than
ever to establish a democratic State that respects the
rule of law and is capable of rejoining the international
community and the Council in applying the highest
standards of justice and fairness in order to meet the
aspirations of all factions of the Libyan population for
the security, stability and prosperity of the region.

In conclusion, I would like to express our readiness
to cooperate with our brothers in the new Libya and to
share with them our experience in the field of judicial
institutions, transitional justice, dealing with the past
and achieving national reconciliation so as to enable it
to remain an effective member of the Maghreb region
and to face the challenges of secession and terrorism
that threaten the Sahara and the Sahel region.

