Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan
has repeatedly warned about the repercussions of
the stalemate in the Palestinian territory and the dire
consequences of the deadlock in the efforts to realize
peace on the basis of the two-State solution. The world
has seen how that has led to bloody conflict, taking
a high toll among Palestinian civilians. Due to the
illegal, unilateral practices of Israel, today we find
ourselves once again on the threshold of yet another
bloody confrontation threatening innocence civilians,
jeopardizing peace and stability in the region and
exacerbating the feelings of frustration and despair.

Israel's desecration of the sanctity of the Haram
al-Sharif, the Noble Sanctuary, has escalated recently,
following the ceasefire in Gaza. That points to one
thing: that Israel is determined to incite and provoke
Arabs and Muslims by any means possible. Israel
knows all too well that the Noble Sanctuary, Al-Quds
al-Sharif, is a red line for more than 1.5 billion people
in the world. They will not remain silent with regard
to such violations. Israel's actions are incompatible
with the pursuit of peace and security for its citizens,
because such acts put Israel in direct confrontation with
the Arab and Islamic world.

Last March we warned the Council against such
acts. We clarified how they are illegitimate and
explicitly contravene the provisions of international
humanitarian law. East Jerusalem is an occupied
territory, as recognized by the international community.
Israel is the occupying Power, as per resolutions of
the Security Council and General Assembly and the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the Legal consequences of the construction ofa wall
in the occupied Palestinian territory.

The unilateral actions of Israel, including those
undertaken in the Noble Sanctuary, will not change
the status quo. Israel must therefore cease forthwith all
of its acts of provocation and deliberate policies that
seek to create a new fait accompli. The detention of
Muslims at prayer and preventing them from entering
the Sanctuary, committing acts of aggression against
them and against officers of the Endowment authorities,
humiliating them and allowing Israeli political and
religious extremists to attack them under the protection
of Israeli police, allowing them to desecrate the
Sanctuary - all those acts are violations of the rules of
international law, and the Hague Regulations of 1907.

The international community in general, and
the Security Council in particular, should therefore
shoulder their responsibilities to put an end to Israeli
acts of aggression against the Noble Sanctuary. Should
such acts continue, they would result in unqualified
disaster, threatening international peace and security.
On the basis of the historic Hashemite guardianship of
the holy sites in Jerusalem held in trust by His Majesty
King Abdullah II ibn Al-Hussein, and Jordan's special
historic role in relation to the holy Islamic shrines,
recognized by Israel in article 9 of the peace agreement,
Jordan will continue to address and respond to Israeli
violations in the Noble Sanctuary through all available
diplomatic and political means. We will continue to
work to preserve, protect and prevent the undermining
of the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque, the Dome of the Rock and

other such sanctuaries. We hope that the message is
clear to anyone who may cast doubt on the status of the
noble sanctuary Al-Haram Al-Sharif and on the status
of Arabs and Muslims in general and Palestinians and
Jordanians in particular.

Geographically, the Gaza Strip and the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, are a single,
integral unit and the territory on which an independent,
fully sovereign Palestinian State would be built, in
accordance with the terms of the peace process and the
Arab Peace Initiative, including all its elements. We
therefore welcome the significant talks on Palestine
and rebuilding Gaza hosted by the Arab Republic of
Egypt. We emphasize that Jordan, at the direction of
His Majesty King Abdullah, continues to provide
political and humanitarian support and assistance for
our brothers in Palestine, including the steadfast men
and women of the Gaza Strip, who have been so hard
hit by events. The Jordanian field hospital has worked
non-stop to treat the injured, and our hospitals have
also received many citizens of the Gaza Strip critically
injured during the act of aggression. Our Hashemite
charity organization has deployed humanitarian and
relief convoys to the Strip, and we will be sending more
than 2,000 mobile-home units for families that have
been displaced.

We stress how important it is that the Security
Council recognize the Palestinians' legitimate right
to live in dignity and ensure that a framework is put
in place so that the occupation can be ended and a
Palestinian State established. In that regard, we should
emphasize that the main guarantee that the recent
bloody events are not repeated would be by making
the two-State solution a reality through a resumption
of negotiations designed to make that happen. The
negotiations should be serious, robust and held to
standards for producing results within a limited time
frame. They should be accompanied by a complete halt
to unilateral or illegal measures, which could obstruct,
undermine and even preempt the negotiations through
attempts to change the status quo or the legal status
of the Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem,
or through efforts to target holy Islamic or Christian
shrines in Jerusalem, particularly the noble sanctuary
and the Al-Aqsa Mosque at its heart.

Jordan would like to emphasize the importance
of arriving at a political solution to the crisis in Syria,
ending the bloodshed and providing a political transition
compatible with the Syrian people's legitimate
aspirations. It should restore peace and stability in
Syria and establish a welcoming environment for

refugees returning home. Jordan also stands with Iraq
in its pursuit of stability and security and its efforts to
maintain its territorial integrity. We encourage all the
Iraqi political forces to be involved in a comprehensive
political process that allows them to share in
decision-making and improves unity and the potential
for national reconciliation among the Iraqi people.

In Jordan we fight terrorism and terrorists, and
those who advocate for or support them. We strive to
block their sources of financing and work to address
the risks of terrorism and extremism, particularly
through initiatives aimed at promoting dialogue among
religions, cultures and Civilizations. We try to explain
the true tenets of the noble religion of Islam, and in that
context I would like to recall the message of Amman
and many of the other conferences that have been held
on this subject. Our fundamental focus is on fighting
extremist thought in all its forms and manifestations.
We stand at the forefront of international and regional
efforts to fight terrorism and extremism. Doing so,
in our view, constitutes protecting Jordan's national
interests, because we are against terrorism that targets
us or perpetrates crimes on our territory or against our
citizens.

