Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I should like to express my appreciation for the
convening of this public meeting to inform the Council
of the recent activities of the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville (UNPOB). In addition, I am
grateful to Ambassador Sinclair for his briefing, and I
thank the Permanent Representative of Papua New
Guinea for his statement.

We welcome the completion of stage II of the
weapons disposal plan, a process that UNPOB has
facilitated and accelerated. We welcome the holding of
broadened consultations with the national Government,
political leaders, leaders of various factions and the
people of Bougainville themselves, which has given
everyone the opportunity to discuss the progress in the
peace process. In that connection, one of the most
important elements is the strengthening of mutual trust
and of the sense of security in the community. We
particularly value the fact that the completion of this
process allows Section XIV of the national
Constitution, the new organic peace-building law, the
autonomous Government of Bougainville and the
elections to enter into full force.

We recognize the importance of the new
Constitution as central to the implementation of the
Peace Agreement of August 2001, which is why we
emphasize the considerable progress achieved as well
as the active participation of the island's population. In
particular, we consider the second draft, which was
finalized in May, to be of great importance. Therefore,
we believe it is essential that the Bougainville
Constitutional Commission continue its work, using
that text as a basis.

Moreover, we share the view expressed by a
number of previous speakers that it is necessary to
ensure that the international community support with
the necessary resources a number of priority areas,
such as finalization of the establishment of the
Constituent Assembly in Bougainville. Assistance in
preparing for elections is also essential.

We welcome the growing cooperation between
the authorities of Papua New Guinea and the leaders of
Bougainville. We reiterate our gratitude for the work
done by the Peace Monitoring Group over the past five
years and wish every success to the Bougainville
Transition Team, which has recently begun its support
efforts.

Like others, we recognize the invaluable
contributions made by Australia, New Zealand, Fiji and
Vanuatu, inter alia. We would like to highlight in
particular the support that must provided in promoting
trust in this peace process in the transition towards an
autonomous Government.

Finally, we wish to note that, in order for peace to
be sustainable, an effective administration and a viable
economy must be established. Accordingly, the
relevant bodies of the United Nations must coordinate
their efforts in Bougainville closely with those of the
international donor community in order to establish and
consolidate peace. In this context, we welcome the
efforts made by the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Children's Fund in
the area.

In conclusion, we reiterate our gratitude to
Ambassador Noel Sinclair and his team for the
outstanding work they have done in Bougainville. We
wish them every success in their future efforts to bring
peace, security and stability to the people of
Bougainville.

