Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting and
thanks Mr. Modibo Toure, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau, for his briefing. We also thank Ambassador
Mauro Vieira for his commitment and leadership
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Peru is monitoring with concern the situation in
Guinea-Bissau. Despite efforts by the international
community and regional organizations to reach a
solution to the political crisis, little progress has been
made in the implementation of the Conakry Agreement,
concluded in October 2016. We would like to make
three main points.

First, Peru deems the successful holding of
2018 and 2019 elections to be crucial to achieving
sustainable peace. In that regard, we are concerned
about the nomination of a Prime Minister who does
not enjoy consensus among all parties, as called for
in the Conakry Agreement. That undermines the
credibility of the Government. Additionally, four of
the members of the National Electoral Commission,
including its President, could not be nominated for
the National Assembly, which has not convened since
January 2016. Such conditions complicate the holding
of legislative elections slated for May. That is why
we believe it is necessary and urgent for all parties to
resume inclusive dialogue with a view to implementing
the commitments undertaken.

We welcome the efforts of the Economic Community
of West African States, which include imposing
sanctions on those who obstruct the implementation of
the Conakry Agreement, in line with regional rules and
regulations. We believe that it is important to increase
the participation of women and youth in the necessary
dialogue and subsequent elections. That is why we
highlight the efforts of the Women's Facilitation Group,
which seeks to increase the participation of women in
the country's political processes.

Secondly, we are concerned that, despite the
current relative stability, a stalled political process
could lead to renewed violence and rampant crime,
especially considering that the country is vulnerable
to threats such as terrorism, organized crime and
human trafficking. In that connection, we highlight
the launching of the Network of National Human
Rights Defenders. As the Secretary-General noted in
his report (S/2018/110), reform is needed in this area,
including strengthening the armed forces and the
professionalization of the police. Similarly, we call for
full respect for the fundamental right to freedom of
expression in Guinea-Bissau.

Thirdly, with regard to socioeconomic development,
we would like to highlight the fact that, although the
World Bank has reported economic growth of5 per cent
over the past year, it should be borne in mind that such
growth is primarily attributed to the country's main
exports being sold at a higher price on the international
market. Nonetheless, a country whose poverty rate is
approximately 70 per cent is socially and economically
vulnerable. That is why we believe that peacekeeping
and peacebuilding require greater investment in social
development, and in particular in Peacebuilding Fund
projects aimed at empowering women and young people,
promoting national reconciliation and strengthening the
judiciary. We underscore the importance of ensuring
the predictability and stability of the Fund's financing.
We also believe that it is important that the activities
promoted by the Peacebuilding Fund be coordinated
with the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and the United
Nations country team.

In conclusion, we support the renewal of the
UNIOGBIS mandate for an additional year, in line with
the recommendation of the Secretary-General. We thank
the Economic Community of West African States, the
African Union, the Community ofPortuguese-speaking
Countries, the European Union and other international
actors committed to assisting Guinea-Bissau for their
valuable efforts.

