The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Germany.

Germany voted in favour of this resolution
because it contains important measures to enhance the
effectiveness of non-proliferation efforts at a global
level. It also testifies to the central role of the Security
Council in the fight against proliferation, a threat that
is global and that therefore also requires a global
approach. Germany, along with its European Union
partners, is committed to strengthening the Security
Council in that role.

The negotiation process was not easy. The
original text drafted by the sponsors in six months of
internal discussions has been improved after being
presented to the other Council members and to a great
number of other interested United Nations Member
States. We welcome the progress made in the last four
weeks.

The international treaty system on disarmament,
arms control and non-proliferation, including its aim of
the total elimination of weapons of mass destruction,
plays the key role in realizing the goals of this
resolution. It is now mentioned in the preambular
section. However, we would have preferred to see it
highlighted in the operative section as well. A strong
role has finally been allocated to a two-year follow-up
mechanism, and we welcome that. However, we regret
that no explicit language could be introduced on the
importance of verification, security assurances and
regional security arrangements and on the leading role
the Security Council as a whole must play in the
context of this resolution.

Despite those shortcomings, we support this
resolution as it stands, and we will cooperate in its
implementation because the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction by non-State actors is a major
threat to international peace and security. That threat is
real and imminent. All United Nations Member States
must strengthen their respective domestic controls,
including export controls and legislation. The Security
Council is setting clear goals. The concrete rules to
reach those goals will be established by Member States
in accordance with their national procedures.

During the Council's open debate on 22 April
2004, which was marked by wide, constructive
participation, a great number of United Nations
Member States expressed their understanding for the
goals of this resolution and their support for its
implementation. The proactive cooperation of all
Member States, the public and private industry, as well
as international agencies such as the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, is a prerequisite for
the success of this important instrument. In the case of
any lack in its implementation, the resolution does not
foresee any unilateral enforcement measures. If
necessary, such measures must be subject to specific
further decisions, to be adopted by the Security
Council as a whole under paragraph 11 of the
resolution and in conformity with the United Nations
Charter. In the open debate, many speakers, including
sponsors, underlined that this resolution is not about
enforcement actions.

The Committee to be established to follow up on
the implementation of the resolution must closely
cooperate with Member States and international
agencies in order to ensure an even-handed and
transparent approach. We welcome the fact that the
Committee has been given a two-year mandate, and we
hope that, after that time, the Committee and the
resolution will have fulfilled their task. In any case, the
end of that two-year period should be the occasion to
subject the resolution and its implementation to a
comprehensive review.

As this resolution covers an important aspect of
non-proliferation, it complements the existing system
of international instruments of global disarmament,
arms control and non-proliferation, including effective
verification. This multilateral treaty regime, which is
highlighted in several paragraphs of the resolution,
retains its full validity and relevance and remains a
core instrument for the preservation of international
peace and security. The obligations contained therein
have to be fully complied with. We are committed to
strengthening and universalizing the multilateral
disarmament and non-proliferation treaties and
agreements. After all, one of the most effective
contributions to preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction remains the total
elimination of those weapons both from arsenals and
from military doctrines worldwide.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.
