Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Mr. Nikolay Mladenov for his briefing.

We have been following reports of escalating
Violence in the occupied Palestinian territory and
of events taking place in Gaza, about which we are
very concerned. It has been just two weeks since the
emergency Security Council meeting (see S/PV.8256)
following the escalation of violence in the occupied
Palestinian territory, which left many Palestinians dead
and injured in the Gaza protest. At that meeting we
expressed our seeped sorrow and sympathy on the loss
of life. While we called on Israel to show maximum
restraint, we also stated that Hamas and the leaders of
the demonstrations had a responsibility to prevent all
violent actions and provocations. I would like to echo
what the Special Coordinator said yesterday, to the effect
that he was deeply concerned by the indiscriminate
firing of rockets by Palestinian militants from Gaza
towards southern Israel. He also said that such attacks
were unacceptable and undermined the serious efforts
made by the international community to improve the
situation in Gaza. His statement, which we feel is most
valid, highlights how dangerous the rocket attacks
from Gaza are and the hindrance they cause to making
progress in the peace process. This must stop, for they
are in the interest of no one, least of all the Palestinians.

Under these circumstances, it is impossible to deny
Israel the right to self-defence, a right that goes along
with a responsibility to ensure proportionality. We
in the Council have repeatedly said that any negative
action that runs counter to a peaceful settlement of
the conflict will only prolong the process of resolving
the problem. It is therefore self-evident that unless
the peace process is advanced and the underlying
problems solved peacefully, the tragedy at hand will
only happen again and again, eventually reaching the
point of no return. That is where we seem to be headed.
The situation is that grave, and much worse violence is
becoming imminent, despite the current calm situation.
This is part and parcel of the very logic of the situation,
and that is why preserving the possibility of finding a
solution through a two-State formula is critical. That
is also why a de-escalation of this dangerous situation
remains critical, so as to protect civilians, break
the cycle of violence and resume the much-needed
political process.

We appreciate the role played by Egypt in trying
to de-escalate the situation, and we note that today the
ceasefire appears to be holding. This could calm the
situation for a while, but to resume the political process,
the parties, as well as the international community, have
their own, respective responsibilities. While the parties
should show the flexibility to engage in direct and
meaningful negotiations so as to reach a final settlement
on all issues, the international community, in particular
the Council, should discharge its responsibilities in
helping and encouraging the two parties to do so.

In conclusion, let me say that it is very important
to get the narrative right. It would not be right to lose
sight of the root causes of this tragic and potentially
extremely dangerous situation. The possibility of
a two-State solution is shrinking by the day, to the
frustration of the Palestinians, whose living conditions,
particularly in Gaza, are deeply worrying indeed. As
Mr. Mladenov said recently, at one point weeks ago
Gaza was on the verge of total collapse, with all the
attendant consequences. He reiterated that view today.
That situation is conducive to the creation of groups
of all stripes that would pose a threat not only to the
peoples of Palestine and Israel but also to the region
as the whole. That is why the resumption of the peace
process is so critical and why there is no other option
for saving the possibility of the two-State solution.

