Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Pedersen for his
briefing and wish to convey our gratitude to the Syrian
Government, the opposition and the members of the
small group on Syria and the Astana guarantors for
having created a forum for dialogue among the parties
involved, so as to achieve, for the first time in a long
time, tangible progress in the political process.

We welcomed the announcement made by the
Secretary-General a week ago on the composition,
terms of reference and basic rules of procedure of
the Constitutional Committee. We see that as a first
major step towards resolving the conflict in Syria. We
hope that it will translate into a resurgence of hope for
all Syrians.

We reiterate the support of the Dominican
Republic in this new phase for the efforts aimed at
the advancement of the Committee and the eventual
satisfactory conclusion of its work, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), facilitated by the United
Nations. We invite the parties to show the highest
possible levels of compromise, flexibility and mutual
respect, but above all to keep the Syrian people at
the centre of each and every decision they take. After
all - and we must always remember this - it is the
Syrian people who will decide their own future.

We advocate for the participation of women in equal
conditions to be respected, valued and strengthened at
every stage of the constitutional process. The voice of
women must resonate louder than ever in all aspects
of the broad political process, but especially in the
Constitutional Committee as a fundamental piece
of the creation of a new national system based on
the rule of law and respect for the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all citizens. We urge the
Special Envoy to continue to advocate for at least 30 per
cent female representation throughout the process. The
road to political and national reconciliation is long and
complex and must have at its core the strengthening
and empowerment of all Syrian civil society, for whose
participation clear terms must be fixed. Certainly, an
agreement such as this is an important achievement, but
it is essential, in our view, to strengthen the people's
trust through urgent measures on the ground.

First, we believe it is crucial to ensure the safety
and protection of the members of the Constitutional
Committee and their families.

Secondly, given the humanitarian and, consequently,
impartial nature of the treatment of detained and
missing persons, we reiterate the need to see more
progress in that area. We therefore invite the parties to
work in good faith and to immediately release women,
children, the elderly and persons with disabilities, as
well as to provide information to families about their
missing loved ones.

Finally, we reiterate the need to protect the civilian
population in the north-west of the country and avoid
indiscriminate attacks against areas inhabited by
civilians and against civilian infrastructure. We recall
that even counter-terrorism measures must adhere to
international humanitarian law and avoid the loss of
civilian lives at all costs. All efforts must be aimed
at alleviating the precarious conditions in which a
large portion of the Syrian population lives and at
restoring their dignity and ensuring their protection
and development without any further delay.

I would like to take this opportunity, at the last open
meeting in September, to congratulate Ambassador
Nebenzia on the success of the Russian presidency.
As expected, he has demonstrated great diplomatic
capabilities, which should be emulated, and great
efficiency in the conduct of the Council's work. I thank
him and his entire team.

