Ms. Muthukumarana (Sri Lanka): I join other
speakers in commending you, Mr. President, for having
convened this important debate. The Sri Lankan
delegation associates itself with the statement made
by Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. My
delegation wishes to express our appreciation for the
dedicated service of Mr. Robert Serry, the outgoing
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, and to wish his successor, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, success in this key leadership role. Proactive
leadership in the international community is essential
in order to find a just and durable solution to the
question of Palestine.

Successive generations of Palestinians have
suffered owing to a range of factors, in particular by
being dispossessed from much of their land. In recent
years, the continuing blockade of Gaza has added
to the difficulties experienced by the Palestinian
people. Restrictions on imports and exports due to
the blockade are stifling economic growth as well as
aggravating the humanitarian crisis. We are deeply
concerned at the situation in Gaza, where the basic
needs of the Palestinian population must be addressed
following the conflict last year, which resulted in
large-scale destruction and displacement. Continuing
the humanitarian and reconstruction assistance for the
devastated Gaza Strip should be a priority. In addition,
the pace of reconstruction needs to be accelerated to
address basic needs as well as to ensure stability.

The fulfilment of pledges made at the Cairo
conference for Palestine last year will be a lifeline for the
Palestinian people to rebuild their lives and livelihoods.
Also, the funding of United Nations agencies that carry
out vital operations in Gaza for both the refugee and
non-refugee populations must receive the highest
priority. Peace negotiations need to be resumed as soon
as possible with the goal of reaching a just and durable
solution consistent with the principles of international
law, and relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions. Both parties to the conflict must
actively pursue every possibility for peace with a view
to ultimately establishing an independent State of
Palestine that exists peacefully, side by side with Israel.
A climate conducive to peace would be encouraged
by an approach of mutual sensitivity to each other's
concerns.

We would also like to reiterate that the security
needs of the Israeli people must be respected. An
improvement in the conditions of the Palestinians would
contribute to improving the situation of the region
as a whole. The ongoing settlement activities, which
are illegal under international law, need to end at the
earliest for a sustainable solution. Sri Lanka supports
the implementation of General Assembly resolutions
concerning the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to statehood and the attainment of a two-State
solution on the basis of the 1967 borders. Sri Lanka
also supports Palestine's application for admission to
full membership in the United Nations. We recognize
that the viability of the two-State solution will depend
on the political unity and economic advancement of the
Palestinian people.

In conclusion, we hope that both Israel and Palestine
will utilize the opportunities presented during this year
to achieve a historic peace agreement in the interest of
their future generations.

