Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria): At the outset, I would
like to extend the congratulations of the delegation of
Algeria to your friendly country, Bosnia-Herzegovina,
and to you personally, Madam President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January. I would also like to thank
you for organizing this open debate on an important
question on the agenda of the international community
as a whole.

I would also like to thank the outgoing members
of the Security Council - Austria, Japan, Mexico,
Turkey and Uganda - which served with dedication in
pursuit of peace and security and respect for the rule of
law in every situation. I also want to congratulate the
incoming members - Colombia, Germany, India,
Portugal and South Africa - on beginning their
mandates. I wish them success in fulfilling their
responsibilities.

In spite of recent efforts to revitalize the peace
process, Israel continues to carry out its illegal
settlements and colonization activities in occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, which
are accompanied by escalating settler violence, home
demolitions, forced evictions and the ongoing
construction of the separation wall despite the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice.

The recent allocation by the Israeli Government
of significant additional financial resources to expand
settlements through 2012 demonstrates clearly that
Israel is not on the path to peace and that the only goal
pursued by Israeli policy seems to be to undermine any
future prospects for a peaceful settlement. It is obvious
that those measures are intended to annex Palestinian
territory by bringing about long-term demographic
changes, removing traces of Palestinian heritage and
fortifying the Israeli presence in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem.

Furthermore, the situation is Gaza remains
disturbing from the perspective of human rights and
international law. Palestinians continue to be punished
collectively through the isolation of the 1.5 million
residents of Gaza for several years, including the
interdiction of exports from the Strip and the
prevention of the flow of goods and people, even in
life-and-death situations. Algeria reiterates its demand
for Israel's immediate lifting of its illegal blockade and
for the opening of all crossing points to Gaza, in
accordance with resolution 1860 (2009), General
Assembly resolution ES-10/18 and other relevant
resolutions of the United Nations.

Similarly, the imprisonment of about 10,000
Palestinians in Israeli jails, where ill-treatment and
torture are widely used, represents a matter of serious
concern for my country. The international seminar in
support of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails
organized in Algiers on 5 December 2010, with the
participation of delegations from several countries,
called on the international community to address this
scandalous challenge to international humanitarian law
and to adopt a clear and urgent stand for the immediate
release of these illegally detained people, among whom
are children and women.

It is the responsibility of the Security Council to
exercise its prerogatives in order to halt the brutal
practices of the Israeli Government by taking the
required actions to ensure respect for, and compliance
with, the ruling of the International Court of Justice,
the Fourth Geneva Convention and the relevant United
Nations resolutions.

Negotiations remain imperative for achieving the
two-State solution based on resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) and other relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative, including the principle of land for peace,
which means the withdrawal of Israel from all Arab
occupied territories.

Algeria reiterates that any negotiated outcome
between the parties must result in the emergence of an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, based on
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions. A complete cessation of colonization and
settlement activities and human rights violations is
clearly a prerequisite to creating a more stable
environment conducive to resuming the peace process
and achieving the two-State solution for peace.

As a sponsor of the draft resolution contained in
document S/2011/24, Algeria urges the 15 members of
the Security Council to step up to the challenge at stake
and to ensure its timely adoption.

