Mr. Henze (German) (interpretation from French):
First of all, Mr. President, I should like to associate
myself with your expression of farewell to Ambassador
Merimee. We view his departure with great regret. His
broad-ranging experience and wisdom helped us a great
deal in our work - and not only in the Council. We hope
that in Rome he will find a somewhat less turbulent
landscape than at the United Nations, and that there he
will be able to take vacations with no fear of being called
back to the Council.

(spoke in English)

Germany voted in favour of extending the mandate
of the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL) until 31 January 1996. There is reason to
hope that the peace process will make substantive
progress until that date. We also hope that the Abuja
Agreement will prove to be a lasting foundation for a
peace settlement in Liberia.

 

The installation of the Council of State and the re-
establishment of a comprehensive cease-fire are important
first steps, which we welcome. The inclusion of the leaders
of the warring parties in the provisional government should
provide the basis for a continuation of the peace process.

International assistance will be necessary to sustain the
peace process, especially within the framework of
demobilization of the armed units and to re-establish an
economic foundation for Liberia's further development.
Depending on a further improvement of the security
situation, increased humanitarian assistance will, hopefully,
be an additional stabilizing factor.

The warring parties will have to provide further proof
of their sincere commitment to the peace process by
abiding strictly by their commitments under the Abuja
Agreement. Only under this condition can international
assistance for the peace process be maintained.

The continued United Nations engagement therefore
also depends on the Secretary-General's report to the
Council, by the end of October, and his conclusions on the
future concept of UNOMIL's operations. It is the
understanding of my Government that the Council will at
that time have to reconsider UNOMIL's options in Liberia,
in the light of progress made in the peace process.

In conclusion, my Government would like to express
its gratitude to the Member States of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and
particularly Ghana and Nigeria. In the end, it was their will
to harmonize their policies on Liberia that was instrumental
in reaching the Abuja Agreement and in attaining the
progress we are seeing now. They are called upon to
continue their political efforts and their commitment
through their presence in the Cease-fire Monitoring Group
of ECOWAS (ECOMOG). That and further improved
coordination with UNOMIL will, hopefully, yield the
necessary help to the people of Liberia to achieve peace
and reconciliation.

