Mr. Lacroix: I wish to thank you, Madam, for
this opportunity to brief the Council on the situation
in the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) area of operation and on the activities of the
Force and Observer Group Golan over the past three
months, following the publication of the report of the
Secretary-General on UNDOF (S/2019/248).

As noted in the report, the ceasefire between
Israel and Syria has been maintained, notwithstanding
a number of violations observed by UNDOF of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement of 1974. They
included the crossing of the ceasefire line by civilians
from the Bravo side, the presence of unauthorized
equipment and personnel in the areas of separation and
limitation, and the firing into the area of separation
and across the ceasefire line. UNDOF protested to the
parties all violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement that it observed.

The incidents of missile, rocket and other heavy
weapons fire on 29 November, 20 January and
11 February, details of which the Secretary-General
outlines in his report, illustrate the continued risk
of escalation of the situation in the UNDOF area of
operation. It is critical that the parties at all times
respect the Disengagement of Forces Agreement so as
to maintain stability on the Golan. The importance of
the parties maintaining their liaison with UNDOF in
the first instance cannot be overemphasized. We count
on members of the Security Council to support efforts
to sensitize both parties and regional stakeholders to
the risks of escalation and the need to preserve the
long-standing ceasefire between Israel and Syria.

Allow me to turn the Council's attention to
UNDOF's incremental return and full resumption of
operations on the Bravo side. Since I last briefed the
Council in December (see S/PV.8432), the Mission has
continued to conduct operational patrols on routes in
the northern and central parts of the areas of separation
and limitation. In addition, UNDOF continues to carry
out assessment Visits and protected patrols to vacated
United Nations positions and observation posts,
including position 85 and observation post 57, in the
southern part of the area of separation. UNDOF has
also conducted, for the first time, route reconnaissance
patrols to United Nations observation post 52 through
the area of separation.

UNDOF also continues to make progress in
the refurbishment and reoccupation of its vacated
positions. The refurbishment and reoccupation
of United Nations position 32 was completed on
30 December 2018 through the deployment of 35
UNDOF military personnel. On 28 January, UNDOF
commenced a limited reoccupation of position 37 to
support engineering work related to the refurbishment
of the facilities and the security infrastructure at the
position. It is expected to be completed by the end of
April. Following the reoccupation of position 37 we are
planning for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of
position 27 in the central part of the area of separation.
During the reporting period, Observer Group Golan
continued to maintain temporary observation posts in
the central and northern parts of the area of separation.
Allow me, however, to underline that Observer Group
Golan will not be deployed at observation posts in the
area of separation on a permanent basis until such a
time as conditions permit.

UNDOF continues to regularly utilize the Quneitra
crossing, which was reopened on 15 October 2018,
to move equipment and personnel between the Alpha
and Bravo sides. Pending the completion of the
refurbishment of United Nations position at the Charlie
gate and its reoccupation, UNDOF military police
continued to deploy at the crossing point during the
limited opening hours only to liaise with the respective
sides on UNDOF personnel crossings. As Council
members will be aware, the Quneitra crossing is
important in facilitating efficient and effective UNDOF
mandate implementation.

The completion of the redeployment and resumption
of full operations in UNDOF's southern area of
operation will be facilitated by the deployment to the
Mission of a new mechanized company in July of this
year, which is planned to occupy positions 85 and 68.

I can reassure Council members and troop-
contributing countries that in the implementation of
the Mission's plan to gradually return to the Bravo
side, the safety and security of UNDOF and Observer
Group Golan personnel remain paramount. There
is a continued significant threat to United Nations
personnel in the UNDOF area of operation from
explosive remnants of war and from the possible
presence of sleeper cells of armed groups, including
listed terrorist groups, particularly in the southern
part of the area of separation. UNDOF, in consultation
with both parties, continues to review the situation
in the area separation in order to assess Whether the
conditions on the ground would permit the return to
vacated positions in the area of separation. We remain
committed to supporting UNDOF in the implementation
of the necessary mitigation measures, including force
protection measures, at both United Nations positions
and observation posts, as well as at Camp Ziouani and
Camp Faouar.

The importance of the continued support to and
cooperation of the parties with UNDOF is of critical
importance. It remains critical that the deployment of
the necessary technology and equipment to UNDOF be
seamless and expeditious. The support and cooperation
of both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic remains
essential in this regard. Such support and cooperation are
also critical to ensuring the full freedom of movement
and access to United Nations positions in the area of
operations, and to reducing the delays and challenges
that United Nations personnel experience in crossing
the technical fence to United Nations observation posts
and positions. In addition, the full utilization of the
Quneitra crossing by UNDOF, in line with established
procedures and Without any administrative obstacles,
is important, in particular as UNDOF increases its
operations on the Bravo side to facilitate effective and
efficient mandate implementation.

In conclusion, I wish to acknowledge and appreciate
the continued dedication of UNDOF personnel and
Observer Group Golan military observers serving
under the leadership of Major General Francis Vib-
Sanziri. I am also grateful for the continued support of
UNDOF troop-contributing countries.

I also would like to thank members of the Council
for their continued and steadfast support. The presence
of UNDOF on the Golan remains essential in our shared
efforts to prevent regional escalation. We continue to
rely on the Council's support.

