Ms. Embale (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by delegation): The
Prime Minister of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, His
Excellency Mr. Carlos Gomes Junior, asked me to send
his warmest greetings to the Security Council and to
convey to it the importance that we attach to this
meeting of the Council, which once again confirms its
readiness to support the Government's efforts to
stabilize the country.

Whenever we have an opportunity such as this,
we wish to highlight our recognition of how the
Security Council has played its strategic role of
maintaining international peace and security in a world
where threats and urgent and complex issues require
appropriate responses.

With regard to Guinea-Bissau, the Council's
actions have been steady and careful, and have
revealed its proper understanding of the challenges we
face. That has been the basis for its effective action,
6
which has created the environment of confidence and
optimism that we are currently experiencing in our
country, supported by the assistance that we have been
receiving from the United Nations.

We therefore welcome United Nations efforts to
promote stability and peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau,
and for that reason we pay tribute to the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNIOGBIS), through its Head and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mr. Joseph
Mutaboba, who, with integrity and great sense of
purpose, has contributed to revitalizing and
strengthening national reconciliation and dialogue.

Allow me to express what an honour and
privilege it is for me to participate in this meeting of
the Security Council to outline the developments in
Guinea-Bissau since the Council's most recent meeting
on the topic (see S/PV.6569).

Over the past three years, my country has shown
perseverance and determination in implementing its
governmental agenda. The acceleration of structural
reforms in areas critical for development has helped to
normalize the social and political spheres and restore
public trust. The long periods of political instability
that dragged the country into a vicious circle of serious
imbalances and exacted a massive toll by delaying the
normal course of development, have now given way to
a more favourable political context, characterized by
economic recovery and the renewed confidence of
internal and external partners.

Today, I can report that our people enjoy, with
some sense of euphoria, the gains that governmental
stability has brought to the country. That progress has
enabled the country to move from a dramatic budgetary
situation to a more stable position, thanks to greater
control over public spending, increased tax revenues
and the substantial reduction of public debt.

Despite the massive uncertainties currently
prevailing in the international context, rising exports
have benefited the national economy and have
compensated for shrinking international aid flows. In
that regard, the country's GDP growth has surpassed its
historical trend of 1.8 per cent over the past 10 years
and is forecasted to reach 5.3 per cent this year,
compared with 3.5 per cent in 2010, in a context of
moderate price stability. Those successes were based
on careful and efficient economic governance, building
on bold reforms and on the gradual improvement of
living conditions, thanks to the revitalization of some
industries and improvements in basic infrastructure and
the delivery of social services.

In the framework of implementing security and
defence sector reform, it is worth highlighting the
Government's efforts to set up a special pension fund.
The special pension fund is a step in the process of
restructuring the defence and security forces and will
ensure that all members who retire from active duty for
reasons of age, seniority or disability receive a fair
pension.

Despite the consensus reached on the essential
role of the pension fund as a key pillar of security and
defence sector reform, its start-up of operations is
significantly behind schedule, owing mainly to delays
in the financial contributions that will constitute the
fund.

Guinea-Bissau has shown its firm commitment to
promptly beginning the process by adopting most of
the legal instruments that frame the reforms, in
accordance with the expert studies carried out in the
framework of our cooperation with the European
Union.

As evidence of that commitment and along the
lines previously agreed and accepted by all, the
Government organized the public bidding process to
select the banking institution to be entrusted with
management of the fund. More recently, it deposited
40 per cent of its annual contribution into the account
opened in the bank selected, and made a commitment
to deposit an additional $300,000 by the end of the
current budget year, which will complete the target
amount set for this year.

Once we receive the contributions announced by
some donors, namely, the United Nations through the
Peacebuilding Fund, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the European Union (EU)
and Angola, the Government is ready to offer the
additional guarantees necessary to safeguard the
exclusive use of the fund's resources for the purposes
for which it was created. In that regard, the framework
agreement signed between the Government and the
bank in question provides for the signature of
additional protocols to ensure that the specific financial
procedures of each donor are respected.

At this stage in the process, the financial
contribution of ECOWAS is contingent on the
11-57874
signature of a memorandum of understanding between
ECOWAS, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP) and the Government to implement
defence and security sector reforms.

As is well known, the framework of support for
and follow-up to the road map is established in the
memorandum, as is a set of priority actions, such as the
operationalization of the pension fund. A draft
memorandum of understanding is already available,
and its signature will be made possible with the final
decision of ECOWAS. The Government estimates that
a rapid response from that institution will allow for the
implementation of the decision of the Conference of
Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS which, in
March 2011, approved the special financial package to
support the road map in the amount of $63 million and
will have the additional merit of highlighting the role
of ECOWAS in the consolidation of the process of
regional integration and, in particular, in the
strengthening of peace and security in Guinea-Bissau.

The conclusion of consultations with the
European Union until article 96 of the Cotonou
Agreement and the resulting commitments undertaken
by the Government created the conditions for the
resumption of EU support for security sector reform.
As the Council is aware, the Government has
maintained a constructive political dialogue with the
European Union in a follow-up committee that meets
regularly to assess the implementation of the road map
that emerged from the consultations. To complete the
picture of the commitments already announced for the
financing of the pension fund, it is worth mentioning
the contributions of the Government of Angola in the
framework of our bilateral cooperation and of the
Peacebuilding Fund. The Government welcomes these
efforts and calls for their implementation as soon as
possible.

The efforts of the Government that I have just
described should be appreciated and valued by the
donor community, which must show greater flexibility.
One can only be healed after treatment and not the
other way around. It is therefore only reasonable to ask
for results after creating the conditions necessary for
obtaining them. In order for the work done so far not to
be seen as a handful of salt thrown into the sea, to use
a popular expression, and in order for our
commitments not to be reduced to mere rhetoric, we
must proceed to the high-level meeting scheduled to
take place later this month under the auspices of the

United Nations. The meeting, which is part of a
strategy to deepen the political dialogue with the
Government, should continue to receive special
attention.

Indeed, it was in this conviction - which we
understand is shared by our partners - that we
adopted, without hesitation and often at high social and
political cost, the comprehensive legislative package of
reforms with a view to implementing measures to
monitor the payment of wages in the public sector,
including the defence and security forces, and to raise
awareness of and improve communication on the goals
of the reform and other elements deemed necessary to
ensure its operability.

In short, we have created the conditions, once
considered a major challenge, for the establishment of
the special pension fund and the launch of the
demobilization process. We now call for greater
engagement by all in these efforts, failing which we
risk undermining the significant efforts made to date
and sowing doubt among the beneficiaries of the
process with regard to the capacity and interest of some
in successfully concluding this process.

As far as the Government is concerned, the
process will begin so long as conditions are in place to
cover the costs related to the payment of pensions for
the first two years of the fund's operation. The launch
of the fund will allow us to face many of the challenges
that we have been confronted with, such as the gradual
replenishment of the military command and improved
training for new recruits. Together with other actions,
including demobilization and reintegration into active
life, security sector reform will be further energized.

The Government welcomes the adoption of the
employment programme within the framework of the
Peacebuilding Fund, which includes employment
solutions for demobilized military personnel as well as
other projects of a similar nature already under way
with the support of the European Union.

The issue of impunity continues to be highlighted
as one of the causes of Guinea-Bissau's fragility and as
a threat to social peace. The examples that are often
cited are the excessive delay in the investigation of
crimes, the lack of State authority, which would
indicate leadership deficits, and lack of technical and
financial capacities to ensure the rule of law. The
Government views these shortcomings as challenges
and is therefore committed to moving forward with its
programme of justice sector reform.

So far, clear results have been obtained in the
rehabilitation of prisons and penal system reform, in
strengthening criminal justice legislation and national
capacities, and in implementing mechanisms to
facilitate access to information and impartial justice.
These results demonstrate the appropriateness of the
choices made to strengthen the judiciary and improve
its operations in accordance with full respect for
democratic principles, in particular the principle of
separation of powers.

The creation of the first model police station, the
Offices of Information and Judiciary Support and the
creation of the Judiciary Training Centre fall within
this new dynamic. The promotion of professional
training for judicial officers, the access of all citizens
to justice and the dissemination of a new paradigm
between citizens and the police are critical factors for
the consolidation of democracy and the rule of law.
This framework also includes measures taken to
combat transnational organized crime, especially drug
trafficking, terrorism and money-laundering, at the
subregional level, through the West Africa Coast
Initiative, and at the national level.

The strategy and the action plan to combat drugs
were warmly welcomed by the Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), who has just completed a working visit to
Guinea-Bissau. In addition, the support provided by the
representative of the Attorney-General of the United
States should also be praised and enhanced so that we
can take advantage of their enormous experience in this
field.

With the assistance of UNODC and France, we
are working on a plan to combat money-laundering that
will also rely on the support of the Intergovernmental
Action Group against Money Laundering in West
Africa and the National Unit for the Processing of
Financial Information, which has already been created
in our country. There is also an ongoing programme to
strengthen the channels of communication among the
different agencies of the system and to enhance the
sharing of information collected from different sources.
INTERPOL, which now has a local office, will play a
central role in this process.
The will and determination of the Government to
implement these strategies is a necessary but
insufficient condition for their success. The lack of
financial means and the imposition of conditionalities
for their disbursement have been the main causes of
delays in the process.

The interconnection in Guinea-Bissau among the
political, security, justice, economic and social
development dimensions is unequivocal and generally
accepted by donors and local actors, as well as by
national civil society institutions, all of which
recognize that only in a climate of peace and political
stability can the country achieve sustainable
development and economic and social progress. That is
why, in the recently revised and reformulated country
strategy paper, defence, security and justice sector
reforms were included in the first section under the
title "Strengthening the rule of law and republican
institutions". This axis refers to the structures and
authority of the State, as well as to its ability to
implement new practices of political and
administrative governance in order to establish the rule
of law and lasting security for the population and its
property. Among the actions to be taken in this area, I
note measures to improve the human rights situation
and mechanisms to prevent and manage crises.

The separation of powers, the primacy of the law
and the establishment of an independent and
technically and culturally able judiciary are the
cornerstones of the rule of law that we wish for our
country. For us, that necessarily implies accelerating
and stabilizing the defence and security sector reform
process. Respect for democratic principles, particularly
through holding free, transparent and regular elections
and leaving behind the former practice of seizing
power through force, completes the picture outlined
above, incorporating the democratic components
within the regular functioning of institutions. That will
be the main guarantee of stability for our country,
which will allow it to turn a corner and break the cycle
of political instability that has marked it in recent
years.

The other elements of the national poverty
reduction strategy aim at providing responses to the
characteristic challenges of the country in the area of
development, where priorities and needs in the
Guinean context require a more inclusive approach in
which social and human needs cannot be relegated to
the background. The country still has a low level of
human development and faces complex and wide-
ranging challenges in terms of poverty. Thus strategies,
policies, programmes and actions that could
significantly reduce poverty in its multiple dimensions,
generate increased income and employment
opportunities, and improve access to basic public
services that meet basic quality standards have been
envisioned over a five-year period.

As we have reiterated several times in
international forums, implementation of those
strategies depends on the effective support of the
international community, particularly in the social
sectors. To follow up those ideas, we have already
started preparations to organize a donor round table
next year with a view to mobilizing funds to implement
the national plan to combat poverty.

The high-level meeting on defence and security
sector reform scheduled for this year is part of the
Government's strategy to raise awareness and mobilize
resources and partnerships. We hereby renew our
appreciation for everything that has been done by those
who have supported us in this massive effort to raise
awareness and begin implementation of the reforms. I
refer to the Economic Community of West African
States, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, the African Union, the European Union, and
particularly to countries such as Angola, Brazil, Cape
Verde, Portugal, Nigeria and Senegal for all they have
done to ensure that the voice of Guinea-Bissau is heard
around the world.

We count on the wholehearted support of the
Security Council and of the entire international
community, from whom we ask for engagement with
Guinea-Bissau, as has already occurred with some of
our partners, so that we can jointly implement the
programmes that will boost the country's economic and
social development and transform it into a prosperous
and exemplary nation. Those are the matters I wish to
highlight at this juncture.

