Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Let me join my
colleagues in congratulating you, Madam, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council, and in
thanking your predecessor, the representative of
Ireland, for the successful way in which he led the
work of the Council last month. My delegation wishes
also to acknowledge the presence of the Foreign
Minister of Liberia, Mr. Monie R. Captan, to whom we
extend a warm welcome.

I wish also to thank Ambassador Mahbubani,
Chairman of the sanctions Committee on Liberia, for
introducing the report of the Panel of Experts on
Liberia (S/2001/1015, annex) and for his most
pertinent remarks. Let me also welcome the members
of the Panel of Experts and congratulate them on the
elaborate, detailed and probing report they have
submitted in accordance with the mandate given them
under paragraph 19 of section B of Security Council
resolution 1343 (2001). I further thank Mr. Ed Tsui of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs for his report.

The report of the Panel of Experts brings to the
attention of the Council a mixed bag of good news and
bad news from Liberia. The good news is that the
Government of Liberia has taken some positive
measures to implement the demands of Security
Council resolution 1343 (2001). It has grounded all
Liberian-registered aircraft, and the civil aviation
authorities in Liberia are pursuing their efforts to
identify and localize Liberian-registered aircraft.
Investigations are under way to establish the full extent
of the problem of fraudulent registrations before a new
registration list is opened. We also note that since May
this year, when an embargo was imposed on Liberian
diamonds, there has been no official export of
diamonds from Liberia; this has been confirmed by
Central Bank statistics. The Government of Liberia has
also expressed its readiness to establish an
internationally acceptable and transparent certification
regime for the export of diamonds, and we welcome
that. As for the travel ban, which the Panel considers to
be the most effective sanction, it appears that it is
working quite well. We encourage the Government of
Liberia to pursue these efforts and to comply strictly
with the other measures imposed by Security Council
resolution 1343 (2001).

Turning to the bad news, my delegation and,
indeed, I am certain, the Security Council as a whole
remain deeply concerned over the continued
relationship between the Government of Liberia and
the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) in Sierra Leone.
Despite the assurances of the Government of Liberia
that it has curtailed all relations with the RUF, the
Panel of Experts reports that this is not the case. RUF
units are involved in the fighting which continues in
Lofa County in Liberia, and Sam Bockarie, the
prominent RUF leader, freely travels to Liberia.

The Government of Liberia can and should play a
more determining role in ridding the entire region of
West Africa of rebellious activities.

Liberia today stands among the world's poorest
countries. Eighty per cent of the population lives in
abject poverty on less than a dollar a day.
Underdevelopment, war and the inability to re-establish
political and economic stability in the post-war period
have left Liberia at the bottom of the Human
Development Index: in fact, it ranks 174th out of a
total of 175 countries. Given that situation, we note
with concern that the natural resources of Liberia
continue to be plundered to provide for the comfort and
luxury of the elite. Thirty-four per cent of the
budgetary allocation under the 2000-2001 budget went
towards Government of Liberia special commitments.
Most of those funds were utilized for defence
expenditure on account of the war in Lofa County. It is
important for the Government of Liberia, along with
steps it is taking to implement resolution 1343 (2001),
also to uphold the principles of accountability and good
governance. We believe that adherence to those
principles would garner international support to assist
Liberia in addressing its economic difficulties.

The report of the Panel of Experts has in a lucid
and elaborate manner exposed how, despite a general
and complete embargo on all deliveries of weapons and
military equipment to Liberia, a steady flow of new
weapons continues to enter Liberia. The situation is
compounded by the linkage that has been established
between irregularities with respect to Liberian-
registered aircraft and violations of the arms embargo.
In most of the arms trafficking cases, the Panel has
demonstrated that air transport has been a crucial
element, and in all the cases the planes that were used
had, in one way or another, been subject to document
fraud, forgery of flight plans or irregularities with
respect to the registration of the aircraft.
Another serious aspect related to the violation of
the arms embargo is the practice of using undercover
agents to effect payments for the procurement of
weapons. Timber companies as well as individuals
have been identified by the report as being involved in
arranging payments for arms shipments to Liberia. In
several case studies, the Panel demonstrates in great
detail how end-user certificates have been forged by a
network of brokers to export weapons. These facts
indeed cause some disquiet. This situation reminds us
of the urgent need for all States to fully implement the
Programme of Action adopted at the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which was held in
July this year. We welcome the recommendation by the
Panel of Experts that the moratorium on small arms
declared by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) should be broadened to include an
information exchange mechanism for all weapons types
procured by ECOWAS member States.

It is most unfortunate that at a time when Liberia
is showing poor prospects for sustained economic
development, the leadership of the country is
exploiting avenues for self-enrichment. Revenue
derived from timber production has also been utilized
for sanctions-busting; that has been well illustrated in
the report. We welcome the recommendations of the
Panel on the commissioning of a detailed independent
report on revenue from the timber concessions for the
period January 2001 to July 2002.

We are pleased to learn that the travel ban has
generally worked successfully. We remain concerned,
however, over several violations of the travel ban, and
we urge countries of the region to fully implement the
provisions of resolution 1343 (2001) in that regard. My
delegation supports the Panel's recommendation that
the travel ban list should not be set in stone and that
constant updating is required.

The Panel of Experts has made a number of
valuable and constructive recommendations. These
recommendations are well intended and are meant to
assist Liberia in recovering from the economic
deprivation it finds itself in. It is crucial that all parties
concerned undertake the necessary efforts to implement
those recommendations so that peace can return to the
region.

It has been eight months since we adopted
resolution 1343 (2001), and six months have passed
since the sanctions were put in place. It is important at
this juncture for the Council to take stock of the
success or otherwise of its actions with respect to
Liberia and to peace and stability in the West African
region. Although the sanctions have generally worked
and are yielding the desired results, it would appear
that collateral damage and harm have been caused to
the Liberian population, which even prior to the
imposition of the sanctions was living in dire
conditions. It is therefore necessary for the Council to
have a fresh look at the most effective and least
damaging way of applying sanctions in the spirit of the
Bonn-Berlin-Interlaken process. Any new measure
taken by the Council should be so designed as to target
exclusively the Liberian elite, should have a clearly
defined time-frame and should spare the Liberian
civilian population any further hardship. We also
believe that it is important for the Council to give
careful consideration to alternate tracks that could lead
to a political solution to the problems in the region. We
call on the international community to continue its
support and assistance to the Liberian population.

Recent political developments in the Mano River
Union augur well for the region. We welcome the
efforts of ECOWAS aimed at improving relations
between the Government of Liberia and its neighbours,
as well as at restoring confidence and stability in the
subregion. We look forward to the regional summit of
the leaders of the Mano River countries in January
2002, and we hope that the outcome of the meeting will
produce results that will impact positively on the
region and its people.

Before I conclude, I wish to bring to the attention
of the Council the fact that, under the subtitle
"Diamonds" in Part III of the report, it is mentioned
that one Leonid Minin, a businessman with close
connections with President Charles Taylor, had in his
possession, at the time of his arrest in Italy in August
2000, documents of a Mauritian diamond company
called Black Stella Diamonds and letters showing
Minin's attempts to set up a diamond- exporting chain
from West Africa, through a polishing plant in
Mauritius, to Russia and China. I wish to bring to the
attention of Council members that the Chairman of the
Panel of Experts had written to my Mission on 11 May
seeking information on the import and export of
diamonds from Mauritius and the Black Stella
Diamonds company. I provided to the Chairman all the
information he had requested and informed him that all
diamond imports were carried out through legal
channels and that, according to records available,
Black Stella Diamonds Ltd. had not been involved in
the import or export of any diamonds. I have offered to
provide any additional information to the Panel.
