Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your country's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.

Syria has fulfilled its commitments under the
Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution
2118 (2013). Syria has always cooperated fully and
objectively, as well as in a positive, transparent and
flexible manner, in the fulfilment of its commitments,
despite great challenges and the complicated, difficult
and provocative security situation resulting from the
hostile conduct of some regional and international
parties. The Syrian Government has realized an
unprecedented achievement in the history of the
Organization by eliminating forever the Syrian
chemical-weapons programme in record time. The
elimination was confirmed by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Mission in its report (see S/2014/444) submitted to the
Council in June 2014.

However, unfortunately, instead of commending
the efforts of the Syrian Government, some members of
the Council - and I mean the United States, which has
not destroyed its huge chemical arsenal and makes one
excuse after another to avoid doing so, in addition to the
United Kingdom and France - have mastered the art
of deception and misinformation in order to dominate
the world and return to the time of colonization
and trusteeship.

Those States continue to exploit the Council to
make false and baseless accusations against the Syrian
Government. Furthermore, they are inventing new
meeting formats at the Council, with the aim ofachieving
one clear goal, namely, to obstruct any progress by the
Syrian army against the terrorist groups supported by
those same States. They aim to tarnish the image of
the Syrian Government and blackmail it politically. The
best proof of what I say is the theatrics staged by the
White Helmets, the propaganda wing of the Al-Nusra
Front. They claimed that toxic chemicals were used in
eastern Ghouta. Such claims have coincided with the
successful liberation of that area from armed terrorist
groups by the Syrian army and its allies, and were
proved to be false.

In a dangerous precedent being set, we have heard

statements by high-ranking officials of the States I
mentioned, who said that the only way for those groups
to be saved is through the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. It is as though such officials tell terrorist groups
to use chemical weapons against civilians, fabricate
evidence, use fake witnesses and manipulate crime
scenes, as they did previously, and such officials would
provide those groups with media coverage and political
support, and intervene to save them and then accuse the
Syrian Government. That is what those States tell the
terrorist groups to do. Such theatrics are staged not only
by the White Helmets; they are also staged here in the
Council as part two of the Khan Shaykhun play directed
by a permanent member of the Security Council.

Some members ofthe Council are in unprecedented
denial although the majority of the members of this
international organization agree that the conclusions
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
against the Syrian Government pertaining to Khan
Shaykhun incident are false and unfounded. That
did not prevent some States from repeating lies and
unfounded accusations against my country. I would
like to remind the Council that the JIM. refused to
visit Khan Shaykhun. It decided instead to rely on
statements made by the criminals who perpetrated
this immoral incident in Khan Shaykhun and on fake
witnesses, presented and introduced by terrorists to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and the Joint Investigative Mechanism. The JIM. also
relied on so-called open sources, which proves that
the comical investigation lacked minimum credibility
and transparency.

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
has repeatedly underscored before the Council and
the Executive Council of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons that it condemns any
use of chemical weapons or any other kind of weapons
of mass destruction, which constitutes a crime against
humanity and is an objectionable and immoral act that
cannot be justified under any circumstances for any
reason and regardless of where it takes place. We again
stress that the Syrian army did not use any chemical
weapons. It no longer possesses such weapons. In fact,
the Syrian army itself and civilians have been the target
of chemical weapons and toxins, including chlorine,
used by armed terrorist groups. Such groups include
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the Al-Nusra
Front and associated entities. They have used chemical
weapons in other places in Syria in terrorist crimes
they committed in the country and the wider region.
We have sent the Security Council and its specialized
agencies more than 130 letters, with details about the
possession, production and use of toxic chemicals
by armed terrorist groups. Regrettably, the Syrian
Government did not receive a response, not even one
word on measures that the Council took against States
that have helped terrorists to gain access to and use
such weapons.

It is also deplorable that the Governments of some
States have claimed to defend peoples and laws, while
their political and colonial history is full of violations
against them. How can the United States, the United
Kingdom and France claim to be committed to justice
when their track record is full ofshameful attacks against
people and wreaking annihilation in Palestine, Iraq,
Afghanistan, Libya, Yemen and Africa and, before that,
in Viet Nam, Cambodia, Cuba, Nicaragua, Grenada and
many other States? With regard to the martyred city of
Raqqa, an assessment mission conducted by the United
Nations visited the city a few days ago and found that
it has been completely destroyed by the attacks of the
United States-led coalition against Raqqa and other
parts of Syria. What credibility is it they talk about
before the Council?

I would also like to refer to the so-called French
initiative - the International Partnership against
Impunity for Use of Chemical Weapons. It is an attempt
to sidestep legitimate international mechanisms and to
establish a politicized, parallel mechanism in order
to serve the agendas of States that wish to accuse the
Syrian Government at all costs. The partnership does
not aim to prevent impunity, but rather to protect the
real perpetrators who use chemical weapons.

Finally, the Syrian Government underscores that
it is committed to implementing all the obligations
it assumed when it joined the Chemical Weapons
Convention, and will continue its war against terrorism
regardless of any political or media blackmail and cheap
exploitation of the blood of innocent people in Syria.

In conclusion, I would like to pose a question to
the representative of the Netherlands. Why has the
Netherlands not provided information so far about the
chemical agents and technology found on the plane that
crashed in Amsterdam in 1992? The explosion led to a
giant orange glow, smoke and strange odour. Why has
the Netherlands not provided information thus far on
those chemical agents?

The meeting rose at11.50 a.m.
