Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I wish to thank the
Japanese presidency for having organized this open
debate. We are pleased to see this topic return, the last
such debate having been held in August 2008 (see S/PV.5968).

There are at least two merits to this type of
discussion. It places all Member States in a position to
know the main issues related to the Security Council's
working methods, and it helps us to identify concrete
solutions for improving them.

We have heard, also over the last weeks and
months, some interesting ideas on improving working
methods, beginning with the proposals of the group of
small five countries, to which we pay tribute for the
excellent work they have long promoted on this
question. Italy is moving along the same lines and has
put on the table a series of suggestions aimed at
impacting the Security Council's working methods for
the sake of greater transparency and greater access to
and participation in the Council.

There are many aspects of the working methods
that still need improvement: old concerns, such as the
demand to increase and give renewed impetus to open
meetings, for example; and more recent ones, like the
issues of sanctions regimes and relationships with
troop-contributing countries, where significant changes
have been introduced but much remains to be done.
The presidential note contained in document
S/2006/507 is a significant point of reference in this
process. We fully endorse an update of its contents,
which could serve as a guide to all Member States in
this endeavour.
It is not my intention today to make a list of what
we have achieved and what we have not. I will focus
my remarks instead on a matter of procedure and, if I
may say so, of good will.

As we all know, some innovations to working
methods would require amendments to the Charter.
What I am proposing today, however, is a renewed

commitment and effort by all Council Members to
implement at least some of the measures we are
discussing that do not require these amendments. In
other words, we can use this debate to identify
measures that can be enacted immediately. Let us
consider, for example, the following three proposals on
interaction with non-Council members.

There is a widely supported request to improve
such interaction, especially with troop- and police-
contributing countries. They should be more engaged
in the Council's proceedings through open meetings
and informal consultations, and by creating standard
procedures for hearing their views. This is also true for
the regional organizations most involved in questions
being debated. If our goal is to interact with today's
world, we certainly cannot exclude regional
organizations.

There is also significant support for greater use of
the Arria Formula, which allows civil society and
non-governmental organizations to enter into dialogue
with the Council.

Lastly, there are demands to increase recourse to
open meetings and reduce to a minimum the number of
closed meetings and informal consultations. At the
very least, there should be post-meeting briefings by
the President to non-member States or at least to
interested States.

In another room of this building, we are engaged
in a process of reform of the Security Council, in
which a comprehensive package that entails
amendments to the United Nations Charter, also on
working methods, is being discussed. But
implementing the proposals that I have just mentioned
would not require a Charter amendment. We should
therefore decide that these demands shall enter into the
Council's practices effectively as soon as possible. In
this way, we would provide an immediate answer to
primary needs that are easy to fulfil.

I wish to say A final word on one prerequisite for
a substantial and lasting reform of working methods.
As we all know, the search for major innovations in
working methods has been promoted most
enthusiastically by countries that are not permanent
members of the Council and are seeking access to a
body on which they cannot be seated for perpetuity. Of
these, a key role is played by the small States. This is
understandable since, as we know, the current
exclusionary practices make Council membership
virtually off-limits to them.

In our view, this is a clear demonstration of the
fact that only a Council in which the principles of
accountability, elections and rotation are enhanced
would assure a genuine and ongoing effort towards
reform of its working methods. Those who know that
they will spend limited periods of time in the Council
will do everything possible, once they get there, to
ensure that in the future the room will be more open,
accessible and transparent.

I conclude here in deference to the five-minute
rule, another innovation in working methods that we
can put into practice immediately.

