Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for convening this very important meeting. Allow me,
first of all, to thank all the briefers - Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, Ms. Wevyn Muganda and Ms. Sofia
Ramyar - for their presentations, as well as for sharing
their touching and inspiring experiences.

We concur that youth participation can increase
the legitimacy and sustainability of peace processes.
We therefore join the Secretary-General in saying that
we must transform norms, practices, approaches and
attitudes towards our young people and recognize them
as equals who can contribute to all steps and aspects of
peace pI'OCESSGS.

Inclusiveness is indeed key. As future leaders,
it is only logical that young people be given a bigger
role in preventing conflict and encouraging peace
and development. To that end, Governments should
invest more in creating environments where young
people are empowered to take control and ownership
and exert a positive influence. Allow me to elaborate.

First, we need to create conditions conducive to
youth participation, including in addressing the root
causes of conflict. Socioeconomic gaps and a lack of
economic opportunities can drive young people to
disappointment and frustration. Disenchanted youth
are fertile ground for the spread of dangerous narratives
and ideas. In protracted conflicts, those disempowered
young people are easy prey to armed groups, either as
victims or as tools of war. The Council, in that regard,
is well positioned to play an important role.

Peacekeeping efforts, including disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and community
engagement, can help young people gain their second
chance and reintegrate themselves into society. Post-
reintegration and peacebuilding can create opportunities
to help young people maintain their peaceful ways of
life through education and job opportunities. Moreover,
there is also a need to include youth in all stages of
the peace continuum, as frequently mentioned by the
Secretary-General, from conflict prevention, to conflict
resolution, peacekeeping and, of course, peacebuilding.

To achieve that, partnership is needed, which
brings me to my second point. Resolutions 2250 (2015)
and 2419 (2018) were not meant for the small group of
the Council alone, but for the wider membership of the
United Nations. It is important that we translate those
resolutions into action through partnerships involving
States, regional organizations and the whole United
Nations system. We appreciate the first International
Symposium on Youth Participation in Peace Processes,
held in March, and support the engagement of the
President of the General Assembly in advancing the
agenda of youth, peace and security.

Allow me to share Indonesia's experience in
empowering youth to combat radicalization. In 2009, we
enacted a youth law that serves as the legal foundation
for integrating youth empowerment into our national
development plan. It includes education access, basic
health care and youth participation in decision-making
processes and in promoting human rights. To help
combat terrorism and violent extremism, we currently
have approximately 780 youth ambassadors spread out
across 13 provinces.

We brought that initiative to the region when, in
April, we hosted a regional workshop on establishing
youth ambassadors for peace against terrorism and
violent extremism. One hundred young people from
the region were tasked with building networks and
spreading positive messages on social media. We look
forward to the Secretary-General's report in May, which
could feature our partnerships to combat radicalization
among youth. Indonesia is a country that was built with
the spirit of youth, and that spirit will continue to shape
our future. The first Indonesian President, Mr. Sukarno,
once said, "Give me 1,000 people and I will shake a
mountain, but give me just 10 young people and I will
shake the world". It is time that we transform our youth
from a demographic dividend into one of peace.

