Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank Mark and
Ms. Sirkin for their briefings.

We reiterate the recognition of the Dominican
Republic for humanitarian workers in Syria for the
work they are doing for the people affected, at the risk
of their own lives. We are concerned about access to
humanitarian aid for more than 11 million people, half
of whom are children, owing to the security situation.

Since the end of April, at least 400 people have
died in Idlib, Hama and Aleppo governorates. In the
last month alone, 33 children have lost their lives.
Death caught all of them unawares in their homes, in
schools, in hospitals, in camps for displaced persons or
in the marketplace. There are now more than 400,000
displaced persons whose humanitarian needs are ever
increasing. Forty attacks on health facilities have been
recorded over the past three months. That is one attack
every two and a half days.

All ofthis is cause for alarm and requires immediate
action by the Council. We must not be silent witnesses to
what some might call just another chapter in the history
of Syria. No, the Council must mobilize to bring about
the immediate cessation of attacks against civilians in
Idlib and the rest of Syria.

We reiterate our conviction that there is no military
solution to the conflict in Syria. The immediate priority
must be to protect the population and ensure their
access to humanitarian assistance. We must replace
fear, frustration and a lack of faith with the building of
a common vision and a new future of sustainable peace.
That begins with an inclusive, credible and sustainable
political process for and by Syrians, facilitated by the
United Nations and based on resolution 2254 (2015),
whereby the Council is guarantor. All attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure must be investigated
and its authors held accountable. In addition, we wish
to see progress in the process of freeing those detained
or kidnapped, as well as in finding missing persons.

(spoke in English)

The Dominican Republic might have little influence
on the parties involved in this conflict. However, it is
because of Syria's suffering population that I say this
to the Council, on their behalf. I call upon everyone to
exercise restraint. I call upon everyone to give peace a
chance. I call upon everyone to alleviate the suffering,
not to add even more. And I call upon everyone to
protect civilians. Hostilities must stop, and they must
stop now.

