Mr. Lewicki (Poland): We very much welcome your
presence, Mr. Minister, here among us today. We also
wish to thank Joint Special Representative Ambassador
Mamabolo and Assistant Secretary-General Ursula
Mueller for their comprehensive briefings, including
on the recent developments in the Sudan.

A number of representatives have referred to the
developing situation in Khartoum. Poland also closely
follows the developments, including in the Sudan.
Like other delegations, we support the aspirations
of the Sudanese people to an inclusive, peaceful and
democratic transition, good governance and social and
economic well-being. We support the African Union
call for a swift transition to a civilian Government.

We call on the new Sudanese authorities not
to lose sight of Darfur. With the drawdown of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), we are at a crucial turning point
and the new civilian Government should do its utmost
to provide security, rule of law and basic services in
Darfur. Protecting civilians, promoting intercommunal
reconciliation and dealing with the root causes of the
conflict should be among the top priorities.

Poland welcomes the relative stability of the
security situation in Darfur. At the same time, we are
aware that the progress that has been made is both
volatile and reversible. In that context, we remain
concerned about the continued clashes in Jebel Marra
between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan
Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid, and the incidents of
intercommunal conflict, which Assistant Secretary-
General Mueller highlighted, and which make it clear
that Darfur requires the Security Council's continued
attention. I could not agree more with Mr. Annen that it
also requires a long-term engagement on the part of the
international community.

We note with regret and are deeply troubled by
the fact that the human rights violations, in particular
sexual and gender-based violence, as mentioned by
the representative of South Africa, continue to occur
in Darfur. We strongly condemn any targeting of
the civilian population - including by Government
security personnel - especially those who are most
vulnerable, that is women, children and internally
displaced persons. The authorities should spare no
effort to hold the perpetrators accountable and should
do their utmost to fight impunity in Darfur. It is also
vital to address the human rights situation with regard
to ensuring long-term stability in the Sudan, because
human rights violations and abuses are both root causes
of the conflicts and also a constant feature of conflicts
and their concomitant violence. In that context, we
welcome the cooperation of the Sudanese authorities
with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and look forward to seeing the new authorities
continue that cooperation.

We reiterate our position that there can be no
solution to conflict in Darfur other than a political
one. We regret that the recent changes in the Sudan's
internal situation have led to a loss of the momentum
in the peace process and hope that it can be resumed in
the near future.

To repeat once again what we have said on many
occasions in this Chamber, it is our strong belief
that during the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding in Darfur, particular emphasis should
be put on socioeconomic conditions there with regard
to the provision of basic services, job opportunities,
education for children, basic economic infrastructure,
agriculture and so on, as well as on establishing the
effective rule of law and good governance across the
region. Nor should we forget about the very challenging
humanitarian situation, which as Assistant Secretary-
General Muellerrightlypointedouthas beenexacerbated
by the deteriorating macroeconomic conditions.

Cooperation among the Government of the Sudan,
the local authorities in Darfur, UNAMID and the
United Nations country team is key to a successful
transition, as are adequate resources. We believe that
the international community should join in the efforts
on the ground in support of recovery and development
in Darfur, or we may run the risk of a relapse into
conflict. As I have already said, the progress we have
achieved is both volatile and reversible. With regard
to the drawdown of UNAMID, we continue to believe
that the Security Council should closely monitor the
impact on the ground of the downsizing of the mission
in order to ensure that the gains achieved in Darfur will
be durable and not be compromised. We look forward
to receiving the results of the strategic assessment of
UNAMID in the context of our upcoming discussion of
the mission's mandate.

In conclusion, I would like to express our deep
gratitude to all UNAMID personnel and the United
Nations country team for their continued dedication
and contribution to the promotion of peace, security,
stability and reconciliation in Darfur.

