Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Firstly,
Mr. President, we would like to thank you for holding
this debate on small arms and light weapons. It is a
matter of extreme importance for Latin America, as
was just said by my colleague from Ecuador. Small
arms and light weapons do not themselves cause the
conflicts in which they are used, but the ease with
which they are obtained and their excessive
accumulation tend to worsen those conflicts. Their use
claims large numbers of victims, prolongs conflicts and
increases the feeling of insecurity among the
populations suffering from this scourge. Because they
are easy to transport and conceal, they are difficult to
control.
7

Chile has been concerned with controlling small
arms and light weapons as well as their ammunition,
explosives and related elements. States are the actors
that bear the primary responsibility for providing
security to populations, which they must do in
compliance with the rule of law. In accordance with the
guiding principles of human security, Chile assigns to
the State the role of protecting fundamental freedoms,
which are the essence of life.

My delegation agrees with and supports the
agreements and resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly with regard to conventional weapons,
particularly those related to the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. My country attaches particular
importance to the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which provides a
good basis for States to incorporate some of its
provisions into their national norms. In addition, we
look forward with interest to the commencement of
negotiations on instruments for tracing illicit small
arms, as suggested in the Programme of Action. We
believe that to be highly important.

It is also important that States adopt the
Programme and that they be able to incorporate into
their national legislation all the aspects it covers, in
keeping with their national capacities. The
international assistance and cooperation provided to
States can be an important incentive in the
implementation of this and other international
instruments.

We are prepared to participate in the third
Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action, to be held
in New York in July, and in the activities that will be
carried out in our region to prepare for that event, such
as the preparatory meeting for Latin America and the
Caribbean, to be held in Bogota, Colombia, on 17 and
18 June.

My country agrees that the problems related to
small arms and light weapons as a source of conflict
should be addressed in the Security Council, which is
the organ that has responsibility for the arms
embargoes and sanctions that it applies to achieve the
stabilization of regions in post-conflict situations. If
embargoes are to have real impact, the Council must
carry out effective monitoring together with the
affected State, respecting its national capacities and

helping it to develop that capacity if the State does not
possess it or has lost it as a result of the conflict. There
must also be effective exchange of information among
the various actors participating in the control regime,
including national authorities and peacekeeping
missions as well as international and regional
organizations.

The Peacebuilding Commission has an important
function in this area. The Commission can play an
important role by creating the necessary synergies
among United Nations organs so that the countries
under consideration in its country-specific
configurations can consider including the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, adopted by the Assembly, as well as the
related international instruments, as effective tools for
peacebuilding in societies emerging from conflict.

The conclusions reached by the Secretary-
General in his report on small arms (S/2008/258) are
appropriate for the existing international situation and
challenge us to continue the efforts to reduce the
worldwide circulation of these weapons and to control
their illicit trafficking. Chile would like to see the
establishment of global and regional norms and
agreements prohibiting transfers of weapons and
ammunition that cause or spread armed conflicts or
that worsen existing ones. Adequate international
control, based on an integrated and broad strategy that
responds to the challenges posed by the excessive
circulation of small arms and light weapons and their
illicit trafficking, would undoubtedly contribute to the
prevention of threats to international peace and
security, to respect for the norms of international
humanitarian law and, finally, to the enjoyment of
human rights.

