Ms. Blais (Canada) (spoke in French): I would like to commend Belgium for putting forward this crucial topic, which we hope will pave the way for us to explore how the Security Council can foster peace by supporting transitional justice initiatives in country-specific contexts. I would also like to thank Her Excellency Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Mr. Francisco de Roux and Ms. Yasmin Sooka for their thoughtful and insightful contributions to today's debate (see S/PV.8723). We must identify victims. We must support victims. We must respond to their needs and ensure that they are at the heart of transitional justice. Canada's foreign policy is based on the recognition of the importance of reconciliation and survivor-centred approaches. We know that the recognition of responsibility is essential for a society to accept a history of widespread crime and abuse and for a lasting peace to emerge. That applies equally to war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. (spoke in English) Justice is also about establishing a historical record on personal and institutional responsibility for mass atrocities, addressing gender inequality and social exclusion, providing access to remedies, reforming institutions and bringing about a degree of reconciliation between perpetrators and victims and guarantees of non-recurrence. Transitional justice has no magical powers. The journey to repairing harm is a process, not an event, and it can be painful and lengthy. While each country's transitional justice path is shaped by its own unique history and cultural context, as we heard earlier this afternoon, the one striking advance in the field of transitional justice is that victims, often the most marginalized and vulnerable in society, have become visible and their dignity is recognized and respected. Transitional justice has helped victims and their families articulate their demands for justice and ensure that they are meaningfully engaged in shaping the legal and social policies that affect them. The centrality of the voice of victims and their families was critical to our own transitional justice processes. In seeking reconciliation with indigenous peoples in Canada, we are undergoing a very difficult, but necessary, exploration of our treatment of indigenous peoples and providing reparations for the harm that they have suffered. Their experience was mostly one of humiliation, neglect and abuse, including the economic disenfranchisement and exclusion fromtraditional lands of Inuit and First Nations Peoples and a systematic denial of the rights and history of the Metis. We established two federal commissions: one documenting the history and lasting impact of the Canadian residential school system that separated children as young as 5-years-old from their families, punished them for speaking their own language and sought to extinguish indigenous cultures entirely and a commission into missing and murdered indigenous women and girls that examined the systematic causes of all forms of violence against indigenous women and girls, including, sadly, sexual violence. As Prime Minister Trudeau stated in 2017, the failure of successive Canadian Governments to respect the rights of indigenous peoples in Canada is our great shame. And for many indigenous peoples, the lack of respect for their rights persists to this day. We are determined to bring the perspective that we have gained about the importance of reconciliation and a victim-centred approach into our work as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). The first public hearings before the Truth, Reconciliation and Reparations Commission in the Gambia have begun. I believe that we will hear from the representative of the Gambia shortly. Those hearings are set to last two years, many of which will be televised. That is an incredible step. It will likely be a long and, at times, distressing journey full of sorrow and grief. We congratulate the Gambia for its commitment to a credible and inclusive transitional justice process and its engagement with the PBC. As Chair of the PBC, we hope to continue working with them this year and beyond. While reckoning with its own legacy, we applaud the Gambia's efforts to foster such a process in Myanmar and contribute to the prevention of future atrocities committed against the Rohingya by launching proceedings against Myanmar at the International Court of Justice. In Argentina, the State worked long and hard to confront past violations, including the disappearances of 30,000 people in the 1970s and 1980s. Innovations were adopted that put the needs of victims first, such as the truth trials that led to criminal trials and convictions and an active judicial system on victims' rights generally. As highlighted by Ms. Bachelet, Chile embarked on large-scale truth-telling processes that identified victims and acknowledged the crimes committed against them between 1973 and 1990. Innovations included monthly reparations disbursements that were paid to victims, who were also exempted from military service. Most recently, moreover, earlier this week, the Government of the Sudan announced several important decisions that promise to pave the way towards meaningful accountability for the Sudanese people. Canada welcomes those decisions. In conclusion, as the Security Council explores how to integrate transitional justice considerations and further build on its work, both in relevant country- specific contexts and across thematic areas, Canada believes that it will be critical to place victims at the centre of that effort. It is critical because it is empowering. It engenders dignity and fosters trust and, as the evidence suggests, makes the possibility of achieving the aims of transitional justice more likely, which can only strengthen the State and society and lead to a more lasting and sustainable peace.
