Mr. Gorita (Romania): Allow me at the outset to join
previous speakers in congratulating you, Mr. President, on
your excellent performance in the exercise of this function.

Since my country has subscribed to the statement
delivered by the representative of the United Kingdom on
behalf of the European Union, I will briefly focus on some
points of particular importance to my Government.

My delegation appreciates as highly significant the
convening for the first time in this forum of this public
debate on the issue of children in armed conflict. This
marks the recognition by the international community of the
tremendous importance of children and the urgent need to
ensure respect for their rights.

This meeting acquires enhanced significance during
this current international year of human rights, when we
are commemorating two outstanding events: the fiftieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the mid-term review of the implementation of the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action.
Romania is profoundly concerned with the
devastating impact of war or armed conflict on children.
We see it as a failure of the Member States to fulfil the
commitment they assumed, in the opening words of the
United Nations Charter, to "save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war". The basic living conditions of
these children are diminished and destroyed; they can be
driven from their homes and separated from their
families. Many suffer serious injuries resulting in
permanent disability and are prey to random assaults,
rape, mutilation or slaughter.

At the same time, we deplore the trend of increasing
participation, direct or indirect, of children in armed
conflict. We unreservedly endorse the principle that
children must have no part in warfare and that all parties
to armed conflicts should refrain from recruiting and
involving children in hostilities.

Therefore my delegation takes this opportunity to
commend the important work carried out by Mr. Olara
Otunnu, in his capacity as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, in
raising the awareness of Governments, civil society and
the international community alike on unacceptable
violations of the rights of the child. We appreciate his
endeavours to collect information and render it visible
and, through international cooperation in this field, to
promote national and international measures in order to
improve the situation of those children and ensure respect
for their human rights.

I should like also to pay homage to Ms. Graca
Machel, who, by her challenging report on the impact of
armed conflict on children, presented in 1996, and by her
valuable recommendations, practically unleashed the
international campaign on this painful issue.

The situation of children in armed conflict is closely
related to the question of the status and well-being of
refugee and displaced children as well as to that of
juvenile exploitation. Accordingly, it should be given

 

enhanced consideration, in a coordinated manner and from
multiple perspectives, by all the United Nations entities
which deal with these issues. I have in mind in particular,
in addition to the indispensable political approach by the
General Assembly and the Security Council, the most
valuable expertise of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), the Office of the High Commissioner for
Refugees, the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Office of the Coordinator for Humanitarian
Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
We welcome in this respect the initiative of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict to bring
together, in an informal advisory group, senior officers
from several United Nations structures.

In our opinion, particular care should be taken by
Governments, with the support of the international
community, to ensure the physical and psychic recovery of
children suffering from war traumas and their reintegration
into society.

Romania shares the view that the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child offers a
comprehensive legal framework for protecting children, for
providing for their needs and well-being, and for allowing
them to grow and develop with dignity. Thus we urge the
United Nations Member States to achieve its universal
ratification and to fully implement its provisions. We
should not forget that these provisions apply equally in time
of peace and in time of armed conflict.

Likewise, considering the need for adjusting the legal
framework to the specific situation of children in warfare,
Romania strongly supports the finalization and adoption of
the draft optional protocol on the involvement of children
in armed conflict.

In conclusion, we reaffirm that our action and
cooperation should be guided by the commitment to give a
high priority to the essential needs of children at both the
national and international levels, in time of peace as well as
in time of armed conflict. We believe that today's public
debate and the presidential statement to be adopted at the
end of the debate are an important step forward in this
direction.

