The President: I thank the Under-Secretary-
General for the further points that he has made.

We have had an interesting debate, with a number
of useful ideas emerging from it. Many speakers have
called for a culture of protection, but a culture is
formed from the accumulation of effective action -
even a habit of effective action.

I think there was a significant degree of support,
from members and non-members of the Council alike,
for the Secretary-General's recommendations in the
areas of ensuring the prosecution of violations of
international criminal law, setting meaningful standards
for access negotiations, engaging armed groups and
separating civilians from armed elements, to take just a
few examples. The Security Council will need to
examine how best to take these into account in its
future work, taking careful account also of indications
of scepticism from some Member States in respect of a
number of those recommendations. Clearly,
pragmatism and realism are both called for.

We have also welcomed Mrs. Robinson's
recommendations today on a human- rights-based
approach to conflict and have, I think, sensed the value
of close coordination with her Office on this subject.

We have also recognized that the Council has not
done well enough in implementing the Secretary-
General's previous set of recommendations.

Members of the Council this morning drew most
of their examples from the African theatre. This
afternoon, many Member States focused on the Middle
East.

Whatever the feelings about the past, it is time to
start taking more systematic action to improve the
United Nations performance in this whole area. I shall
bring to the Council a number of points drawn from
today's discussion that might be a stimulus for the
taking of relevant Council decisions or for making
recommendations to the Secretary-General or to
Member States where others have the lead
responsibility 4 for instance, to establish a working
group to cover a number of issues that arose today; to
address impunity; to look at Security Council mandates
in a number of respects; to look at better provision of
information and analysis to the Council; and to
consider the Council's links with regional and
subregional groups, with sanctions policy, with
agencies dealing with refugees and internally displaced
persons, with the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and other United Nations
intergovernmental bodies, and with, perhaps, the
Secretary-General's 1998 report on Africa.

There are points for the Secretary-General, the
Secretariat and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in a number of
respects, which I shall detail for the Council. And there
are points for Member States, which I think still have
to fulfil their obligations under international law,
conventions and other international instruments if we
are to address this subject in its entirety.

So I will bring some points to the Council for
discussion in informal consultations so that we can
draw some conclusions together from this debate. But I
think that today was a good start in moving forward the
Council's work in this vital area. We can meet again in
the next two to three weeks, subject to the
arrangements made by the next presidency, to decide
on precise follow-on action.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.30pm.
