Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We
thank Lord Paddy Ashdown, High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for his detailed report on the
progress achieved in the implementation of the Peace
Agreement during the period between July and
December 2004. We also thank His Excellency Mr.
Barisa Colak, Deputy Chairman of the Council of
Ministers and Minister of Security of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his detailed statement on the situation
in that country. We commend the success registered in
Bosnia and Herzegovina since the Dayton Peace
Agreement and the London Peace Implementation
Conference of 1995.

The report is divided into several parts, but I will
limit my comments to only four of them. First, with
regard to the transition from NATO to the European
Union (EU), we commend the smooth and successful
handover from a NATO-led to an EU-led peacekeeping
force in December 2004. We also commend the
European Union for the comprehensive approach and
assistance programme that it has put in place for the
country. Now is the opportune time for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to work for progress, stabilization of the
country and a peaceful and viable multinational society
as it prepares for entry and integration into the
European Union.

Turning to the economy, we welcome the positive
developments in the reform of the economy. Durable
peace can be achieved in a post-conflict situation only
if it is accompanied by progress in the economic sector.
We are pleased to note that, with the assistance of the
Office of the High Representative, patterns of
mismanagement, incompetence and political
manipulation in public companies have been reversed
by amending legislation and applying general reforms
of the economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Thirdly, as regards the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, Tanzania is very
encouraged by the return of the one-millionth refugee
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which took place during
the High Representative's reporting period. We note
the encouraging progress made by the authorities in the
implementation of property law to permit the return of
refugees and a smooth reintegration of returnees. My
country, as members are aware, has over the years
provided shelter to hundreds of thousands of refugees
from neighbouring countries. Experiences like that of
Bosnia and Herzegovina raise our hopes that a refugee
presence in a host country is, after all, a temporary
situation, and that countries of origin have ultimately
to take responsibility for the return of their citizens. We
pay tribute to the Office of the High Representative,
the EU and all others that in one way or another have
contributed to the return of refugees to Bosnia and
Herzegovina in safety and dignity.

On war crimes, we welcome the positive
development reported this morning by Lord Ashdown
on forthcoming cooperation by Republika Srpska in
apprehending suspects and handing them over to the
Hague Tribunal. The establishment of the War Crimes
Chamber within the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the appointment of judges and prosecutors
constitute a very significant step. What is essential now
is to ensure that the prosecution of individuals accused
of war crimes and organized crime is carried out and
that the rule of law is upheld. We take this opportunity
to encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina and all parties
concerned to continue cooperating fully with the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

Finally, we wish to urge Bosnia and Herzegovina,
in cooperation with the Office of the High
Representative and the EU Force, to continue to
monitor weapons smuggling and to apprehend all war
criminals to ensure that the stability achieved is
durable and sustainable.

