Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this informative
meeting of the Security Council on Ukraine. We also
welcome Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, and thank him for his briefing on
the current situation in Ukraine.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela supports
the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes
in accordance with international law. We advocate a
political and diplomatic solution to the Ukrainian crisis
to be brought about constructively in accordance with
the norms and principles of international law.

We are firmly convinced of the need to put an end
to the hostilities in south-eastern Ukraine as soon as
possible. We reject the acts of violence and ethnic and
political persecution and the acts ofterrorism regardless
of who commits them.

Direct negotiation is the most appropriate means for
achieving that goal, and there should be no interference
in matters under the domestic jurisdiction of States, be
they military, political or economic.

Venezuela stresses that the mediation of regional
organizations is the path to a negotiated settlement of
the conflict. In that regard we support the efforts of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
Germany and France aimed at promoting dialogue
among Ukraine, Russia and the representatives of
the Donbas region. We hope that the recent political
meetings will help to bring about a ceasefire that will
lead to lasting peace in strict compliance with the
Minsk agreements.

Venezuela believes that the parties should act
with moderation in order to avoid the dialogue being
affected by unilateral actions that could jeopardize the
peace process. In that regard, our country rejects the
application of unilateral coercive sanctions, which are
contrary to international law and counterproductive
to the desire for peace and stability in the region, as
they erode the necessary climate of trust between the
parties.

We also believe that any incident on the ground

should be investigated in an independent manner, with
evidence being provided that supports its conclusions.

We must avoid a military escalation and the spread
of the conflict. All efforts should be made to address
the historical and root causes of the crisis in order to
achieve a strong and lasting peace that includes all
parties involved.

We call upon the parties to strictly observe the
commitments concerning the protection of civilians in
the areas affected by violence, including the need to
ensure access to humanitarian assistance for internally
displaced persons, refugees and others living in the
areas affected by the conflict.

Finally, we call on all parties to redouble their
efforts in the search for a just and lasting political
solution, which is in everyone's interest and in the
interest of the entire region.

