Mrs. Kenilorea (Solomon Islands): My delegation
attaches great importance to the subject oftoday's open
debate and commends you, Madam President, and the
Government of Argentina for convening this timely
discussion of the agenda item.

As stated by the 2004 report of the High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change (A/59/565),
while the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security rests with the Security
Council, over time a considerable number of regional
and subregional groups have been established. Some of
those organizations have directly contributed to peace
and stability and receive little or insufficient attention
by the United Nations.

Following the ethnic conflict that erupted in
Solomon Islands, the leaders ofthe Pacific Island Forum
dispatched the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon
Islands (RAMSI) at the invitation of the Government
of Solomon Islands. RAMSI, which initially consisted
of 2,000 military personnel was led by Australia, with
the support of New Zealand and all of the Pacific small
island developing States. RAMSI involved military,
police and civilian components. It was headed by a
civilian and it successfully carried out peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and peacemaking roles. After 10 years of
operation, the Mission, as of last month, is now going
through a transitional phase. The military component
has since withdrawn, with the police component now
playing a more advisory role.

The success of RAMSI can be put down to the
partnership the Mission has with the Government and
the people of Solomon Islands. Sufficient resources
provided by the region in carrying out its work and the
flexibility of the Mission have allowed RAMSI to adapt
to changing situations on the ground.

In the 10 years of regional operations in Solomon
Islands, there has been only one loss of life of RAMSI
personnel. Thousands of soldiers, police and civilians
have been rotated through the regional Mission. Last
month, in marking the tenth anniversary of RAMSI,
my Government and people thanked all 14 United
Nations Members of the Pacific Islands Forum and two
non-members of the United Nations for contributing to
international peace and security.

Today, a subregional organization of the Pacific,
the Melanesian Spearhead Group has established a
Department of Peacekeeping Operations unit within
its Secretariat. Solomon Islands would like to welcome
improved coordination between the United Nations
and regional organizations and share information
and expertise as appropriate, especially with regional
organizations that have peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and peacemaking capacities. Such relationships are
provided for under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations and should be encouraged.

We are pleased to see that consultation between
the United Nations and regional organizations is
increasing. It will be noted that, in all Solomon Island
statements that we have delivered in the Council this
year and in the past in such open debates, we have
always recognized the role of regional organizations,
by way of complying with Article 54 of the Charter of
the United Nations, in keeping the Council abreast of
the activities undertaken by regional organizations for
the maintenance of international peace and security.

