Mr. Volcker: I and my colleagues with me today
greatly appreciate this opportunity to address the
Security Council directly on the results of our inquiry.

Eighteen months have now passed since the
inquiry was launched, with the full support of a
resolution of the Security Council. That resolution was
critically important in signalling Council members'
interest in the investigation and in eliciting cooperation
by Member States, their agencies and, importantly, the
countries represented around this table.

Our assignment has been to look for
misadministration or maladministration in the oil-for-
food programme and for evidence of corruption within
the United Nations and by contractors. Unhappily, we
found both. The investigation and the findings are
documented in great detail in the very large report
before the Council. What I want to emphasize this
morning are not the details, but the broad conclusions
and recommendations the Committee has reached.
They are summarized in the preface to our report,
released yesterday, which I believe is in members'
hands.

In essence, the responsibility for the failures must
be broadly shared, starting, we believe, with member
States and the Security Council itself. In the first place,
the programme left too much initiative with Iraq. It
was, as one past member of this Council has put it, a
compact with the devil, and the devil had means for
manipulating the programme to his ends. That basic
difficulty was compounded by a failure to clearly
define the complex administrative responsibilities
shared between the Security Council Committee
established by resolution 661 (1990) and the
Secretariat, and by continuing political differences.
The result was that no one seemed clearly in command.
Delays in or evasion of decision-making were chronic.

The administrative structure and practices of the
Secretariat and some agencies clearly were not up to
the truly extraordinary challenge presented by the
programme. Sadly, those weaknesses were aggravated
by unethical and corrupt behaviour at key points at the
top of the Office of the Iraq Programme and in the
purchasing department.

There was a pervasive absence of effective
auditing and administrative controls. Weak planning,
sorely inadequate funding, and too few professional
staff were all characteristic of the process. The absence
of truly independent status for the auditing and control
functions was a critical deficiency. Close cooperation
among various United Nations organs apparently goes
against the grain for agencies with their own funding,
management and oversight. It is true that autonomy can
bring benefits, but in a complex programme requiring a
range of competencies, while at the same time
invoking common funding and a common purpose,
absence of full cooperation should not be tolerated.

That is a litany of problems. Clearly, there is
another side to the story - one of positive success. An
expert study commissioned by the Committee confirms
that the programme averted the clear and present
danger of malnutrition and a further collapse of
medical services in Iraq. That is no small achievement,
especially when combined with the support that the
programme provided for maintaining the basic
sanctions against Iraq and its inability to obtain
weapons of mass destruction.

The conclusions we draw will not surprise the
Council. They emphasize the need for stronger
operational capacity and authority. Specifically, we
suggest or recommend that a new chief operating
officer be appointed with a clear mandate and authority
for administration. Our conclusions underscore the
need for strong and independent auditing control and
investigatory functions. And again, we recommend a
strong independent oversight board.

These and other recommendations are common to
most recent commentary and reports. What our work
does is bring new dimensions to the discussion.

I believe our investigation is unprecedented in
both scale and detail. It covers both the Security
Council itself and the Secretariat in New York. It has
touched directly on nine other members of the United
Nations family.

Consequently, we do not believe our conclusions
can be dismissed as simply reporting aberrations in one
programme or something that can be smoothed over
with patchwork changes. Instead, the problems are
symptomatic of deep-seated systemic issues. Those
issues arise in an Organization designed 60 years ago
for a simpler time, an Organization then without large
and complex operational challenges alongside its
political and diplomatic responsibilities.

I believe I speak for my colleagues as well as
myself in the conviction that in an unsettled world the
United Nations will again be called upon - it is being
called upon today - to deal with complex operational
problems crossing national and disciplinary
boundaries. The administrative ability and the technical
capacity of the Secretariat and the agencies will be
tested again and again.

A United Nations programme carries with it -
and should carry with it - a strong sense of
international legitimacy. No single nation or group of
nations can match that potential quality. But we believe
that more than legitimacy is essential to success.
Support is, in the end, dependent upon credibility and
confidence. And it is that credibility and confidence
that have been challenged by the travails of the oil-for-
food programme. To some degree, the Organization has
been weakened.

That is why reform is so urgent. We commend
our particular recommendations to the Council. And
we urge the Council and the General Assembly to set
firm benchmarks for progress. Quite specifically,
action should be taken by the time the General
Assembly completes its meetings in 2006. The
opportunity for reform should not - in my view, must
not - be lost.

