Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to welcome the Secretary-General to our
meeting today and to thank him for his statement.

Chile voted in favour of the resolution for the
following reasons. Its adoption opened a new stage in
the political, economic and social reconstruction of
Iraq. This resolution should be analysed, along with
other Security Council resolutions that gradually
transmit authority to the United Nations in the post-
conflict phase.

The resolution contains a number of measures for
political transition and the role of the Untied Nations.
In the political sphere, before 15 December the
Governing Council will have to send to the Security
Council a timetable for drawing up a new constitution
and for holding democratic elections. Similarly, in view
of the complexity of the security situation, the
resolution allows that it be the Secretary-General who
decides, in the final analysis, on participation of United
Nations staff in the process. This is an essential point
for the Organization to be able to carry out its
functions efficiently. In this context we ask the
Secretary-General to inform the Security Council of
progress made in the process of transferring power to
the authorities and people of Iraq, and the
responsibilities and powers of government.

Moreover, there will be a constitutional
conference that, if it is broadly representative, will be a
milestone for the full restoration of the Iraqi people's
sovereignty. Also, we envisage an important role for
the United Nations in various reconstruction efforts.
These include the facilitating of a national dialogue,
electoral and humanitarian assistance, the promotion of
human rights, help in developing civil society, training
the police and judicial and public administration
reform.

If we compare the resolution adopted with the
initial text, we can see that there is a series of
important changes and developments and a multilateral
focus to tackle the situation in Iraq.

Finally, the general consensus we have achieved
today is an example of the Security Council's ability, in
spite of the divisions that have arisen, to arrive at
understandings, of which the Iraqi people should be the
only beneficiary.

