Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this meeting
and expresses its gratitude for the comprehensive
briefings by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations; His Excellency
Mr. Festus Mogae, Chairperson of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission; and Ms. Ursula Mueller,
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs.

Our remarks on the alarming situation in South
Sudan will focus on two points: first, on the need
to support the peace process and, secondly, on the
obligation to put an end to, investigate and punish the
recurring violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.

First, with regard to the peace process, Peru
supports every effort to revitalize the peace process
in South Sudan. We emphasize that there can be no
military solution to the situation in that country; on
the contrary, it is necessary to strengthen the political
dialogue through inclusive and transparent processes in
which all parties participate. We believe that the High-
level Revitalization Forum, aimed at revitalizing the
peace process and facilitated by the Intergovernmental
Authority for Development (IGAD), constitutes the
most viable initiative to guide the country towards
sustainable peace. We encourage greater participation
by women and young people in that process.

The support of the international community and
of African organizations is important. The United
Nations, the African Union and IGAD must maintain
close cooperation with a view to acting in a consistent
and complementary manner in supporting the
process. At the same time, we believe that the internal
dialogues fostered by the Transitional Government
of National Unity should also be conducted in a
transparent and inclusive manner, and be aimed at
complementing the dialogue initiated by the High-level
Revitalization Forum.

A permanent ceasefire is essential to resume a
credible dialogue about the country's governance. We
are concerned about violations of the Agreement on
the Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians
and Humanitarian Access, concluded last December.
We believe that punishing those responsible should be
considered. In that connection, we wish to emphasize
the importance of continuing to make progress in the
full deployment of the Regional Protection Force and
of the need for the South Sudanese authorities to extend
it their due support.

Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian situation
and human rights violations, we condemn the attacks
on civilians perpetrated indiscriminately by all parties
to the conflict, including violations of the human rights
of children, women, refugees and ethnic minorities, as
well as the military use of hospitals and schools. We
took note of the statement issued by the United Nations
Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan following
its fourth visit to the country, in December 2017. We
remind the national authorities of their responsibility
to protect the population against the occurrence of
atrocious crimes, including the duty to investigate and
to punish the perpetrators.

We highlight the efforts of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to protect civilians
under extremely difficult circumstances. We call
on the authorities to cooperate with the Mission by
removing any impediment to it fulfilling its mandate.
We believe that it is unacceptable that there continue
to be obstacles to access for humanitarian aid and
an increase in reported incidents, including hostile
acts against humanitarian workers by the State's own
security forces.

To conclude, we would like to welcome the various
initiatives by UNMISS to promote the participation
of women and young people in the peace process. We
believe that the strategic review under way should
strengthen that line of action with a View to promoting
sustainable peace in South Sudan.

