Mr. Liow Tiong Lai (Malaysia): Malaysia deeply
regrets the failure of the Security Council to maintain
unity on the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-l7. We are deeply disappointed at the failure
to adopt draft resolution S/2015/562, which would
have established an ad hoc criminal tribunal for MH-
l7, despite our persistent efforts to address Council
members" concerns and to bridge our differences.
Malaysia, together with the countries participating
in the joint investigation team, had wanted to pursue
this option because it would have generated broad
international support for the prosecution process. It
was also the best way to ensure the cooperation of all
nations with an effective prosecution mechanism to
ensure justice and accountability.

Unfortunately, one year since the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2166 (2014), the Council is now
taking a step backwards by sending the wrong signal to
the victims' families and loved ones. The Council has
also failed to implement resolution 2166 (2014), which
demands that those responsible be held to account and
that all States cooperate fully with efforts to establish
accountability. Instead of conveying a message in
support ofjustice and accountability, we are sending a
dangerous message of impunity for the perpetrators of
this heinous crime, as well as jeopardizing the safety of
civil aviation over conflict zones in the future.

I wish to stress that Malaysia will not be deterred
by today's unfortunate event. We will remain steadfast
in our determination to pursue accountability for the
perpetrators and to ensure justice for all the innocent
victims on board the ill-fated plane. I wish to sincerely
thank all the countries that have supported Malaysia
and those participating in the joint investigation team
in our endeavour to establish an international criminal
tribunal for Flight MH-l7.

Moving forward, we will continue with our
outreach efforts and consultations with the relevant
countries to address any concerns that they may have
in the pursuit of justice and accountability for Flight
MH-l7. Malaysia will also consider and explore other
viable options and prosecuting mechanisms in View
of today's setback. Council members may rest assured
that we will not stop here and that we will never give
up. We have to do something; doing nothing is not an
option, and we must now move forward with a renewed
sense of purpose in order to ensure that we are able
to demand justice. We owe it to the families and loved
ones of the victims to soldier on in our quest for justice
and accountability.

