The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.

I should like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous and the four Force Commanders for their
briefings. The four Force Commanders of United
Nations peacekeeping operations make important
contributions to the maintenance of international peace
and security by implementing the mandates given by
the Security Council. I wish to pay tribute to all the
Force Commanders and chief military observers, and,
through them, to all United Nations peacekeepers
around the world.

As the international situation undergoes complex
changes, United Nations peacekeeping operations also
face many challenges. To respond to those challenges,
we need to better coordinate, better make use of the
resources available and better manage peacekeeping
operations around the globe. In that regard, I appreciate
the efforts made and the progress achieved by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations under the
leadership of Under-Secretary-General Ladsous.

Having heard this morning's briefings, I shall focus
on three points in my statement. First, peacekeeping
operations should always adhere to the principle of
objectivity and neutrality. Host countries and regions
in which there are peacekeeping operations often find
themselves in a complicated political environment.
Peacekeeping operations should abide strictly with
the mandates of the Security Council, respect the will
and choice of the people of host countries and become
promoters and mediators in the political process and
national reconciliation ofhost countries. While carrying
out their mandate, peacekeeping operations should pay
great attention to the views of the parties concerned in
the host countries, respect the local culture and have
the trust and support of the people ofthe host countries.

Secondly, mandate planning for integrated missions
should be strengthened. Peacekeeping operation
mandates have become increasingly complex and
multidimensional. In the course of carrying out their
mandates, peacekeeping operations should have clear
priorities. The relationship between long-term and
short-term objectives should be addressed properly.
When formulating mandates for peacekeeping
operations, the Security Council should take into full
consideration the particular situation of host countries
and take a pragmatic approach. Once mandates are
given, the necessary resources and instruments should
be guaranteed.

Thirdly, different components of peacekeeping
operations should strengthen their coordination to
generate synergy to foster the achievement of stability
and strengthen institution-building in host countries.
Military and civilian components of peacekeeping
operations should have a clear division of labour and
utilize their respective advantages with a view to
achieving a seamless transition between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Council members have raised some questions
in their statements. I shall now give the floor to
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous, Major General Obi
and Lieutenant General to respond to the questions
raised.

I now give the floor to Major General Obi to respond
to the questions raised by the Council members.

