Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I thank Special
Representative Honore for her commitment to Haiti's
stabilization, and I wish to acknowledge the important
work of United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and its contributing countries.

New Zealand is concerned about the recent
political turmoil in Haiti and the continued delays in its
electoral process. We had hoped that this would be the
year in which Haiti would transition from dependence
on external partners towards greater self-reliance. We
had hoped that today we might have been considering
a plan for that transition, one that was the joint product
of MINUSTAH and a new Government. We welcomed
reports that agreement had been reached to hold
elections in the coming months. Sadly, the political
manoeuvring over the past three months, including
overnight, has seriously undermined progress towards
that goal.

It is time for all parties, especially the interim
Government, to commit themselves to providing the
leadership that Haitians deserve. The consequences of
Haiti's continued political uncertainty are not trivial. As
the Special Representative emphasized in her briefing,
Haiti's economic growth is being directly affected.
The humanitarian situation has worsened, with severe
droughts, food insecurity for millions of Haitians and
the continuing cholera epidemic.

The timeline for the consideration of the next steps
for MINUSTAH and for the United Nations operations
in Haiti has also been impacted by the political situation.
New Zealand agrees with the Special Representative
that it makes more sense to undertake the strategic
assessment of the United Nations presence in Haiti
following the elections, with a new Government in
place. Even so, MINUSTAH can not remain in Haiti
indefinitely. We need to make the best use of the time
remaining to ensure that Haiti is as well-equipped as
possible to manage its own security once the Mission
is gone.
We are reassured that MINUSTAH and the
United Nations country team are working on a joint
transition plan. In addition to setting out clear goals
and responsibilities, the plan should consider what
tasks MINUSTAH can complete or discontinue
before its mandate ends. Ensuring close coordination
with national and international partners will be key,
including on what residual functions may need to
be transferred. For a transition to be sustainable, the
plan must have genuine national ownership. Ensuring
that core institutions, particularly the police, have the
capacity to operate effectively without international
support will be a priority. We urge MINUSTAH to
engage the new Government on the joint transition plan
as soon as possible after the elections.

The United Nations must also continue to combat the
ongoing cholera epidemic. We acknowledge the efforts
of the United Nations and its partners, particularly
those that have contributed to the support plan and the
national plan for the elimination of cholera. The United
Nations must continue to support those affected in Haiti
and take appropriate action to help close that chapter
and ensure that the new Government is not left alone to
address the ongoing consequences and political legacy
of the outbreak.

Given Haiti's cycle of instability and the lessons
that the United Nations has learned from other fragile
States, we must get MINUSTAH's transition right.
Effective transition planning and capacity-building, as
well as longer-term international support, will be key
to a successful transition. But none of that will produce
long-term benefits, unless the political actors in Haiti
are willing to act responsibly and peacefully, without
violent protests or inflammatory language. We call on

the players concerned to set aside personal interests
and rivalries and put the interests of their country first.
Haitians have a right to expect that, and we hope the
Council will remain united in supporting Haiti through
this critical period.

