Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): It has become
a feature of Armenian policy to level accusations at
a country whose territory it continues to occupy and
whose civilians it has brutally massacred and continues
to kill on a daily basis. It is unfortunate that the forum
that the Security Council provides has once again
been abused for the purpose of disseminating lies.
The arguments on the Armenian side are particularly
astonishing, and they are voiced in the Security
Council, the very Chamber in which four resolutions
were adopted that reaffirmed the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Azerbaijan, including the Nagorno
Karabakh region, recognized and condemned the fact
of invasion and demanded the immediate, complete and
unconditional withdrawal of the occupying Armenian
forces.

To refresh the Armenian representative's memory,
it should be noted that it was the Armenian side that
rejected the timetable for implementing the measures
in the Security Council's resolutions. While continuing
to deny its involvement and role in the conflict, the
Government of Armenia has openly asserted its
ownership of the Nagorno Karabakh region of the
Republic of Azerbaijan and exercised effective control
over it. In its national security strategy for 2007,
Armenia claimed to be acting as a guarantor of the
security of Nagorno Karabakh. No explanation was
provided, however, as to how those guarantees, which
affect ofa portion of Azerbaijan's territory, accord with
international law.

The entity that Armenia tries to portray as
independent, the Nagorno Karabakh republic, is
nothing more than an occupation regime under the
direct control of the Government of Armenia. All the
key figures of the puppet regime illegally established
by Armenia in the occupied Nagorno Karabakh region
of Azerbaijan are in fact representatives of Armenia's
political system. The incumbent President of Armenia,
Serzh Sargsyan, started his career by chairing the
separatist self-defence committee from 1989 to 1993, a
position that he left in 1993 in order to assume the post
of Minister of Defence of Armenia. His predecessor,
Robert Kocharyan, was the first so-called President
of the occupation regime from 1992 to 1997. He then
moved to Armenia, becoming Prime Minister, and
from 1998 until 2008 served as its President.

On 15 June 2015, President Serzh Sargsyan of the
Republic of Armenia officially approved a rotation
between the Deputy Chief of the General Staff of
Armenia's armed forces and the so-called Minister of
Defence of the separatist regime. No further comments
are necessary to explain the logic and attitude of the
Armenian leadership concerning the issue of the
protection of civilians and the peaceful settlement of
conflicts.

