Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): The Secretary-General first
recommended the deployment of the 500 military observers
in his report of 1 November 1999, and we thank him very
much for that report. It has taken the Security Council
almost 4 months to agree in this draft resolution on the
deployment of the 500 observers, not to mention the
various conditions attached to said deployment. My
delegation hopes this is testimony of the importance that the
Security Council and all of us gathered here today attach to
resolving that conflict.

It is indeed encouraging to know that work on the
national dialogue envisaged in the Ceasefire Agreement has
commenced. We welcome the discussions held between the
facilitator of the national dialogue and the Government of
the Democratic Republic of Congo and other political
leaders in the country. We would once again like to call for
assistance with the facilitation process. We have no doubt
that the Congolese people will find common ground to
resolve their problems, without interference, and in that
way pave the way for the orderly withdrawal of foreign
forces.

We hope that the adoption of the draft resolution,
which is long overdue, will result in the speedy deployment
of personnel of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to the
Democratic Republic of Congo. In the same vein, it is our
sincere hope that all parties will cooperate fully with
MONUC to enable its personnel to carry out its mandate.
In this regard, we are encouraged by the joint communique
adopted at the Lusaka summit yesterday. On our part,
Namibia pledges its full-continued support and cooperation.

The draft resolution before us is not perfect; it is a
compromise draft. It is for this reason that I would like to
remind us all about the real cause of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of Congo and the need for all States
to refrain from interference in each other's internal affairs.
This is a Charter obligation, which is emphasized in the
Lusaka Agreement and accepted by all parties.

The situation in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of Congo is of particular and serious concern to
us. We should not turn our backs on the innocent
Congolese people in the eastern part of the country who
are subjected to continuous human rights abuses and
international humanitarian law violations. The perpetrators
of these heinous crimes should bear responsibility for
their actions. Indeed, the people of the Democratic
Republic of Congo should not pay for the inaction of the
international community with regard to past violations of
international humanitarian law in other parts of that
region.

In addition, the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources and other natural wealth of the Democratic
Republic of Congo in the eastern part of the country
should cease. These illegal actions not only violate the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country, but
fuel the continuation of hostilities. We look forward to the
Secretary-Generals report in this regard.

Our view remains that the number of 5,537 military
personnel being authorized by the draft resolution is
inadequate to monitor implementation of the Ceasefire
Agreement over the vast territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In other words, it does not
conform to the mandate of MONUC as set out in the
resolution we are about to adopt. Nevertheless, we will go
along with the proposed numbers, with the hope that the
Secretary-General will revert to the Council should
additional personnel be required.

The deployment of the 5,537 MONUC personnel is
only the second phase in a series of deployments. It
therefore goes without saying, and it is only logical, that
the Secretary-General will no doubt be preparing for the
next phase of United Nations deployment in the
Democratic Republic of Congo. We therefore hope that
the Secretary-General will come back to the Council with
recommendations in that regard as well. Furthermore, we
cannot overemphasize the need for MONUC to protect
civilians under threat of violence within its capabilities.

Over the years, the United Nations has brought
peace to so many countries, including my own. The
expectations of the suffering masses of the Democratic
Republic of Congo for peace in their country are therefore
high, and rightly so. We should not let them down.

Finally, Mr. President, my delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us.

