Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): I would first like to
congratulate Peru on its assumption of the presidency
ofthe Security Council and to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate at a time when the world
is facing growing threats to international peace and
security. We would also like to thank Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, the Secretary-General's Envoy on
Youth, and Mr. Graeme Simpson, the lead author of the
progress study (see S/2018/86), for their briefings.

Sri Lanka acknowledges the Council's landmark
resolution 2250 (2015) on youth and welcomes the
progress study on youth, peace and security that it
mandates. It is a valuable framework for integrating
our young people into our collective efforts to preserve
international peace and security.

Today we live in a world that is overwhelmingly
young, one in which 46 per cent of its people are under
24 years old. Migration and refugee movements, among
other things, have contributed to a youth bulge and fast-
changing demographics. That is a cause not for panic
but for quick action and hope. Rather than viewing it as
essentially a problem, we should recognize its potential.
It provides a reason for the international community to
renew its commitment to implementing the 2030 Agenda

for Sustainable Development. We must aggressively
attack the underlying reasons why some young
people become vulnerable to the violent narratives of
extremists. Economic deprivation; systemic injustice
and bias due to racial, religious and other prejudices;
feelings of helplessness and hopelessness in an unfair
social justice system; an unwelcoming society that
seeks to exclude and label - all of these are breeding
grounds for disgruntled, sullen youth. If we take away
hope and opportunity within the system, Jihadi John
will begin to look like an attractive option.

From the Arab Spring to the March for Our
Lives movement, it has been young people who have
energized the people, inspired action, held politicians
accountable and spoken up for democracy, equality and
justice. We must provide them with an environment
that is as welcoming and a tool set that is as effective as
possible so that they can live their best selves to their
full potential.

Let me turn now to my own country and our
efforts to empower young people in the context of the
five pillars of resolution 2250 (2015) - participation,
protection, prevention, partnerships, disengagement
and reintegration.

First, in the context of this debate, let me say that
Sri Lanka is faced not with a youth bulge, but with a
rapidly ageing population. While Sri Lanka stands
out as one of the success stories of considerable
advancements in human development in South Asia,
that brings its own economic and social challenges.
Early investments in health and education have resulted
in significant reductions in infant mortality rates,
increases in life expectancy and decreased fertility
rates. Those achievements have influenced Sri Lanka's
demographic cycle. By 2041, one out of every four
persons is expected to be an elderly person, making Sri
Lankans the oldest population in South Asia.

International labour migration, largely concentrated
among groups of young adult of working age, has
increased during the past three decades, reducing
the proportion of the working-age population in the
country. Because of the extent of youth migration, the
proportion of the elderly in the population has increased.
For us, therefore, our young people are precious and
indispensable to our success.

As a country that had, until 2009, suffered under
the oppressive yoke of terrorism for nearly three
decades, including two youth insurrections, Sri Lanka
understands the challenges of addressing the issue. Two
insurrections in the 1970s and 1980s led to sweeping
social and political reform, including the setting-up
of a youth commission, the enactment of land reform
laws and the establishment of a national youth council.
Since 2015, following the devastating conflict, we have
been embarked on implementing a reconciliation and
transformative justice mechanism in order to ensure
prevention and non-recurrence, along the lines of the
resolution 2250 (2015).
Sri Lanka has focused on a comprehensive and
responsive rehabilitation and reintegration programme
for over 12,000 ex-combatants who surrendered to the
security forces, including 594 child combatants, at the
conclusion of the conflict in May 2009. The strategies
and activities included improving their physical
and mental state by spiritual, sociophysiological,
personality and leadership training targeted to suit job
opportunities. Apart from ex-combatants who directly
surrendered, over 2,000 ex-combatants who had
been arrested for their direct involvement in terrorist
activities underwent voluntary rehabilitation in lieu
of prosecution.

We have sought to include our young people and other
stakeholders in building a post-conflict reconciliation
and peacebuilding mechanism to ensure ownership and
control of their futures. A national consultative task
force - entirely driven by civil society and operating
under the four pillars of truth, justice, reconciliation
and non-recurrence - consulted with youth leaders,
women, community leaders and others from all over
the country in order to seek their views in establishing
a comprehensive reconciliation mechanism. Sri Lanka
also established a national policy on reconciliation
in 2016, coordinated comprehensive district-level
development plans for former conflict affected areas
and launched interfaith, arts and culture programmes.

We established the Office of National Unity
and Reconciliation as the implementing body for
those programmes. Among a range of activities, the
Office of National Unity and Reconciliation works on
educational sector reform to incorporate national unity
and reconciliation as a pillar within the education sector
with a View to instilling in our children the importance
of plurality. Those reforms include the twinning of
schools, student-teacher exchanges, an examination of
school textbooks to replace potentially inflammatory
material and stereotypes, and the introduction of a
guidebook on the rights and responsibilities of children.
We have also introduced psychosocial programmes
for those who have been traumatized. The Office of
National Unity and Reconciliation provides training to
leaders and clergy of various religions in peacebuilding
with a view to using them as early-warning mechanisms
to defuse potential conflict situations.

Sri Lanka is also on the cusp of introducing
a comprehensive social and emotional learning
programme for three- to five-year-olds in its preschools
island-wide. The programme seeks to adopt a
curriculum mediating all aspects of experiential, social
and emotional learning in order to end discriminatory
mindsets at a very early age and the cycle of violence. It
seeks to change the mindsets and attitudes of children
during their formative years through value-based
education, activity, play and sports as a compulsory
new subject. As a country recovering from conflict,
we remain convinced that the only way to heal the
wounds of division and sustain peace is by inculcating
the values of empathy, oneness, inclusion, forgiveness,
compassion and love in our children while they are
young and open to change. One of the best ways to
achieve that is through the universal language of sport
and play.

Education remains one of the key preventive
measures, and Sri Lanka has recognized the importance
of developing youth skills. In that regard, we took the
initiative to declare 15 July as World Youth Skills
Day. General Assembly resolution 69/145, recognizing
World Youth Skills Day, received the overwhelming
support of the General Assembly. In conclusion, Sri
Lanka believes that our children and youth are not only
our future, but also our present. We see them as our
greatest asset on our path to a better, peaceful and more
secure world.

