Mr. Valdes (spoke in Spanish): I should like at
the outset, Sir, to express my satisfaction at seeing you
preside over the Council and to congratulate the
Argentine Republic on the excellent manner in which it
has been conducting the work of the Council during
this first month of the year. I am also extremely
grateful to you for having convened this open debate of
the Security Council at the ministerial level to consider
the situation in Haiti. This meeting is a reflection of the
interest of the countries that are friends of Haiti and of
the members of the international community in general
in the efforts being made by the Government and the
people of Haiti to overcome their difficulties. I also
warmly welcome the presence here today of the Acting
Secretary General of the Organization of American
States, Mr. Luigi Einaudi.

This meeting also provides a show of political
support for the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) and represents a vote of confidence
for the role that the United Nations can play in assisting
in the recovery of societies in which a combination of
poverty and weak governance lead to internal violence.

I should like to reiterate here my conviction that,
if we provide Haiti with continuing international
political support, that country will emerge from its
present crisis and become reintegrated into
international society, in a framework characterized by
internal political stability and democratic freedoms.

I should like also to thank the Transitional
Government of Haiti for the warm welcome it accorded
the Mission and for the relationship based on mutual
trust that we have built since the inception of the
Mission. The Transitional Government of President
Boniface Alexandre and Prime Minister Gerard
Latortue have courageously shouldered a very difficult
task - one that is not always understood by their
compatriots. In a climate of profound national division,
they have had to revitalize institutions that were on the
verge of collapse, and to deal with forces seeking
chaos and destabilization while maintaining sufficient
openness to enable the country, with the participation
of all, to set out once again on the path towards
democratic legitimacy - and that in the framework of
a formal commitment to renounce any position of
power following the upcoming elections.

Since my last appearance before the Council, on
22 November last, Haiti has embarked on a different
phase. Indeed, although security challenges remain
complex and factors leading to insecurity and
instability have not yet been dealt with, the attempts
made last November by armed groups deliberately to
destabilize the country were foiled. We have also seen
a reduced level of violence and insecurity, and the
launching by the Transitional Government of political
initiatives has made room for participation by all those
who reject violence and made it easier to carry out the
electoral process planned for the end of this year in
conditions of peace and freedom.

MINUSTAH has almost reached full strength in
terms of the authorized number of troops and civil
police and has been deploying throughout the country,
as described in the recent report of the Secretary-
General. As a result, our ability to deal with situations
that might jeopardize security and the political
transition has improved substantially. As a result,
MINUSTAH's recent efforts have focussed essentially
on robust and sustained initiatives in the area of
security.

It is important to note once again that the security
concept that underpins and guides the United Nations
Mission includes, on the one hand, the legitimate use
of force when necessary or indispensable, and, on the
other, a focus on the most urgent problems which affect
the more vulnerable people of Haiti. We have thus
embarked on a new phase of the Mission, which I will
expand upon.
MINUSTAH has taken clear-cut steps towards
stabilizing the security situation. Groups of former
soldiers who dared to defy the authority of the State
and of the Mission had to quickly back down, while
other illegal armed groups, which include some who
claim to support former President Aristide, are losing
ground.

Threats and challenges in the area of security
remain serious, but we are gradually beginning to see a
greater degree of stability. On 14 December 2004,
MINUSTAH launched a major political and military
operation jointly with elements of the Haitian National
Police in the district of Cite Soleil, in the city of Port-
au-Prince - an area that is well known for harbouring
criminal armed groups, many of which have different
and conflicting political loyalties. The objectives of the
operation were to restore order and security in the area
through the presence and the firm and ongoing control
of MINUSTAH, which will facilitate the gradual
restoration of the autonomous functioning of the police
in the area, as well as create conditions for the
normalization of activities ranging from the proper
functioning of the public administration to the
reactivation of trade and the relaunching of various
types of humanitarian operations at the local and
international levels.

Aside from isolated and sporadic gunfire,
Operation Liberty, as it was called, did not encounter
strong armed resistance and was successful, with no
deaths recorded within MINUSTAH or the Haitian
National Police. Unfounded allegations that many lives
had been lost were completely and thoroughly refuted.

In the first phase of the operation, two police
stations were reopened in Cite Soleil, where
MINUSTAH forces have an ongoing presence. The
deployment of MINUSTAH patrols and the activities
of civil servants have made it possible to initiate
contacts leading to a variety of quick-impact projects
financed by the Mission. In parallel, United Nations
agencies will be undertaking new initiatives in the
area. We are aware that the inhabitants are still afraid
publicly to express their satisfaction at the evident
change that has taken place in terms of improved
security. We are therefore convinced that gradual
progress in health, sanitation and educational
programmes, which were halted for a long time
because of the violence, as well as the prompt
launching of our disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration initiative, will soon make it possible to
bring together and involve Cite Soleil neighbours in a
process that will qualitatively change the area, thereby
helping to eliminate and dismantle the armed bands
that are still active in the area. Likewise, an initiative
taken by MINUSTAH and the Transitional Government
will make it possible to set up a standing high-level
mechanism to identify and prioritize development
projects specifically designed for the inhabitants of
Cite Soleil.

On 15 December 2004 a group of armed former
soldiers, with an authorization illegitimately given by a
municipal civil servant, took possession of the
abandoned private residence of former President
Aristide in Tabarre, in the city of Port-au-Prince. The
group convened media representatives and declared
that it would set up its new permanent base in that
location. The Transitional Government reacted
immediately, saying that it would not tolerate such a
measure. It fired the municipal civil servant who had
given the alleged authorization and called on
MINUSTAH to put an end to the occupation of the
premises. The Mission responded promptly and
deployed a considerable number of soldiers around the
captured building. Thanks to MINUSTAH's firm and
resolute approach and to a level-headed, sincere and
open approach to dialogue, the situation was resolved
on 17 December, with no losses. Currently, all who
participated in that venture have been disarmed, except
for their leader, who is still at large. Some have
received advance compensation - which the
Government had promised all former combatants. And,
as a group, they have agreed to participate in
reintegration programmes.

In the past 10 weeks, MINUSTAH has started
planning and organizing a disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programme. While we have
some of the required resources, and while a work plan
will be submitted to government authorities this week,
security and political conditions are not yet favourable
to the programme's full implementation. We welcome
the imminent creation of the disarmament committee,
as announced by Prime Minister Latortue; this is
essential for developing the process. At the same time,
our Mission is closely following the Transitional
Government's current policy of granting compensation
and severance pay to former members of the Haitian
armed forces. The Government of Haiti believes that
this is fair compensation for individuals who were
demobilized without consideration of rights stemming
from their paid contributions during their military
career. However, we agree with Haitian authorities that
this policy has to be situated within the context of the
disarmament process and that after the prompt payment
of the first part of the promised amount, any further
monetary payment must be conditioned on the
surrender of military weapons to the Transitional
Government. With respect to the armed groups among
marginalized sectors of the population, the
disarmament policy contemplates actions to create
conditions for reintegration that, while not deviating
from our policy of firmness vis-a-vis the challenge
those groups represent, can persuade some to return to
a working life and to surrender their arms.

The events I have just summarized indicate in
practical terms MINUSTAH's course of action and
implementation in dealing with the challenge posed by
the various armed groups in Haiti, thus fulfilling the
mandate of the Security Council: to demonstrate
firmness and calm in the use of force in order to ensure
respect for law and order and to demonstrate social
awareness in order to understand the source of the
basic demands of the population. I would like to
mention that MINUSTAH troops have undertaken
infrastructure work on roads in Port-au-Prince and
Cap-Haitien, which has helped enormously to establish
good relations with the population, in particular among
the poorest sectors of the capital.

Events seem to be helping to achieve this
strategy, which is vital to our effort to establish a
process of national dialogue and ensure that elections
are held this year. I note that this policy of the Mission,
after difficult periods when the military component of
the Mission was not yet fully established, last October,
has today led to a substantial improvement in relations
between MINUSTAH and the population of Haiti,
which has witnessed the soldiers' dedication to tasks
aimed at improving the living conditions of the
neediest. The way inhabitants applaud at the arrival of
digging machines and soldiers carrying pickaxes and
shovels to improve the quality of the streets
demonstrates the importance of providing the Mission
with a greater number of military engineers and
demonstrates the adjustment of the Mission's focus,
which always combines deterrent force with the
Mission's participation in and support for social
development.

The swearing-in on 6 January 2005 of the new
representative of the Catholic Church in the
Provisional Electoral Council, the Transitional
Government's decision to allocate additional funding,
the establishment of a mechanism for the disbursal of
those funds through the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) in Haiti and the planned disbursal
of the financing pledges made by Canada and the
European Union allow me to state that the basic
technical elements for proceeding with the electoral
timetable for 2005 are now in place. That MINUSTAH
expects to sustain the progress in security further
reinforces that positive climate. It now remains to
make progress in the direction indicated in paragraph 2
of Security Council resolution 1576 (2004):

n

. to continue to explore actively all possible
ways to include in the democratic and electoral
process those who currently remain outside the
transition process but have rejected violence".

With the support of MINUSTAH, the Provisional
Electoral Council benefited from the important and
generous contribution of the Federal Electoral Institute
of Mexico, which during the last week of November
carried out an intense training programme, with the
cooperation of its peers from El Salvador, the
Dominican Republic, Panama and Venezuela. The
Provisional Electoral Council has completed
preparation of the electoral law following, in a gesture
of unprecedented openness, the submission of that text
for discussion among all public, social and political
sectors of the country. The Organization of American
States will begin voter registration in March in
cooperation with MINUSTAH.

We view with great hope the political decision of
the provisional President of Haiti, Mr. Boniface
Alexandre, to promote national dialogue during the
course of this year. As he has indicated, all sectors of
society and all political forces of Haiti without
exclusion must take part in that process and shoulder
their respective historic responsibilities. In effect, the
dialogue must be freely conducted and developed by
the Haitians. It is for them, in a climate of mutual
respect, to envisage the reconstruction of a community
marked by profound social divisions, to deal with the
reconstruction of institutions that have been debilitated
by the destructive combination of anti-democratic
manipulation and corruption, and to revive a political
system that had been plagued by political factionalism.

In that context, it is important to welcome the
initiative to visit the country and to support the all-
inclusive dialogue process on the part of international
leaders, such as the Prime Minister of Canada in
November, the Secretary of State of the United States
on 1 December, the Foreign Minister of Brazil on
20 December and the President of the African Union
Commission on 17 December, among others. Their
appeals for broader dialogue and reconciliation among
Haitians undoubtedly constitutes encouragement for
the democrats in the country. I welcome with
enthusiasm the upcoming visit to Port-au-Prince of the
Foreign Minister of the Argentine Republic this week.

The provisional release of some leaders of Fanmi
LavaIas on 23 December 2004 as decreed by the
judicial authorities should be interpreted as a step in
the right direction. It will make the national dialogue
an important factor in the elimination of violence.
However, we View with concern the unjustifiable
slowness of some trials concerning political leaders. A
particularly emblematic case is that of former Prime
Minister Yvon Neptune, who has been in prison for
almost a year without any sign of a decision by the
relevant court.

We also note with concern the fact that human
rights are being violated and crimes committed with an
apparent link to the Haitian National Police. MINUSTAH
is participating and cooperating in daily working
operations with the Haitian National Police and is
committed to investigating some of those incidents.

Correcting those tendencies will undoubtedly
ensure the full credibility of and participation in the
dialogue and the electoral process. In the context of the
national dialogue, MINUSTAH will play a scrupulous
and most respectful facilitating role and fulfil its
special commitment to providing technical support,
substantive bases and secure conditions for ensuring
that the dialogue proceeds without hindrance.

(spoke in French)

Concerned by the slow implementation of the
interim cooperation framework agreements, and at the
initiative of the World Bank, I attended the 15 December
meeting of the Contact Group in Washington, DC.
Allow me to take this opportunity to reiterate the
demands that I made at that time. They included the
need for the Transitional Government to select a few
projects for priority implementation and for the
international community to simplify its financing
mechanisms to the greatest extent possible in order to
allow infrastructure projects to be undertaken in 2005
so as to give hope and work to thousands of Haitians.

In that connection, it is with great satisfaction
that I welcome the World Bank's decision to release
$73 million, out of a total of $150 million, following
the repayment of arrears by the Haitian Transitional
Government. I note that the announcement coincided
with the decision by the Government of Canada to find
the funding necessary to support the electoral process
and with the reiteration by the European Union of its
pledge of funding. We hope that all participants in the
Core Group will be able to help in raising the funds for
the elections.

(spoke in Spanish)

I commented earlier on the need for ongoing
political and economic support for Haiti. Let me
conclude with a similar appeal. The process of
reintegrating Haiti into the international community, in
a framework of internal political stability and
democratic freedoms, requires us to make our best and
greatest efforts towards its rehabilitation. We all know
here that it is ultimately up to the people and
Government of Haiti to move forward in the process of
national reconciliation.

