Mr. Maqungo (South Africa): As this is the first
time this month that my delegation has made a
statement, we would like to join others in
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. My delegation also welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2006/109) under consideration at
this meeting.

South Africa believes that the Security Council's
involvement on this issue complements the efforts of
the General Assembly. The Assembly remains the
principal organ with the primary responsibility to
oversee and monitor the implementation of the
Programme of Action and to launch new initiatives in
the area of small arms and light weapons. However, the
continued involvement of the Security Council in small
arms and light weapons is significant, particularly
because there has recently been more focus on
weapons of mass destruction at the expense of the issue
of conventional weapons. We are of the View that this
debate will also provide the necessary momentum as
we approach the first review conference on the
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action.

Over the past few years, the Secretary-General
has continued to make specific recommendations on
how the Security Council could contribute in dealing
with the question of the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons in situations under its consideration. My
delegation has taken particular note of those
recommendations contained in the report that refer to
the implementation of the United Nations Programme
of Action adopted in 2001.

South Africa actively participated in meetings of
the Open-ended Working Group to Negotiate an
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons. While South Africa
would have preferred a legally binding instrument and
the inclusion of ammunition, we nevertheless View the
adoption of the Instrument as a very positive
development in this area. The implementation by all
Member States of its provisions is critical in order to
halt the scourge of the illicit proliferation of small arms
and light weapons. It is my delegation's belief that only
through collective efforts at the national, regional and
international levels can the issue of illicit small arms
and light weapons be effectively dealt with.

The process that led to the adoption of the
Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons recognized the huge and catastrophic problem
and the consequences of the illicit trade in these
weapons. Almost five years after the adoption of the
Programme of Action, diversion continues unabated.
My delegation is pleased to note in the Secretary-
General's report that progress is being made on the
issue of the illicit brokering of small arms. The
establishment of a group of governmental experts to
enhance international cooperation to prevent, combat
and eradicate illicit brokering will put in place a
framework to deal with illicit weapons. South Africa is
pleased that the group of governmental experts will
begin its work immediately following the review
conference on small arms and light weapons to be held
in June or July 2006.

The discussions leading up to the first review
conference, through biennial and regional meetings,
have highlighted that much still needs to be done in
implementing the Programme of Action. It has become
very clear that political processes alone will not
achieve the desired result, namely, to combat and
eradicate the illicit proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. International assistance and cooperation are
imperative in order to make significant gains against
the scourge. The process has also highlighted the
importance of a regional approach in addressing
problems of proliferation. In that regard, South Africa
participated in and hosted one of the African regional
preparatory meetings for the review conference, which
resulted in the adoption of the African common
position on the review conference.

My delegation views the establishment of
necessary legislation to ensure effective control over
the export and transit of small arms and light weapons
as a very significant measure in the fight against the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. In that
regard, South Africa is implementing the National

Conventional Arms Control Act of 1993, which
contains specific guiding principles and criteria for the
consideration of arms transfer applications. These
include adherence to international law, norms and
practices, including international obligations and
commitments. The Act also stipulates that arms exports
require the provision of authenticated end-user
certificates.

South Africa remains fully committed to the
achievement of the peaceful resolution of conflicts,
particularly on the African continent. In that context,
South Africa supports sanctions mechanisms, such as
arms embargoes, where such sanctions would advance
the path to lasting peace and stability, as that
complements South Africa's role in promoting the
peaceful resolution of conflicts on the continent.

Through its extensive involvement in
peacekeeping operations in Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Africa has
experienced the value of effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) activities and
has recognized that provisions relating to DDR are an
essential part of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. It is for that reason that South Africa
stresses the need for reliable funding of DDR
programmes to guarantee the success of the entire
peace process. Effective DDR programmes should
include specific measures for the collection and
disposal of illicit and surplus small arms and light
weapons. We urge the international community and
donors to support such DDR programmes in order to
assist countries emerging from conflict in the
implementation of these programmes.

In conclusion, my delegation views its
participation in the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms as an effort to enhance
transparency in armaments. South Africa is pleased to
have seen increased participation by Member States in
the group of governmental experts mandated to assist
in the preparation of a report on the continuing
operation and further development of the Register. We
hope that all these efforts will contribute to lasting
peace, especially on the African continent, where we
are beginning to see a decrease in the number of armed
conflicts.

