Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): I want to thank Mr.
Klein for his very comprehensive, informative and
encouraging briefing. I wish also to thank the
Secretary-General for his latest report.

Since the adoption of resolution 1247 (1999) of
18 June 1999, the progress achieved in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in furthering the implementation of the
Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement has in fact been
substantive. In our view, a significant contribution to
the overall success achieved so far by the international
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been made
by the United Nations system of organizations, headed
and coordinated by the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH). My delegation
feels that the UNMIBH and the International Police
Task Force (IPTF), its core part, continue to play a
crucial role in the implementation of the civilian
aspects of the Peace Agreement, in particular with
respect to establishing mechanisms for the rule of law.

Ukraine commends the work done by UNMIBH
during this period in the fields of police restructuring
and reform, building common institutions, establishing
a judicial system and ensuring respect for human
rights. We acknowledge the professionalism of the
IPTF staff, who have been carrying out their mandate
in the difficult conditions of an authorized strength that
had been reduced, mainly because of the additional
requirements for Kosovo.

My delegation would also like to congratulate Mr.
Klein and the Mission personnel on a number of most
important recent achievements in the field of
establishing common institutions: the multi-ethnic
integration of the parallel police structures and the
municipal and cantonal court system in canton 7, the
formation of the multi-ethnic Brcko district police
force and the inauguration of the State Border Service
at the Sarajevo airport just a week ago. Obviously, all
these ground-breaking projects have at least one
remarkable and noteworthy feature in common: they
bring together the representatives of three major
ethnicities in their joint endeavours to build a State. We
were pleased to learn from the Secretary-General's
report that such significant developments towards
integration of the police have enabled Croats and
Bosniacs to work together in west Mostar for the first
time since the war ended. The significance of the start
of functioning of the State Border Service cannot be
overestimated.

While praising UNMIBH and IPTF efforts in
building common institutions, we fully agree with Mr.
Klein that much more has yet to be done in the field of
police minority recruitment in both entities, as well as
in providing security to the minority returnees. We
cannot be satisfied with the increased number of
security incidents related to the minority returnees and
the issues of their property rights. Such incidents are
unacceptable. Undoubtedly, the IPTF and the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) should undertake
additional measures to remedy the situation. We also
believe that more attention should be paid to
accelerating the process of cross-border refugee return
to Bosnia and Herzegovina and its neighbouring
countries.

My delegation notes with satisfaction some
positive steps outlined in the Secretary-General's
report, aimed at enhancing the coordination of joint
efforts between United Nations bodies and other
international organizations. Here I mean the idea of
handing over in the future the work of the Mission's
judicial system assessment programme to an
international organization that will be ready to carry on
with this programme on the basis of UNMIBH's
experience.

My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General's
observation in paragraph 34 of the report that all the
UNMIBH components have begun the preparation of a
framework for the fulfilment ofthe core mandate of the
Mission by December 2002. We take it as a positive
sign that the United Nations Mission can fulfil its
mandate by that time. Still, we think it is too early even
to anticipate the withdrawal of the United Nations
Mission from Bosnia and Herzegovina in the near
future.

It is well known that there is still a long way to
go to make the process of peace and reconciliation,
stability and democracy in Bosnia and Herzegovina
irreversible. One of the major problems, in our view, is
ensuring that the leaders and the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina are totally committed to the
implementation of the Peace Agreement in full, while
realizing that the future of the country is their main
responsibility. In this regard, we share certain
misgivings expressed at the latest meeting of the Peace
Implementation Council in Brussels on the current
insufficient level of commitment demonstrated by the
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to the peace
process.

In this regard, we believe that the Council should
continue to give its solid support to UNMIBH and
strongly encourage the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to demonstrate their firm commitment to
the implementation of the Peace Agreement in full
cooperation with UNMIBH.

As an IPTF contributor, Ukraine is determined to
continue its participation in IPTF activities. As a
member of the Peace Implementation Council, my
country has endorsed the three priorities for Bosnia for
the next 18 months, as identified at the Peace
Implementation Council meeting: specifically, pursuing
market-economy reforms, accelerating refugee return
and strengthening State democratic institutions. We call
on the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to ensure
their implementation.

In our view, four and a half years of UNMIBH
activities have been a worthwhile effort, since they
have brought undeniable results, and the overall
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina seems to be quite
promising. At the same time, we feel that, in view of
the remaining problems, continued UNMIBH activities,
secured by effective SFOR backing, are still required in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to consolidate the peace
process and move it forward. Therefore, my delegation
supports the Secretary-General's recommendation to
extend the UNMIBH mandate for a further 12-month
period, until 21 June 2001.

In conclusion, let me wish further success to Mr.
Klein and the entire staff ofthe United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina in pursuing our common
strategy aimed at restoring lasting peace and stability
to that part ofthe Balkans.

