The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.

I would like to thank the briefers very much for
their statements, as well as for the work carried out by
the Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and the International Organization
for Migration (IOM) on the ground to assist all those in
need of international protection.

We are committed to helping improve the appalling
conditions of refugee and migrant centres, including
through the launch of new calls for non-governmental
organization projects and finding avenues for legal
migration and repatriation. I would like to underscore
that Italy has long supported and emphasized the
crucial role of the United Nations on the ground, and
from the start we have advocated and worked for a
stronger presence of UNHCR and the IOM. in Libya.
That is why we welcome the important progress
achieved both by UNHCR and IOM. on that crucial
matter. Italy is pleased that Italian efforts, including
through the engagement of the Italian Embassy in
Tripoli, were able to facilitate UNHCR activities in
Libya on behalf of migrants and vulnerable categories
in need of international protection, as well as to
define the terms of its presence and engagement in
the country. To that end, we facilitated meetings at
the Italian Embassy in Tripoli with local authorities
and UNHCR. The procedures for the resettlement of
migrants and vulnerable categories of persons can
therefore now be accelerated in cooperation with the
office dedicated for that purpose in Tripoli being run by
the local authorities, which aims to provide the highest
standards of humanitarian assistance and respect for
human rights.

Human mobility, exploitation and abuses
against migrants, and the situation in Libya and the
Mediterranean are at the centre of Italy's action at the
United Nations and of our presidency of the Security
Council. One week ago, we organized an open debate
(see S.PV.8111) on trafficking in persons in conflict
situations. Our Foreign Minister, Angelino Alfano,
presided over the briefing on security challenges in
the Mediterranean (see S/PV.8106) on 17 November.
A meeting (see S/PV.8104) dedicated to the political
situation in Libya was held the day before. As a member
of the Security Council, measures taken by Italy on
those issues has been consistent, culminating under
our presidency in the unanimous adoption of resolution
2388 (2017), which was supported by many delegations
around the table and co-sponsored by 56 countries at
the open debate I mentioned.

The resolution underscores, inter alia, that the
challenges posed by trafficking in persons and the
smuggling of migrants in the Sahel region and in Libya
are further exacerbating instability and conflict. It
calls for a renewed collective and coordinated effort,
and provides a legal basis for a strengthened victim-
centre dand a gender- and child-sensitive approach
in addressing the needs of the victim, especially
highlighting that human trafficking entails - as
shown by the situation in Libya - widespread and
grave abuses of human rights, including heinous forms
of exploitation and slavery.

The recent reports indicating that migrants in
Libya are being sold as slaves are sickening. Slavery
must have no place in today's world. Such actions are
among the most outrageous abuses of human rights and
may amount to crimes against humanity. We condemn
them in the strongest terms. Italy therefore welcomes
the statement by the Government of National Accord
of Libya condemning those inhumane practices and
announcing the launching an investigation into that
abhorrent episode to bring the perpetrators to justice.
We also welcome the remarks made before of the
Council last week (see S/PV.8111) by the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Mr. Smai'l
Chergui, on the initiative taken by the African Union
to address the plight of African migrants in Libya. We
also recall the words of Prosecutor Bensouda of the
International Criminal Court at the Council (see S/PV. 8091) under the Italian presidencyjust three weeks ago.

We must not forget that the issue oflarge numbers of
people being trafficked through Libya dates back long
before a spotlight was recently shined on that matter
by the international media. Over the past years, Italy
rescued and welcomed over half a million migrants
and refugees who tried to reach Europe across the
Mediterranean. At the same time, we spare no effort in
raising awareness on the issue, initially at the European
Union and subsequently at the global level.

As mentioned in this Chamber by Foreign Minister
Angelino Alfano in the meeting on Libya, the recent
decrease in migration flows across the Mediterranean is
encouraging because it results in reducing the number
of people undertaking a dangerous journey - one that
has cost so many innocent lives over recent years. But
better management of migration flows must not take
place at the expense of human rights. Migrants should
be treated with humanity and dignity, and their rights
should be fully respected. That is the approach that
Italy has taken since the beginning of this crisis by
combining solidarity and security.

Italy is mindful that a sustainable solution to these
issues lies in strengthening Libyan State institutions
and local municipalities, and we are implementing
several concrete initiatives to that end. We recall the
importance of assisting Libya, as indicated by several
Security Council resolutions, under the coordination
of the presidency of the Council, in building needed
capacity, including to secure its borders, and to prevent,
investigate and prosecute acts of smuggling ofmigrants
and human trafficking. That challenge is transnational
in nature, and therefore Libya cannot be left alone in
dealing with it.

We believe that the protection of vulnerable groups,
including migrants, must be at the centre ofthe activities
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. We
also express support to countries in the region affected
by the smuggling of migrants, and emphasize Italy's
initiative to strengthen an effective multidimensional
response with States of origin, transit and destination

Instability in the Sahel - as other have reminded
the Council - is also being exploited by human
traffickers. We need to address those common
challenges in a spirit of international solidarity and
shared responsibility in order to tackle their root causes
and to prevent vulnerable people from being exploited
by migrant smugglers and human traffickers.

Ultimately, the solution to the problem is a political
one, as we have been reminded in the case ofthe Libyan
crisis. Such a solution would accompany the country on
its path towards stabilization and national reconciliation
through an inclusive dialogue. Italy reaffirms its full
support to United Nations mediation in that respect, as
reiterated by Prime Minister Gentiloni Silveri in his
meeting with Special Representative Salame' two days
ago in Tunis.

In conclusion, Italy would like to support the
proposal of the United Kingdom for a formal product,
which would lend important added value to advance
the engagtement of the Security Council on the issue.
The proposal would also be a further follow-up to the
initiative launched by the Italian presidency during
this month. I would like to conclude by also thanking
France for organizing this meeting in cooperation with
the Italian presidency.

I now resume my functions are President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
