Ms. Veneman: I very much appreciate the
opportunity to address the Security Council. I
congratulate the membership and you, Sir, on keeping
our collective attention focused on the important issue
of children and armed conflict.

I would particularly like to express sincere
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his steadfast
commitment and dedication to children affected by
armed conflict. Under his leadership, the United
Nations has made significant progress in highlighting
the plight of the most vulnerable and in ensuring that
the United Nations system responds to their needs.

I would also like to acknowledge the strong
advocacy on this issue of my colleague, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict.

Today, like any other day, hundreds of thousands
of children wake and begin their day as child soldiers
fighting in adult wars. Or they may be sexually
exploited or trafficked. The reasons for these conflicts
are complex, but the result is simple: children bear the
brunt of these conflicts. It is estimated that 43 million
children are out of school, that 4 to 5 million children
have been physically disabled over the past two years,
and that 80 per cent of refugees fleeing war are women
and children.

Again this year, the report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict (8/2005/826)
indicates that children continue to be deliberately
targeted in conflicts. The report provides detailed
information on six grave violations of children's rights
perpetrated by over 40 parties in more than 20 conflict-
affected countries. These violations against children
continue to be committed in defiance of agreed
international norms and standards. However, by
naming the parties that continue to recruit or use child
soldiers, the Security Council has demonstrated its
determination to match words with deeds. Those who
violate the international standards for the protection of
children can no longer do so with impunity. The lists
annexed to the report represent an important step
forward in our efforts to induce compliance by parties
to conflict with international child protection
standards.

The report notes that, despite the progress made
with respect to the protection of children in several
situations of armed conflict, new areas of concern
require our attention. We remain deeply concerned by
the ongoing conflicts in several countries highlighted
in this year's report. In the occupied Palestinian
territories, an estimated 119 Palestinian children have
been killed this year, more than twice the total number
of child deaths registered in 2005. Children and
adolescents represent more than half the population in
the territories, and they are living through a terrifying
siege that will likely have an enduring impact. They
have seen family members killed and their
communities destroyed. It is time to scale up protection
and support to children in this fractured region.

In Chad, the ongoing fighting between
Government forces and the armed opposition, and the
presence of Sudanese rebels from the Sudan Liberation
Army (SLA) and the Justice and Equality Movement
(JEM) has led to tremendous insecurity in the refugee
camps and continuous attacks on surrounding villages.
Children are at particular risk, and the Government
must ensure the safety of refugees and local
populations.

Earlier this year, I visited the eastern region of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo together with
the High Commissioner for Refugees, Antonio
Guterres, and the Executive Director of the World Food
Programme, Jim Morris. We listened to shocking first-
hand accounts of routine rape and sexual exploitation
used as weapons against young girls and women in the
conflict that continues to rage in the region.

This year's report also provides information on
two specific areas critical to enhanced protection of
children from conflict: the implementation of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism and the
implementation of action plans to halt the recruitment
and use of children as soldiers.

Over the course of the past year, the Security
Council and its Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict have demonstrated concerted attention to the
concerns of children affected by armed conflict. I
would like to thank His Excellency the Permanent
Representative of France for his stewardship and for
the action taken by the Working Group to address the
issue of impunity for rights violations.

The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)
will continue to support the further strengthening of the
monitoring and reporting systems, as called for in
Security Council resolution 1612 (2005). Activities for
2007 will focus on finalizing a global database and
information management system, supporting capacity-
building for key partners through training on
information gathering, developing appropriate
programme responses and defining global and country-
level advocacy strategies.

We appreciate the initial start-up of funds
received for the development of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism from the Governments of the
United Kingdom, Norway and Canada. Additional
funding will be required for country-level activities,
particularly to support systematic programmes to
address rights violations committed against children.

Working closely with many partners, UNICEF
continues to negotiate for humanitarian access and to
engage in dialogue with parties to end the recruitment
and use of children associated with fighting forces.

We also support disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, with a special emphasis on
the needs of girls and working with many others to
ensure that the essential focus on reintegration helps to
ensure that children can return to their communities
where feasible. For example, last year in Cote d'Ivoire,
the United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire
(UNOCI) and UNICEF developed a comprehensive
action plan with the leadership of the Forces nouvelles
in an effort to end the association of children with
fighting forces in the conflict.

In Colombia, we have supported local partners in
a effort called Playing for Peace, which promotes
sports, education for peace and systems of social
coexistence among vulnerable adolescents, while
contributing to the prevention of voluntary recruitment
of youths into illegal armed groups. By the end of this
year, Playing for Peace will be active in 60
municipalities. Together with other similar projects,
these initiatives are benefiting almost 19,000 children
and youths in the country.

When children are uprooted and traumatized by
armed conflict, education can play a key role in
bringing stability and security back to their lives.
Education has a broader impact to help re-establish a
normal routine within communities threatened by
violence and war. Education provides a means to reach
war-affected children with information on health and
safety, landmine awareness, HIV/AIDS prevention,
gender sensitivity, human rights and life skills.
Education contributes to building an environment
supportive of future peacebuilding efforts. In this light,
education must be restored as soon as possible during
and after conflict.

The impact of war and violence on children may
also have long-term consequences for the formation of
children's values, identity and political beliefs and of
their ability to function as leaders and decision-makers
in the future. Thus, the pursuit of peace is integral to
the fulfilment of children's rights, including their rights
to physical safety, health and well-being.

And children, young people and women must be
part of the solution. Young people have distinct
experiences in armed conflict, distinct needs and
distinct capacities for recovering and contributing to
peacebuilding. They mentor and tutor other children
and provide friendship and companionship for one
another. They often generate a livelihood for
themselves and their families and take on leadership
roles.

Children and young people and the contributions
they make are therefore a major part of the solution to
armed conflict. Yet experience in countries where
demobilization exercises and justice-sector reforms
have neglected to include children has shown that a
lack of attention to the specific needs of children has a
negative effect for young people themselves, and can
also undermine the peacebuilding effort.

Finally, UNICEF wishes to lend its support to the
recommendations contained the report. We have made
significant progress over the past year. Today, we must
renew our commitment to the children who are
impacted by this unacceptable practice.

