Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I wish you
continued success.

I would like to begin my statement by condemning
the ongoing savage Israeli aggression against Gaza and
the Palestinian people and the ongoing political and
humanitarian indifference with regard to the tragedy of
the Palestinian people, which has lasted for more than
66 years. That tragedy has taken the lives of hundreds
of thousands of Palestinians, destroyed their hopes and
dreams and serve to cast aside all the promises and
resolutions adopted by the Council to do justice to the
Palestinian people.

The humanitarian element constitutes one of
the main aspects of the crisis in Syria. It is clear that
there are those who work with unrivalled dedication
to use creative terrorism as a tool to exacerbate the
humanitarian situation in Syria, with the aim of
exploiting it to exert political pressure on the Syrian
Government and to implement interventionist agendas.
The Syrian Government, based on its constitutional
responsibilities and national duties towards its people,
who are political and humanitarian targets, was aware
of this matter early on and worked hard to protect
its citizens to the best of its ability and to meet their
humanitarian needs in the different regions of Syria
without discrimination.

With the increase in humanitarian needs as a
result of the escalation of terrorist acts, the Syrian
Government welcomed and adopted new initiatives
and means to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. It welcomed every sincere effort to help it
alleviate the humanitarian burden on its people. This
approach was demonstrated by the Government's
eagerness to cooperate constructively with the United
Nations and its agencies working on the humanitarian
sphere, including the granting of licenses to 96 Syrian
and 16 international non-governmental organizations
to work in Syria. All of that was in accordance with the
guidelines established in General Assembly resolution
46/182, foremost among which is the principle of respect
for the national sovereignty of States while providing
humanitarian assistance.

That commitment led to the signing of six
humanitarian response plans between the Syrian
Government and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) to the benefit of
millions of Syrian citizens. It is self-evident that all
measures, regardless of their scope or effectiveness,
will be to not avail unless the root causes underlying the
humanitarian needs are addressed, that is, the activities
of armed terrorist groups, including those affiliated
with Al-Qaida. Among other things, those terrorist
activities include the destruction of infrastructure,
the depletion of the country's resources, the forced
displacement of innocent civilians - depriving them
ofa safe and decent livelihoods - and the cutting off of
water to the city of Aleppo, thereby depriving 3 million
Syrian citizens of drinking water.

The flight of millions of refugees and displaced
Iraqis because of the terrorism carried out by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) confirms
what we have been saying - that the existence of
refugees and displaced persons in Syria is due to
the same reason: terrorism sponsored from abroad.
Ending terrorism is therefore a prerequisite for ending
the suffering of the Syrian people. That is consistent
with the statement made by international jurist Carla
Del Ponte in pointing out that the Syrian people's
tragedy was growing because of foreign mercenaries
and groups like ISIS and the Al-Nusra Front. In that
regard, we reiterate that we will be able to put an end to
terrorism only by bringing immediate pressure to bear
on the Governments of the countries that are financing,
arming and training terrorist elements and those
securing, harbouring and facilitating their passage into
the Syrian territory. In order to fully abide by Security
Council resolutions on countering terrorism, it is high
time for this international Organization to take a bold
stand in the face of the Saudi, Qatari and Turkish
practices of supporting terrorism. The irresponsible
and frantic quest to destabilize Syria and Iraq using
immoral methods is the main reason for the fuelling
and spreading of terrorism in the entire region.

It is not enough for a State to claim that it is against
terrorism and to place an entity linked to Al-Qaida on
its list of terrorists in order that it can claim innocence
with regard to being involved in propagating and
supporting terrorism. It is also not enough to make
statements to the media about the spread of terrorism
and terrorist acts in order to spare civilians the scourge
of terror. We must stop the politicized media coverage,
truly put an end to the various forms of support for
those terrorist groups and hold fully accountable those
who violate the resolutions on counter-terrorism. It is
highly ironic to classify an organization as a terrorist
group while at the same time supporting its terrorist
activities and enabling it to obtain various forms of
assistance, including lethal weapons. Regrettably, in
their statements some of my colleagues have described
those terrorist groups as the Syrian "opposition".

As evidence of what I have mentioned, I have a
letter dated 17 January from the so-called head of the
Free Syrian Army, the fugitive terrorist Salim Idriss,
addressed to the leaders of the so-called revolutionary
military councils in eastern Syria, which states the
following.

"I would like to report that the ammunition sent by
the command staff to the leaders of the revolutionary
military councils in the eastern region is to be
divided up in accordance with the agreement: two
thirds to warlord leaders of Jabhat Al-Nusra and
one third to be equally divided among the military
and the revolutionary elements in order to fight the
ISIS gangs. We would appreciate it if you would
send us the delivery receipts for the total amount of
the ammunition, in terms of quantity and quality,
with the personal signatures of the leaders and
warlords so that the receipts can be given to the
Turkish and French partners."

Two thirds of the ammunition reached the so-called
moderate opposition, the leaders of Jabhat Al-Nusra,
who are classified by the Council as a terrorist entity
affiliated with Al-Qaida.

Furthermore, how is it possible that some
permanent members of the Security Council talk about
providing lethal weapons to the so-called moderate
military opposition, even though the President of one
of those countries has acknowledged that one cannot
rely on the opposition. Everyone knows that the label is
only a cover to conceal terrorist groups affiliated with
Al-Qaida, such as ISIS, Jabhat Al-Nusra and others.

In addition to the activities of the terrorist groups,
there are other factors that hamper the improvement of
the humanitarian situation in Syria. The necessary steps
to deal with such elements should be taken. In short, the
most important of those factors are as follows.

First, the negative impact on Syrian citizens as a
result of the unilateral and coercive measures imposed
on them by the Governments of States that support
terrorism. Those States are by definition contributing
to the humanitarian crisis, not to a solution.

Secondly, the targeting and repeated plundering
of humanitarian convoys by terrorist groups and
their killing and detention of Syrian Red Crescent
humanitarian workers - 33 of whom have to died to
date at the hands of such groups - prevent the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to many areas throughout
Syria. The fundamental problems facing the delivery of
humanitarian assistance occur primarily in areas where
terrorist groups are active, according to the report of
OCHA itself.

Thirdly, despite the boastful scenes and deceptive
pledges made at donor conferences, funding for the
2014 Syria Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan has
barely reached 29 per cent of the required amount. The
choice of some countries to spend vast amounts of their
people's money to finance arms deals to the benefit of
terrorists and to facilitate the entry of extremists into
Syria, rather than to allocate those resources to funding
the Response Plan, shows their hypocrisy and exposes
their false claims of being concerned about improving
the humanitarian situation in Syria.
The Syrian Government relies on the impartial,
effective and responsible role of the United Nations
in dealing with the humanitarian situation in Syria, in
particular with regard to respect for Syrian sovereignty,
not to mention the cooperation and commitment of the
Syrian Government in the humanitarian area, ensuring
the non-politicization of humanitarian assistance and
refraining from the manipulation of border crossings
by some actors to allow the entry of weapons and
terrorists. We underscore the need for certain senior
United Nations officials to fully comply with their
mandates, in accordance with Article 100 ofthe Charter
of the United Nations, and to refrain from pursuing the
agendas of their national Governments.

In conclusion, one cannot support terrorism while
claiming to seek to put an end to the humanitarian
suffering in Syria. The stubborness of some
Governments in denying their huge strategic mistakes
in Syria cannot be seen as political maturity or a sense
of responsibility towards the humanitarian crisis.
After all that has taken place, we have not heard any
apology from the officials of those countries that
have supported terrorism in Syria and Iraq, while
remaining suspiciously silent with regard to declaring
a state of terrorism. Instead, we still hear the shameful
description of those insurgents as freedom fighters,
jihadists and armed opposition. A very important book,
entitled Syria: Why the West was Wrong, was recently
published in Paris. In the preface, the author wrote:

"How could the West have been so wrong about
Syria? It is the result of a mixture of historical
ignorance, political Manichaeism and diplomatic
wishful thinking."

The Syrian people need the Governments of those
States to consider the sins that they have committed
towards the Syrian people and to strive to make amends
for them before the flame of that terrorism reaches their
own territories. In order to improve the humanitarian
situation in Syria, it is first and foremost necessary
to put an end to terrorism and to support the path of
national reconciliation, which has significantly helped
improve the humanitarian situation in those areas where
that has happened. A Syrian-led national dialogue and
the choice of the Syrian people and their aspirations
must be supported.

I would like to mention that the presidential
election that recently took place in Syria, with multiple
candidates, proved that the first and last choice in
deciding Syria's future lies in the hands of the Syrian
people. not a group of States that wrongly puts itself
forward as the custodian of the destiny of the world's
nations. The election also showed that the Syrian
people were united in the face of pressure and that
no one, however powerful, could separate the Syrian
people from their rights, as has been the case in other
countries.

