Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank the Presidents and
the Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their reports
(see S/2012/354 and S/2012/349) and their briefings.
Today's briefings were of special importance, taking
place as they are in the month before the opening of
the Rwandan branch of the Residual Mechanism.
That Mechanism is the first of its kind in the history
of international criminal justice, and it will require
of both management and staff the utmost focus and
accountability. In our view, the Mechanism has been
established within parameters that will enable it to carry
out substantive work, including conducting trials and
appeals, and it has the requisite funding. Moreover,
the resources formerly devoted to the Tribunals can be
used to add to its financing, if its caseload requires. We
anticipate that the first appeals will be referred to the
Residual Mechanism in the near future. That will free
the Tribunals to focus on their remaining cases within
the timeframe set out in resolution 1966 (2010).

Nevertheless, it is unclear whether resolution 1966
(2010) can be implemented. We are concerned by the
delays that have been predicted in proceedings by the
ICTY. We note the useful measures it has adopted to
accelerate its proceedings, thanks to which the cases of
Hadeie and Mladic' are ready for trial ahead of schedule.
However, those measures have still not dramatically
improved the situation. Additional substantive measures
are necessary.

The situation in the ICTR is less troubling, although
we no longer hear promises of completing its activities
any earlier than scheduled. Our View is that, even if
appeals in the cases oszabonimana and Nizeyimana are
taken up by the ICTR, nothing will prevent the Tribunal
from meeting the schedule established in resolution
1966 (2010). Similarly, nothing prevents the taking of
a final decision on the transfer of the Munyagishari
case to the national jurisdiction of Rwanda, especially
given the recent transfer to Rwanda of a similar case
concerning indictee Uwinkindi.

With regard to cooperation on the part of States in
the relevant regions with the Tribunals, we note that in
the past several years, thanks to the efforts of national
authorities, the Tribunals have advanced considerably
in the prosecutions of individuals who have fled from
justice. Serbia demonstrated a high level of cooperation
in that regard when it transferred the last two fugitives
to the ICTY.

With respect to that case, Russia is surprised by the
ongoing attempts by the ICTY Prosecutor to pressure
Serbian authorities with regard to a matter initiated by
them, namely, to investigate the causes underlying the
ability of several indictees to hide for so long in Serbia.
We firmly recommend that the ICTY Prosecutor focus
on the issues that bear directly upon the purview of the
Tribunal. It is quite clear that Serbia is conducting a
national inquiry that will in no way impact the ICTY
trial nor the successful implementation of resolution
1966 (2010).

