Mr. Baja (Philippines): We thank you, Sir, for
convening this public meeting on Timor-Leste. We also
join the members of the Council in extending
condolences to the Government and people of
Bangladesh over the tragic deaths of their peacekeepers
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We acknowledge the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste.

I also wish to thank Mr. Hasegawa, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive briefing on political, diplomatic and
economic developments in Timor-Leste. Indeed,
considerable rewards have been and are still being
reaped from the significant investment in Timor-Leste
by the international community, judging from the
political progress that has been achieved and the
relative calm and stability now prevailing there. We
also acknowledge the efforts being exerted by the
Timorese throughout the process and their
determination to increase their involvement and
ownership in the strengthening of their political, legal
and security institutions.

We also welcome the continuing improvement in
the relations of Timor-Leste with its neighbours,
particularly Indonesia, recently culminating in an
agreement to form a Truth and Friendship Commission
that would address the human rights abuses perpetrated
in 1999.

My delegation takes note of the findings of the
eight transition working groups, contained in the
Secretary-General's report, and the conclusions and
recommendations stemming from those findings.

The international community should heed the
wise caution of the Secretary-General against
jeopardizing the achievements that have been made
through the political and resource investments of the
international community in Timor-Leste. The
Secretary-General's recommendation for a
reconfigured and scaled-down Mission will be
supported by my delegation during the forthcoming
negotiations for a new mission in Timor-Leste. During
this transition period, the country will require a
substantial number of international personnel both to
fill the gaps in the administration and to address
continuing capacity-building. As the Foreign Minister
of Timor-Leste said, that would be better ensured by
systematic and guaranteed United Nations assistance
than by bilateral development assistance.

The present stage of Timor-Leste's development
dictates that the heavy investment poured into
establishing peace and keeping it can be preserved only
by a sustainable socio-economic development
framework for Timor-Leste. A peaceful, free and
strong country will require economic self-sufficiency.
In the medium to long terms, that is the new phase of
investment that the international community should
focus on in assisting Timor-Leste. We welcome the
information given by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General about the petroleum fund, and in
that regard I would like to ask him for information on
any developments on the matter of the maritime
boundary of Timor-Leste with Australia. That has been
discussed in the past and is of interest to the
international community, as it would have a significant
effect on the future economic self-sufficiency of
Timor-Leste and its capacity to address the many
political and socio-economic challenges it faces.

Finally, my delegation notes the creation of the
United Nations commission of experts tasked to review
the progress made on human rights and serious crimes.
That is one of the most sensitive issues and we hope
the commission will be able to come up with positive
recommendations on the matter. External intervention
always needs the cooperation of parties, including the
existing institutions and processes concerned, to be
fully effective. The history of the United Nations
intervention in Timor-Leste reflects a partnership with
the Timorese and cooperation by Indonesia. Ultimately,
the commission's success will be determined by the
common goals underpinning it and the engagement and
support of the parties concerned.

