Mr. Koncke (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to express Uruguay's gratitude to the Permanent
Mission of Luxembourg for convening this open debate
on children and armed conflict during its presidency of
the Security Council. I am also grateful for the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and
reiterate our full support to her in fulfilling her mandate.
We would also like to thank the Executive Director of
UNICEF, whose joint work with Ms. Zerrougui is of the
greatest significance in achieving the goal of stopping
child recruitment by security forces and armed groups
by 2016.

Allow me to highlight the value of the substantive
reports prepared by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, which allow us to appreciate the
achievements made and challenges to be addressed in
order to overcome the serious problems that this sensitive
issue presents for the international community. We also
thank Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for his courageous first-
hand testimony.

The impact of armed conflict on children is
alarming and horrifying, as is the recognition of the
increase in serious violations of the rights of children
despite the many efforts being made to limit and
ultimately put an end to such acts. We therefore call
on the Security Council to adopt specific measures to
strengthen the children and armed conflict mandate.

An alarming and growing number of children are
being killed, subjected to sexual violence and rape, and
recruited into armies and armed groups. In addition,
unacceptable attacks on schools and their deliberate
use for military purposes endanger children's lives and
security, as well as their right to education. The task
before us of preventing such violations and abuses of
children's rights and establishing effective protection
for children from the atrocities of war is an arduous
one, especially as most children involved in armed
conflict are being recruited by States themselves.

The subject we are considering today is an item on
the agenda of the General Assembly, where every year
my country plays as active a role as possible to increase
the share of responsibilty shouldered by that United
Nations organ, which is of universal membership, on a
subject that is part of its mandate and of grave concern
to all of us.
Nevertheless, Uruguay should like to highlight the
role the Security Council has been playing through the
adoption of its many resolutions aimed at establishing
and implementing specific measures to end the illegal
recruitment and exploitation of children in armed
conflict. We reiterate our gratitude in this regard, in the
understanding that the Council's intervention is of vital
importance to achieving the objective of stopping such
recruitment by 2016 and preventing further violations
of the fundamental rights of children. Thanks to the
action plans resulting from the Council's mandate
on this subject, over the past 20 years thousands of
children have been freed from a form of exploitation
that is a violation of human dignity.

Resolution 2143 (2014), adopted by the Security
Council today, on the rights of the child is of special
importance. In particular, the Council reiterates its deep
concern over the lack of progress in situations of armed
conflict and the fact that, in such conflicts, parties
continue to violate with impunity the provisions of
international law that protect children by condemning
their recruitment by armies and armed groups. The
Council has stressed that concern in the resolution
by calling on the parties involved in armed conflict
and armed groups to respect the norms of the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and their additional protocols, and
to refrain from the use of schools for military purposes.
Uruguay believes that this is essential when it comes
to respecting the rights of the child, as established
in various instruments, in particular article 28 of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, which obliges
States to respect children's right to education.

We should also recognize the contribution
made by the International Criminal Court in various
situations, in particular by designating as war crimes
acts that involve sexual violence against children,
the recruitment of children under 15 years of age, or
their use as active participants in armed conflicts. We
also recognize the work of other international courts
that have also taken on the issue of the protection of
children in their jurisdictions. We appreciate the fact
that the resolution expressly recognizes the work of the
International Criminal Court and calls on all States to
put an end to impunity for cases of genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and other abhorrent
crimes against children.

Our delegation affirms Uruguay's belief in the
fundamental need to strengthen the fight against
impunity for all of those responsible for grave
violations of children's rights. We therefore encourage
the Security Council to report such cases to the
International Criminal Court. We also believe that
cooperation with national and international courts is a
necessary and fundamental step in ensuring effective
judgments in such situations.

Another relevant issue is the attention to be
accorded to the effective reintegration of children who
are linked to armed groups and those who have suffered
other severe violations of human rights, in particular
in cases involving sexual exploitation or abuse. I stress
the crucial importance of effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes to the
well-being of all children affected by armed conflict.
Such programmes should necessarily enjoy the human
and financial resources they require and the support
of the communities to which they belong in order to
ensure the successful and sustainable reintegration of
those children into society.

To conclude, my delegation believes that the
social reintegration of children implicitly involves
recognizing situations in which children are accused of
crimes committed during their association with armed
forces or groups. In such situations, children need to be
considered first and foremost as victims, and as such
treated in accordance with international law within the
context of a legal system that enables their full social
rehabilitation.

