The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Canada, Peru, Slovakia and
Switzerland in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Tuliameni
Kalomoh, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs.

It is so decided.

In accordance with rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure and the understanding reached in the
Council's prior consultations, I welcome the
participation of Mr. Paul van Tongeren, Executive
Director of the European Centre for Conflict
Prevention; Mr. Andrea Bartoli, Chair of the Columbia
University Seminar on Conflict Resolution and faculty
coordinator of the Columbia University Conflict
Resolution Network; and Mr. Vasu Gounden, founder
and Executive Director of the African Centre for the
Constructive Resolution of Disputes.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document 8/2005/594, which contains the
text of a letter dated 7 September 2005 from the
Permanent Representative of the Philippines to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.

On behalf of the members of the Council, I
welcome the Ministers of Denmark, Greece, Peru,
Romania, Slovakia, Switzerland and the United
Republic of Tanzania.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

As another measure to optimize the use our time
in order to allow as many delegations to take the floor
as possible, I will not individually invite speakers to
take seats at the table or invite them to resume their
seats at the side of the Council Chamber. When a
speaker is taking the floor, the Conference Officer will
seat the next speaker on the list at the table.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Paul van Tongeren, Mr. Andrea
Bartoli and Mr. Vasu Gounden.

Before giving the floor to those speakers, I shall
give the floor to Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh, Assistant
Secretary-General, Department of Political Affairs, to
make a statement on behalf of the Secretary-General.


