Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I wish to
start by thanking you, Mr. President, for including this
issue on our agenda today. I welcome the fact that the
Secretary-General took the trouble to join us today, and
I thank him for his statement. I think that exemplifies
his commitment to doing more to protect civilians in
armed conflict. We are also grateful for his thought-
provoking report (S/2007/643) and to Sir John Holmes
for the work of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). I believe the discussion
today has demonstrated the centrality of this issue to
all of the work of the Council.

As the Secretary-General's report notes,
resolution 1674 (2006) was a watershed in the
Council's work in the protection of civilians. The
challenge is to build on that achievement. The United
Kingdom sees three roles that the Council should play:
first, in setting standards to be applied to the protection
of civilians during armed conflict; secondly, in
ensuring integrity and effectiveness in United Nations
missions; and thirdly, in pressuring and persuading
States to meet their obligations.

I wish to address the normative framework and
the need to put those norms into practice. I will also
highlight some country situations in which action is
needed.

Resolution 1674 (2006) affirmed the agreement
reached at the 2005 World Summit on the
responsibility to protect. The resolution recognizes the
primary responsibility of States for protecting their
own citizens, but also underscores the shared
responsibility of the international community to help
States fulfil that responsibility.

What we want is a partnership where
international assistance, for example in building
judicial capacity or in reforming the security sector,
helps strengthen States' ability to exercise their
sovereign responsibilities. But in those exceptional
cases in which States cannot or will not protect
civilians from the gravest abuses of their human rights,
the international community not only has a right to act,
but a responsibility to do so. That action can come in a
range of forms, from sanctions against those
responsible to direct intervention to protect civilians
and should always be proportionate and carefully
chosen.

That is part of the wider challenge of becoming
collectively more capable of anticipating and
preventing crises and more effective in our actions
when such crises arise. We therefore need to build on
the responsibility to protect through improving our
ability across the conflict cycle.

We need to do more before conflict breaks out by
being more aware of potential crises and ready to act
through a range of tools. The work of the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide and Mass Atrocities and the special adviser
on the prevention and resolution of conflict is central
to our efforts. We welcome those appointments. I join
my Belgian colleague in expressing the hope that their
positions will soon be confirmed.

We need to do more during conflict, through
more emphasis on humanitarian access and on
preventing or punishing abuses.

We need to do more post-conflict by being better
at stabilization and peacebuilding. In particular, as my
Prime Minister, Gordon Brown, has proposed, we need
to develop the capacity to deploy international civilian
capabilities to rebuild shattered societies, just as we
can deploy military units to help preserve the peace.

The report of the Secretary-General shows the
scale of the task we face. It details the scourge of
sexual violence, a problem caused by the sense of
impunity from justice that its perpetrators believe they
enjoy. If States cannot provide a functioning system of
law and order, it becomes the responsibility of the
international community to ensure that justice is done.
That is integral to building peace in post-conflict
societies and to deterring future crimes. United Nations
peacekeeping missions also have a crucial role to play
in tackling sexual violence.

In eastern parts of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, there are widespread abuses of the civilian
population by armed combatants, of which the brutal
and calculated practice of sexual violence is a
particularly grave example. All those responsible, in
the armed forces and in illegal armed groups, must be
brought to justice in order to secure justice for their
victims and to deter others. Therefore, in renewing the
mandate for the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo at the end of
this year, we should ensure more effective action,
including supporting the recent agreement between
Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
tackle the scourge of the Forces Democratiques de
Liberation du Rwanda, the former genocidaires and
other ethnic armed groups who terrorize the civilian
population.

The conflict in Darfur continues to be
characterized by gross and systematic violations and
abuses of human rights and of international
humanitarian law. In addition, the Government in
Khartoum continues to ignore the demands of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). One of the
indictees even remains a government Minister. The
Government of the Sudan is required to cooperate with
the ICC and to surrender the two individuals for whom

arrest warrants have been issued. The Council will
consider that issue in detail when the ICC Prosecutor
reports to us next month.

The Secretary-General's report contains
substantive recommendations. The United Kingdom
agrees that the United Nations needs to be more
systematic in including the protection of civilians in
the reporting we receive and the mandates we adopt.
And the Council should hear from OCHA and the
Department of Political Affairs, as well as the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, as we
consider peacekeeping issues, where protection is key.

Moreover, we agree that safe, timely and
unimpeded access for the delivery of assistance is
crucial. We welcome OCHA's initiative of developing a
monitoring and reporting mechanism. And we agree
that we need more emphasis on reporting on sexual
violence and on ways to address it, including sanctions
against those responsible.

Above all, we need to mainstream the protection
agenda in the Council's work and across the conflict
cycle. That is a big challenge, but it is one that we have
to meet. We will work with the Secretariat, Council
colleagues and others to take this forward.

Finally, I associate myself with the statement to
be made later by the representative of Portugal on
behalf of the European Union.

