Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak
Republic and Slovenia, the associated countries
Bulgaria and Romania, and the European Free Trade
Association countries members of the European
Economic Area Iceland and Norway declare that they
align themselves with this statement.

At the outset, I should like to thank you,
Mr. President, and all the other members of the
Security Council for giving us the opportunity to
express ourselves on this important matter.

The entry into force of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), on 1 July 2002,
and the subsequent establishment of the International
Criminal Court, which became fully functional this
year upon the election of the 18 Judges and the
Prosecutor, constitute a major step in the progressive
development of international law that will allow a
long-standing dream of humanity - to put an end to
impunity - to finally take shape. All States members
of the European Union have ratified the Statute.

The ICC is not just a judicial institution designed
to prevent and put an end to the impunity of the
perpetrators of serious crimes that are of concern to all
States, but is also an essential means of promoting
respect for international humanitarian law and human
rights law, thus contributing to freedom, security,
justice and the rule of law, as well as to the
preservation of peace and the strengthening of
international security. The objectives of the Rome
Statute are therefore in conformity with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

From the very outset, the European Union has
been strongly supportive of the early establishment of
the ICC and is, and will remain, firmly committed to its
effective functioning. In our Common Position,
adopted by the European Union Council of Ministers in
June 2001 and reaffirmed in June 2002, we pledged to
promote the widest possible participation in the
Statute, to share our experiences with regard to its
implementation and to provide technical assistance to
the best of our ability. That Common Position is now in
the process of being revised with a View to being
consolidated and updated and to take into account new
developments, such as the adoption of the General
Affairs and External Relations Council Conclusions on
the ICC of 30 September 2002 and the Guiding
Principles annexed thereto.

The promotion of the widest possible
participation in, and the implementation of, the Statute
in negotiations or political dialogues with third States,
with groups of States or with relevant regional
organizations, whenever appropriate, are declared
objectives of the European Union. In addition, the
European Union is determined to adopt initiatives to
promote the dissemination of the values, principles and
provisions of the Statute and related instruments.

The European Union reiterates its belief that the
concerns expressed by the United States about
politically motivated prosecutions are unfounded, since
those concerns have been met and sufficient safeguards
against such prosecutions have been built into the
Statute. Indeed, the latter contains substantive
safeguards and fair-trial guarantees to ensure that such
a situation will never arise. In addition, the European
Union can now point to the high moral character and
integrity of the 18 Judges and the Prosecutor of the
Court, who have been elected from among the most
highly qualified candidates in the world and who have
given, or are about to give, a solemn undertaking to
perform their functions impartially. Furthermore, the
Statute incorporates the principle of complementarity,
which places the primary responsibility for
investigation and prosecution with domestic
jurisdictions. The Court may assume responsibility as a
last resort and only when a State is unable or unwilling
to do so.

Among the various responses agreed upon by the
drafters of the Statute to address the concerns that I
have mentioned is article 16 of the Rome Statute. That
article states,

"No investigation or prosecution may be
commenced or proceeded with under this Statute
for a period of 12 months after the Security
Council, in a resolution adopted under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, has
requested the Court to that effect."

In our View, the article should be invoked only in
conformity with the Statute.

The European Union wishes to express once
again its appreciation to the United States for that
country's important contribution to peacekeeping
missions around the world. We should also like to
commend individual peacekeepers for their hard work
and dedication in trying to maintain or restore peace
and stability in risky, dangerous and volatile
environments. It is the strong belief of the European
Union that the ICC is no threat to peacekeeping, but a
welcome safeguard to protect peacekeepers against
serious crimes.

Security Council resolution 1422 (2002) states
that the Council intends to renew the request contained
in it for as long as may be necessary. It is clear that any
necessity to do so should also be evaluated in the light
of the positive effects that the International Criminal
Court will have on peacekeeping. In stating this, the
European Union would point to the significant number
of personnel its member States contribute to
peacekeeping operations. Our adherence to the Rome
Statute should be seen as an indication of complete
trust in the way peacekeepers operate under their
mandate and, at the same time, in the necessity to
properly investigate any allegations of criminal
conduct on their part, if need be.

The European Union is of the view that the
inclusion in resolution 1422 (2002) of the phrase

"renew the request under the same conditions
each 1 July for further 12-month periods for as
long as may be necessary" (resolution 1422 (2002), para. 2)

cannot be interpreted as permitting the automatic
renewal of that resolution without taking into account
the specific conditions under which such a request is
being made. The European Union firmly believes that
an automatic renewal of that resolution would
undermine the letter and the spirit of the Statute of the
International Criminal Court and of its fundamental
purpose - to put an end to impunity for the most
serious crimes of concern to the international
community by bringing to justice in all cases all those
within the Court's jurisdiction.

Finally, we urge all members of the Security
Council to do their utmost to reach a solution that will
preserve the integrity of the Rome Statute and ensure
the unimpeded continuation of peacekeeping
operations.

