The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Cuba, Egypt, Germany, Israel, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia,
Morocco, Norway, Pakistan, Senegal, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Turkey and Venezuela in which they request
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the consideration of the item, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 12 February
2007 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2007/83, and which reads as follows.

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council which will
be held Tuesday, 13 February 2007, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
take a seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Alvaro de Soto, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. De Soto to take a seat at the Council
table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 12 February 2007 from
His Excellency Mr. Paul Badji, representative of
Senegal, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Paul Badji.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Badji to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Alvaro de Soto, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General. I now give
him the floor.


