Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): Croatia attaches great
importance to this timely and relevant debate, the
relevance and importance of which are undoubtedly
confirmed by the high level of participation in this
gathering.

Croatia has aligned itself with the statement to be
delivered by the delegation of the European Union on
behalf of the Union. However, let me take this
opportunity to share a few additional remarks on this
important topic.

The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) was
established with the main aim of filling peacebuilding
gaps between security and reconstruction through
innovative yet coordinated, coherent and integrated
approaches directed at post-conflict recovery,
reconstruction and institution-building. In that regard,
the PBC's primary task of supporting countries
emerging from conflict was conceived as one bringing
together all relevant actors, marshalling the requisite
resources and providing strategic and concrete
recommendations in order to improve the coordination
of those efforts within and outside the United Nations.

Croatia strongly believes that effective
implementation of the PBC's mandate by all
stakeholders offers the best way to achieve the three
United Nations pillars - security, development and the
protection of human rights - all of which are
indispensable prerequisites for sustainable peace and
long-term stability.

Post-conflict peacebuilding, a phase that should
follow the cessation of hostilities, is, in our opinion,
just as important as bringing a conflict to an end. In
order to prevent the recurrence of conflict, a strong
nexus between peacekeeping and peacebuilding should
be established as soon as possible, based on a
coordinated, coherent, integrated approach, the prompt
implementation of a peace agreement and in-depth
knowledge of the situation on the ground.

In that regard, Croatia would like to stress the
important and supportive role played by the
Peacebuilding Support Office in drawing up
peacebuilding strategies, as well as the valuable
contributions of the PBC through its useful and
innovative working methods, making use of country-
specific configurations and meetings, which have
brought new and thought-provoking dimensions to the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture.

On the basis of its own national experience
regarding one of the most successful United Nations
peacekeeping missions, the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium, which contained significant
elements of peacebuilding, including demilitarization,
reconciliation and institution-building, Croatia
supports the Council's intention to further strengthen
coherence between peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding in its work. In particular, we view the
Council's practice of transforming some former
peacekeeping missions into integrated peacebuilding
missions as an important step in the right direction
towards assisting the PBC in implementing the
respective integrated strategic frameworks. Therefore,
cooperation between the Council and the PBC in that
regard is of utmost importance. However, we still see
room for further improvement. In particular, we should
consider the insight that the PBC could bring to
Council deliberations regarding specific issues on
countries that are on the agendas of both the Security
Council and the PBC.

Efforts to date by the PBC to simultaneously
address key security, political and social issues through
the development of integrated peacebuilding strategies,
as witnessed in all four countries on the PBC's agenda,
have been extremely important. They have clearly
demonstrated that the correlation and synergy among
these areas are elements necessary for successful
peacebuilding. Furthermore, we believe that a single
national strategy instrument encompassing all relevant
peacebuilding programmes and activities is a useful
innovation deserving further thorough consideration.

Equally, the United Nations, for its part, should
follow suit by unifying its own programmes and
activities so as to ensure it delivers as one. At the same
time, we should not overlook the lessons learned from
the country-specific approach: that, while some
commonality exists, no one size fits all and that each
and every country situation should be thoroughly
discussed and acted upon according to its own merits
and needs.

In all these efforts, national ownership of the
peacebuilding process is of paramount importance.
Peacebuilding should not evolve in a vacuum for its
own sake, but should build upon available domestic
resources and expertise, which introduces a unique
perspective otherwise not available to outsiders. This
approach allows for the appropriate development and
consolidation of necessary national governing
structures and policies that are in line with national
priorities. This, in turn, opens the way for greater
acceptance of a peacebuilding mission by the local
population.

In that context, Croatia strongly supports the idea
of developing a pool of civilian expertise drawn
primarily from regional resources, which would
significantly improve delivery by shortening the
preparation period and enable immediate deployment
of post-conflict stabilization teams. Moreover, Croatia
recognizes that the strengthening of civil society is of
particular importance in peacebuilding, where
non-governmental and civil society organizations may
be able to provide a valuable link between the PBC and
the strategy endorsed by the local population.

In underscoring the increasing regional
dimension of contemporary conflicts, we would
encourage further engagement and a deepening of
cooperation between the PBC and regional and
subregional organizations. A variety of United Nations
entities active in particular regions should also be part
of the equation.

It is clear that peacebuilding requires a
multidimensional approach supported by timely,
sustainable, predictable and flexible resources. As a co-
founder of the Peacebuilding Fund, Croatia fully
recognizes the critical role that peacebuilding funding
plays as an early investment towards sustainable peace
and development. In this regard, we note with
appreciation the special roles that the Fund and the
international financial institutions have been playing in
peacebuilding efforts. Furthermore, Croatia welcomes
efforts by the PBC to engage non-traditional donors
and partners in financing its activities, as well as its
attempts to ensure that national peacebuilding
obligations are fully matched with fulfilled promises
by the international community.

Croatia believes that, five years after its
establishment, the PBC is now ready to take on further
specific situations and add more countries to its
agenda. At the same time, we strongly support the
PBC's efforts to develop assessment tools to monitor
and measure the progress achieved in the
implementation of peacebuilding strategies and related
activities.

In conclusion, we express our hope that the
outcome of this debate will provide an important input
to the 2010 review process of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture currently under way, while
fully respecting the mandates of the different bodies
involved in this issue.

