Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): First of all, Sir, I would like to congratulate you
on your presidency of the Security Council and thank
you for having convened this very important meeting.

My country's delegation has looked at the concept
note that you circulated (S/2016/306, annex), and we
thank you for that as well. We agree with China's
convictions that terrorism is one of the most serious
threats that the world is currently encountering. It is a
common enemy of humankind as a whole. It therefore
behooves the international community, represented
by the United Nations and the Security Council, to
play its role in coordinating and leading international
cooperation to combat terrorism.

International counter-terrorism instruments urge
all Member States to take legislative and operational
measures to combat the scourge of terrorism. Despite
that fact, the Governments of some Member States,
which are not unknown to those present in the Chamber,
such as those of Saudi Arabia and Turkey, continue to
supply all types of assistance to terrorism. They provide
that assistance in the form of money, weapons, Tafkiri
extremist ideology, recruits and foreign mercenaries.
Furthermore, the Governments of other countries,
some of which are members of the Security Council,
continue to politicize counter-terrorist issues and deal
with them by applying double standards, while the
actions of Governments that support terrorism go on
unnoticed, despite the fact that firm accountability is
required for those actions.

Over the past five years, terrorism has continued
to target my country. It has targeted our people,
the State, our infrastructure, and our educational,
cultural, economic and social institutions, as well as
archeological treasures. Terrorism, barbarism and
criminality have reached an unprecedented level in
Syria. Moreover, other States have suffered abhorrent
acts of terrorism characterized by their great ferocity,
although the identity of the perpetrators has been
different. Nevertheless, that heavy toll has been
accompanied by several successes on the part of the
Syrian Arab Army and its allies in the fight against
terrorism. As examples, I will cite the liberation of the
historic city of Palmyra and of Cariatan from members
of Da'esh. Furthermore, we liberated numerous cities
and villages from the hands of Da'esh, the al-Nusra
Front and other terrorist groups that are operating
within Syrian territory.

My delegation reiterates once again that any
counter-terrorist effort will fail if it is in contravention
with the Charter of the United Nations and the principles
of international law and if it is not implemented through
full coordination with other countries concerned. Any
such effort will fail if other countries use terrorism as a
tool for their foreign policy and if we ignore the actions
of countries that support terrorism. In that regard, we
reaffirm that some countries have tried to justify their
military intervention in Syria. They claim that they
are intervening in order to fight Da'esh in accordance
with Article 51 of the Charter, but that is being done
without any coordination with the Syrian Government.
It is therefore a matter of manipulating international
law. The only effective way to combat terrorism is
by building an effective global alliance based on
international instruments and with the involvement of
the States affected, including Syria. Syria is the main
stakeholder combating terrorism in the region. In that
connection, the Syrian Arab Republic supports the
ideas laid out by His Excellency President Vladimir
Putin of the Russian Federation to combat terrorism.

The Syrian Arab Republic again urges the
United Nations and the Security Council to take the
following measures. First, we urge the full and robust
implementation and application of international
instruments to counter terrorism that we have adopted
over the years, including resolutions 1267 (1999),
1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014),
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015), as well as the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In doing
so, there must be no politicization, no manipulation
of the situation and no double standards. We urge the
Security Council not to ignore documents regarding
the information that some countries have provided on
terrorism. We urge all countries to bring an end to any
violations of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. The failure of the Security Council
in that matter seems to send a message implying the
tolerance of terrorists.

We must also combat hate speech. Extremist and

destructive speech have nothing to do with religions or
civilizations. In addition, we need to combat incitements
to hatred and violence. We must combat discrimination
and persecution based on religion, nationality, ethnicity,
colour or any other factor that could serve as collective
punishment for some sectors of society.

Furthermore, efforts need to be coordinated in
order to combat foreign terrorist fighters. Those foreign
terrorist fighters number in the tens of thousands.
According to United Nations reports, there appear
to be more than 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters,
from 115 countries, who have gone to Syria to kill
our people and destroy our civilization, economic
success and infrastructure. In addition, there need
to be additional border controls. Networks of foreign
terrorist fighters need to be dismantled. The resources
of terrorism, including funding, should be cut off. We
must also combat the illicit trafficking in Syrian oil
and its derivatives and in the archaeological relics from
our country.

We must have an international alliance against
Da'esh, which is destroying Syrian institutions
and infrastructure. It is not our network. We need
those infrastructures to rebuild our countries. We
need to ensure that information and communication
technology, the Internet, television and radio are not
used to promote or incite violence or to recruit people
for terrorist groups. We must also prevent terrorist
groups from getting their hands on weapons of mass
destruction and their delivery systems. We need to
prosecute those States that have provided assistance to
terrorists and those that have used chemical weapons
on numerous occasions, as was the case in our country
a few days ago.

The occupied Palestinian territories are still
suffering from Israeli occupation and State terrorism,
perpetrated by the occupying Power against them. That
form of terrorism, which started in the 1920s and 19305
with the Irgun and Haganah groups, has taken root,
thanks to the assistance provided to consecutive Israeli
Governments. We saw that, during the Syrian-Israeli
crisis, Israel provided assistance to those fighting
against us, and that such Israeli support crossed the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force line in
the Golan Heights. The Security Council must bring
that situation to an end.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates and
underscores the role played by women, young people,
civil society, religious leaders and the media in
combating terrorism. We reaffirm that we do not
expect of the United Nations today only a series of
reports or statements or instruments. What we want
is real resolve, the unfailing determination to combat
terrorism, to prosecute those who support terrorism.
We want resolve to spare humanity from that scourge
and, thereby, to build international peace and security.

