Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Madame President, for convening this
meeting. I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.

At the outset, I would like to offer my sincere
condolences to the King, Government and people of
our sister Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and to the Arab
and Muslim nations on the passing of His Royal
Highness, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Defence and Aviation Crown Prince Sultan Bin
Abdulaziz Al-Saud. I also offer my deep sympathies to
sisterly Turkey and its people in the wake of the
devastating earthquake there, which has claimed many
lives and inflicted great material damage.

In every position it has taken on the Middle East,
the Kingdom of Bahrain has supported all efforts
aimed at achieving a peaceful settlement of the Middle
East question on the basis of a two-State solution in
which Israel and Palestine live side by side in peace
and security, with Palestine guaranteed as a viable,
independent State within the 1967 borders. We
continue to play an active role on the Arab Peace
Initiative Committee, believing it to be the best
framework within which to achieve a peaceful
settlement.

In his address to the General Assembly during the
general debate, His Majesty King Hamad bin Issa Al
Khalifa of Bahrain said that

"Today more than ever, the international
community has a propitious opportunity to do
justice to the brotherly Palestinian people and to
help them to achieve their legitimate aspirations
by recognizing an independent Palestinian State
on their own national soil, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. That would put an end to an era of
bitter Arab-Israeli conflict, contingent on a
complete Israeli withdrawal from all occupied
Arab territories to the lines of 4 June 1967 in
Palestine, the occupied Syrian Arab Golan and
the occupied territories in southern Lebanon, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy and the Arab Peace
Initiative". (A/66/PV.]5, p. 8)

It no longer makes sense to continue to address
the Palestinian question in a routine manner. The
international community must take a bolder step
forward, not only in order to fulfil the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people but, more
importantly, to see justice done after so many decades
of occupation and unilateral attempts to achieve a
peaceful settlement of the Palestinian question. The
whole world, and the Quartet in particular, has seen the
Palestinian Authority make repeated concessions in its
efforts to attain its inalienable and legitimate rights,
chief among them the establishment of an independent
and viable Palestinian State, even as the international
situation evolves within this Organization. However,
the fine diplomacy and flexibility demonstrated has
been greeted by nothing but more settlement and
displacement activities, without regard for all the
international resolutions prohibiting such activities.

I remind the Council of what we have already
heard in previous meeting - the Palestinian Authority
is capable of managing State affairs, as has been
acknowledged by the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, and the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process. The Palestinian Authority
has proved its ability to establish sound institutions and
provide security for a viable State. We pay tribute to
President Mahmoud Abbas and Prime Minister Salam
Fayyad for this achievement, whereby the Palestinian
Authority has attained the goal it set itself two years
ago. This should be considered when the Palestinian
Authority's request for Palestine's full membership of
the United Nations is being addressed. We therefore
encourage the Organization, the Security Council and
the international community to accede to their request.

