Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this open
meeting. I also thank Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his comprehensive briefing.

The report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
(S/2003/449) provides a detailed description of the
situation in Timor-Leste a year after its independence.
The Government of Japan is pleased to note that much
has been achieved during the past year in the fields of
public administration, internal security and Timor-
Leste's relationship with Indonesia, including border-
control issues. However, various political and security
challenges remain to be overcome. We share the
Secretary-General's observation that further bilateral
assistance in such areas as public administration, the
judiciary, the police and national security will be
necessary even after UNMISET has concluded its
activities.

In this connection, recent incidents, such as riots
and armed attacks, are a source of great concern for all
of us. The Government of Japan welcomed Security
Council resolution 1473 (2003), which was adopted to
address this situation, and supports the revised
strategies outlined in the report of the Secretary-
General. It also supports the extension of UNMISET's
mandate for one more year, until 20 May 2004, as
recommended by the Secretary-General. The Japanese
Government intends to take the necessary steps to
enable its engineer group to continue contributing to
the successful completion of the mandates of
UNMISET, as well as to Timor-Leste's nation-building
efforts, in line with the modified downsizing schedule.

As stressed in the resolution, improving the
overall capabilities of the National Police of Timor-
Leste is a key priority. We are encouraged to note that
the workshop on capacity-building of the police, for
which Japan was pleased to provide funding, was
successfully held last week. We hope that it will
contribute to implementing the recommendations of the
joint assessment mission on policing.

Just one week ago, Senior Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, Ms. Ramos-
Horta, visited Japan and met with Foreign Minister
Kawaguchi. On that occasion, Mr. Ramos-Horta
emphasized that security in Timor-Leste cannot be
maintained solely by training and strengthening the
police force, and that it is also necessary to invite
investment and create job opportunities. We could not
agree with him more strongly. Japan has been playing a
major role in providing assistance for building a self-
sustainable nation of Timor-Leste. We have been
steadily implementing our pledge of assistance of up to
$60 million over the period of three years after
independence, with a focus on peace-building, as well
as on reconstruction in three key areas: agriculture,
infrastructure and human resource development. Above
all, human resource development is of particular
importance because it is the very basis of nation-
building. With the aim of enhancing national stability,
which is a prerequisite for development, we have
already allocated $8 million for improving health
conditions and reducing poverty, as well as for
providing employment opportunities for ex-combatants
through the Recovery, Employment and Stability
Programme for Ex-Combatants and Communities in
Timor-Leste (RESPECT). The Government of Japan
has also recently decided to extend an additional
$470,000 for the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation to facilitate national reconciliation in
Timor-Leste.

Mindful of the challenges that remain in Timor-
Leste, I wish to re-emphasize the importance for the
leadership of Timor-Leste of being united in leading
the country; for the people of Timor-Leste of
participating in the nation-building effort as a matter of
their own responsibility, and for the international
community of continuing to extend its support. For its
part, the Government of Japan will spare no effort to
extend as much assistance as it can for the
consolidation of peace in Timor-Leste.

