Mr. Govender (South Africa): South Africa
thanks Mr. Feltman for his briefing to the Council. We
congratulate Rwanda on assuming the presidency of the
Council this month.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

Today's debate is a welcome opportunity to
underscore once again the importance of finding a
lasting solution to the situation in the Middle East in
general, and the question of Palestine in particular.
As we have said in the past, these meetings have
degenerated into talk shops about the situation, with
countries restating their already known positions but
without producing any meaningful outcome. The sad
part about this is that, while we continue participating
in these routine meetings, the people of Palestine suffer
every day under the yoke of an illegal occupation,
with the occupying Power relentlessly underming
international law, including the resolutions of the
Council, with impunity.

South Africa remains deeply concerned at the
impasse in the Middle East peace process. Despite the
recent efforts of the United States leadership to revive
the peace process, the status quo remains. We hope
that the new coalition Government of Prime Minister
Netanyahu will remove all obstacles to the resumption
of peace talks, including the construction of illegal
settlements, and return to the negotiating table as soon
as possible and in good faith.

Needless to say, the settlements are not only
illegal under international law, but also remain a major
stumbling block to the resumption of direct negotiations
and the achievement of sustainable peace. The Israeli
settlement activities are confiscating Palestinian
territory essential for a future State and seek to isolate
East Jerusalem from other main Palestinian cities,
thereby seriously threatening the very achievability of
the two-State solution in line with the overwhelming
call for the creation of a sovereign, independent, viable
and contiguous Palestinian State, coexisting peacefully
alongside the State of Israel on the basis of the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Israel
should immediately stop its settlement activities as an
obligation under various Security Council resolutions
and international law.

With regard to the continuing violence, South
Africa reiterates its condemnation ofall acts ofviolence,
regardless of where they come from, as they undermine
the viability of the two-State solution. We are especially

concerned by the continued abuses perpetrated by
Israeli settlers against Palestinians and their property,
including the uprooting of olive trees, assaulting and
firing on Palestinians, and the demolition of Palestinian
homes, mosques, churches and cemeteries. We hope
that the Israeli authorities will take action against the
perpetrators of such acts of aggression.

Israel's announcement last month of its intention
to restart the monthly transfer of $100 million to
Palestine was long overdue, and we remind Israel
that the transfer of that money, which should never
have been held back, is a requirement under the 1993
Oslo Agreements. We also welcome the decision of
the United States Government to unblock of about
$500 million, which was blocked after Palestine was
admitted as a non-member observer State last year. We
reiterate our view that the withholding of the funds is
an illegal and immoral retributive act that constitutes
collective punishment of the Palestinian population and
negatively affects the effectiveness of the Palestinian
authority.

South Africa is concerned about the critical financial
challenges that the Palestinian Authority faces. These
challenges have the potential to reverse the gains made
by Palestine in its institution-building project and to
render the country unstable as service delivery declines.
In that connection, we call on Israel to urgently lift all
restrictions to allow for the development of the private
sector, trade and other economic activities that could
stimulate economic growth and address the Palestinian
Authority's fiscal sustainability in the short-to-medium
term. Sustained economic development is also critical
to addressing the deep needs of ordinary Palestinians
and to lift them out of abject poverty.

We have also taken note of the resignation of Prime
Minister Salam Fayyad and hope that his successor
will provide the necessary leadership to ensure the
socioeconomic and political stability of Palestine.

South Africa is deeply concerned about the plight
of the Palestinians who are illegally held in Israeli jails.
We deplore the death of Maysara Abu Hamdiyeh in
March this year, whose death could have been avoided
had it not been for medical neglect by the Israeli
authorities. Israel should equally address and improve
the living conditions of prisoners in order to end the
ensuing hunger strike. Palestinian prisoners have long
lived under appalling conditions in Israeli jails and the
international community has not done much about their
plight. In that regard, we call on Israel to respect the
human rights of all Palestinian prisoners and abide by
relevant international human rights and humanitarian
law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention. Israel
should ensure their safety, allow access to them by
family members and respect their basic human rights.

We reiterate our deep concern about the abuse
of the human rights of Palestinian children and their
detention. We are all very aware of the long-lasting
adverse psychological effects that this will have on this
vulnerable group. We have taken note of the February
2013 UNICEF report which, among other things,
concluded that:

"Each year approximately 700 Palestinian
children aged 12 to 17, the great majority of them
boys, are arrested, interrogated and detained by
Israeli army, police and security agents. In the
past 10 years, an estimated 7,000 children have
been detained, interrogated, prosecuted and/
or imprisoned within the Israeli military justice
system - an average of two children each day".

Regarding the situation in Gaza, South Africa
remains deeply concerned about Israel's continued
blockade. We call for an end to that man-made and
protracted humanitarian situation through the lifting of
the blockade on Gaza. The blockade and restrictions
imposed are in violation of international humanitarian
law and contrary to the will of the international
community as expressed in a number of Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 1515 (2003) and 1860 (2009).

The efforts of the international community towards
alleviating the humanitarian situation in Gaza are
commended. For its part, South Africa has contributed
an amount of 2 million rand to the humanitarian
programmes run by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in the Near
East.

South Africa has always maintained that the future
of Palestine is significantly dependent on the unity of
its people. In that connection, we therefore encourage
the Palestinians to strive for unity. In particular,
we implore Hamas and Fatah to work together and
collectively consolidate the gains of the Palestinian
people. Learning from our own experience, we believe
that intra-Palestinian unity is essential for long-term
reconciliation and sustainable peace in Palestine.

In conclusion, the deteriorating situation in the
broader region should not detract from our focus on
achieving a permanent negotiated settlement between
the two sides. It is therefore incumbent on the Security
Council and the Quartet to continue to carry out
their responsibilities without fear or favour and with
increased focus. We further call on the Council and
other stakeholders to accelerate efforts towards the
holistic resolution of the Middle East crisis, including
the Lebanese and Syrian tracks.

