Mr. Tessema (Ethiopia): May I express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to other
members of the Council, for this open debate on the
report of the Secretary-General on the establishment of
a peacekeeping force for the conflict between Ethiopia
and Eritrea. We are indeed grateful to the Secretary-
General for the timely report he has provided us. We
hope the Security Council will act sooner rather than
later in authorizing and deploying the peacekeeping
force.

During this morning's discussion much has been
said as to how it would have been possible to avoid this
costly war fought between my country and Eritrea -
so much so that it is almost as if we had chosen to go
to war just because we wanted to do so. We share the
View that the war should not have happened. However,
we differ from others in determining who is to blame
for starting and carrying out that war of aggression. In
this regard, our conscience is clear. Not only were we
victims of blatant aggression, but our Government and
people also made their best effort to end it peacefully.
We need not remind some Council members of our
plight for upholding international action against a
blatant war of aggression committed by our neighbour,
Eritrea.

Since the signing at Algiers of the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities, on 18 June 2000, we have, for
our part, continued strictly to adhere to the Agreement
in both spirit and deed. Unfortunately, even at this
stage we are again not lucky enough to have a partner.
It is in this regard that the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities also calls upon both parties to have a sense
of coolness, to slow down all negative propaganda and
to place on hold all actions that were done before the
war. Unfortunately, once again thousands of women
and children are being deported from Eritrea to
Ethiopia under inhumane and harsh conditions, as the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has
reported. Two days after the signing of the Agreement,
10,000 Ethiopians were deported from Eritrea. To this
day, the ICRC has not visited a single prisoner of war
in Eritrea. This does not contribute to confidence-
building measures.

On the Secretary-General's report, I must
apologize: I was not fortunate enough to hear
the briefing by Under-Secretary-General Miyet.
Nevertheless, we have read the report carefully and
have consulted with the Secretariat on some aspects of
it. We are glad to note that the main tenets of the
Secretary-General's report are to our satisfaction. The
core issue of mandate has been fully reflective of the
elements of the Algiers Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities. The size of the Mission, as well as other
logistical issues, are acceptable. Of course, other issues
that are of a detailed nature and that will come up in
the day-to-day running of the peacekeeping operation
need to be worked out in further consultations. Having
said this, we want to reiterate our full commitment to,
and cooperation with, the United Nations in this regard.

As to the allegations against my country made by
the representative of Eritrea, unfortunately this has
been the experience of my Government for the last two
and a half years. It is simply a blatant lie, characteristic
of the Government of Eritrea, to bring the issue of
refugees forward as if it had happened today and as if
Ethiopia were responsible for it. We will not respond to
it; it does not merit a response.

May I remind the representative of Eritrea that
while the situation in Eritrea is indeed a desperate and
destitute one, my Government has no responsibility for
its taking place.

In addition, we gave our word to the mediators
and to the OAU at Algiers that issues on the Security
Council's agenda will be discussed in the Security
Council, and that issues that need to be discussed at the
proximity talks will be discussed at the proximity talks.
It was not our intention to mix them up here or there.
Unfortunately, this has been the experience of our
Government with the Government of Eritrea.

Having said this, we look forward to the
deployment of the peacekeeping operation. We have so
far coordinated and cooperated with the team that was
in our country. As was said by many, we also need the
international community to address effectively the
humanitarian situation we are in.

