Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We thank the Peruvian
presidency for convening today's important meeting
and for your able leadership of the Security Council in
addressing the Council's agenda. We also thank Under-
Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing
on the situation, one that regrettably worsens every day
that action to ensure justice is delayed and that a political
horizon for a peaceful solution remains obstructed.

We have come to this Chamber time after time,
appealing to, calling on and imploring the Security
Council to act to alleviate the human suffering, to
salvage the prospects for peace and to contribute to
making that peace a reality. We remain convinced that
such action, in line with international law, the Council's
resolutions and its responsibility for international peace
and security under the United Nations Charter, is the
only way to bring an end to this grave injustice.

Respect for the law and human rights and
establishment of justice are the only way forward.
Those who would tell us otherwise are setting us
up for decades more of suffering and insecurity for
all - Palestinians, Israelis and the entire region. Let me
add in this regard: all colonialists and occupying Powers
throughout history have continuously and repeatedly
tried to substitute freedom with the improvement of
peoples' living conditions and did not succeed in a
single instance. They will not succeed in the case of the
Palestinian people, as we will never be the exception to
the rule. And despite all those who come from Within
or outside the Security Council to try to convince us
that what we are doing does not make sense, saying
that they have the magic formula, we know that their
formula has been tried throughout history, but it has
never succeeded. It will not succeed this time either.

After more than 52 years of Israel's illegal
occupation of our land, its gross, violent denial of
the rights of our people and its constant efforts to
dispossess and displace, it is past high time to justly
and permanently redress the situation. This is a blatant
situation of belligerent colonial foreign occupation,
attested to by any measure ofthe law and by the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the International Court
of Justice, countless regional and global organizations,
academia and the international community in its near
entirety - and it must be brought to an end.

Absent accountability, including for the gravest
violations, this foreign occupation is rapidly mutating
into apartheid, bringing shame to all who have pledged
to never allow such denigration of human beings to
occur again. Moreover, as many have long observed
with regard to the question of Palestine, the failure
to uphold the law on this issue has undermined the
international rules-based system, exposing its flaws
and total dependence on political will for effect and
allowing for its cynical exploitation.

This situation can never be normalized. The legal,
political and moral obligations incumbent upon the
Security Council and the international community as
a whole are clear, as are the principles and values that
are so fundamental for peace and security in our world.
However, as we have heard from Israel's representatives
and more recently from its staunchest supporter in the
Council, there are those who deride their principles
and values as things of the past or mere slogans and
who are blatantly dismissive of Palestinian rights. In
their calculus, the law and morals do not matter; only
raw power and delusions of superiority do. In clearing
the way for a future devoid of values and principles,
they not only expose the emptiness of their claims of
seeking a peaceful, secure and better future for all,
but do a disservice to humankind by setting dangerous
precedents with far-reaching implications.

All of the foregoing was starkly reflected in the
scenes of destruction and injustice witnessed yesterday
in occupied Palestine in the Sur Baher neighbourhood
of the Wadi Al-Hummus area of Jerusalem, where
Israel has issued military orders for the demolition
of 10 residential buildings, comprising at least 70
apartments and affecting hundreds of families. Instead
of demolishing the illegal wall, Israel is now using the
wall as a pretext to demolish Palestinian homes.

I can show Council members a few pictures of
yesterday's reality; they depict some of the homes
that were destroyed and demolished. In front of these
homes, we see their owners watching the demolition by
the Israeli occupying authorities, who show complete
disregard for the suffering of children who are seeing
the furniture of their homes being thrown outside while
they are watching their family homes being destroyed
and demolished. Such plans and actions, deliberate
and systematic in nature, constitute gross violations of
United Nations resolutions and the Charter prohibition
on acquisition of territory by force, grave breaches of
the Fourth Geneva Convention, disrespect for the 2004
International Court of Justice advisory opinion and war
crimes pursuant to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC).

Yet, ignoring its legal obligations and the appeals
of the United Nations, States and Palestinian, Israeli
and international human rights organizations, Israel
began yesterday to demolish, as I have mentioned, the
homes in Sur Baher. In the early hours of Monday, a
large contingent of Israeli soldiers entered the homes
of the families residing there and forced them to leave
before proceeding to destroy the homes using military
bulldozers and massive amounts of dynamite. As I have
just shown Council members, the scenes have been
shocking and heartbreaking.

The families displaced and dispossessed of their
properties and life's belongings yesterday include 17
persons, 11 of whom are children. Nine are Palestine
refugees who have been traumatized by yet another
displacement. As the destruction continues, 350 other
Palestinians fear the same loss, in addition to the
thousands more Palestinians, especially in occupied
East Jerusalem, who are under the threat of pending
demolition orders by Israel.

For these families, the anguish is immense and the
situation disastrous. Their homes have not been taken by
an act of nature such as those we sadly witness around
the world; rather they have been taken by a deliberate
decision by the Israeli Government and its so-called
Supreme Court of Justice, which have assumed rights
and privileges that the people of Israel are not entitled
to in order to strip another people of their legitimate
rights, land and property. This is a blatant act of ethnic
cleansing and forced transfer; it is tantamount to a war
crime and it must be fully condemned and prosecuted
as such.

Israel is not the sovereign in the area of Sur Baher/
Wadi Al-Hummus, just as it is not the sovereign in any
part of the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967,
including East Jerusalem. Israel, the occupying Power,
does not hold any of the rights it has accorded to itself
to carry out such colonization in our land. The Israeli
Government, its officials and military personnel must
be held accountable for these crimes, and reparations
and restitution for these losses must be obligatory upon
the occupying Power. The State of Palestine will spare
no effort and will continue exploring every avenue to
end impunity and ensure justice for victims, including
through the ICC.

We are informed by over five decades of Israeli
occupation policies. The pretext may vary but the
objective is always the same: an illegal land grab. They
may declare closed military areas, green areas, new
archaeological sites, a new road or a new tunnel, but
they always mean land confiscation. Religion, history
and security are placed at the service of that colonial
project to the detriment of the rights of the Palestinian
people and the interests of the Israeli people.

So when Israel announced the excavation of yet
another tunnel in occupied East Jerusalem, its true
intentions were obvious. Its recent inauguration of
the so-called Pilgrims Road, with the support of the
United States Ambassador to Israel and other American
officials, was yet another illegal act attempting to assert
sovereignty where there is none and to alter the character
and status of that Holy City in flagrant contravention
of United Nations resolutions, revealing yet again the
occupation's expansionist, extremist intentions.

Is that the better life that some United States
administration officials claiming to seek peace speak
of? Is that the future touted by the failed, so-called
Peace to Prosperity workshop convened last month,
which neglected to even minimally acknowledge the
root causes of the conflict, the reality of a half-century
of occupation and the basic rights of the Palestinian
people, we wonder?

When people live peacefully, even under conditions
of constant oppression, and when they work hard,
support themselves and build homes for themselves on
their own land only to see those homes destroyed under
pretexts that are as false as they are illegal, how can that
possibly contribute to a better life, a sense of dignity and
stability? How can such dispossession, as was inflicted
on hundreds of thousands of Palestinians before them,
foster any beliefthat peace and coexistence are possible?
It cannot. No amount of spin or propaganda - or stories
told inside or outside this Chamber - can hide the fact
that those actions are being taken in a grave breach of
international humanitarian law that amounts to massive
collective punishment.

Yet, though dispossessed and displaced, deprived
and isolated, the Palestinian people remain. They have
been and will continue to be resilient. They will not
submit or surrender. There is no people on this Earth that
will willingly give up the right to freedom and human
dignity, and I say that in the presence of representatives
of nations that have fought valiantly to free themselves
from occupation. Those members who have lived under
colonial domination and fought against colonialism to
acquire their freedom would not consider for a second
exchanging their freedom for money or a better life.
Freedom was always the most important thing and we
are exactly like them. Freedom is the most important
thing for us.

The continuation of those criminal, inhumane
actions, like all the crimes before them over more than
70 years of injustice, have sown deep resentment, anger
and pain among our people, while the international
community's silence and inaction have only deepened
our hurt, despair and sense of abandonment. The
colonization and annexation of our land by Israel, its
suffocation of Gaza, its violence, terror and incitement
against our people, its killing of our children, its
imprisonment of our people, its assaults on our holy
sites, its theft of our natural and financial resources and
its destruction of our future must be halted.

The global consensus on the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and to the same freedoms
cherished worldwide, on the principles and parameters
of a just solution, remains strong, and we thank and
salute members for holding firmly to their collective
and unanimous position in spite of all the efforts of
some to try to convince them otherwise on the basis of
big ideas that were not even shared with them.

Those principles and parameters and the
commitment to their realization are reaffirmed in
this Chamber every month. That consensus has been
reaffirmed by recent summits of the League of Arab
States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)
and the African Union, as well as by the ministerial
meetings of the OIC and the Non-Aligned Movement,
and it remains at the core of the international position.
At every juncture, calls are made for action to achieve
the two-State solution based on the 1967 borders in
accordance with international law, the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principle of land
for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map.

Equally consistent are the calls for action to bring
an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967;
to realize the independence and sovereignty of the
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living side by side with Israel on the basis of secure
and recognized borders; and to achieve a just solution
for the Palestine refugees in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948. The consensus
remains that such a solution would be the guarantor of
just, lasting and comprehensive Israeli-Palestinian and
Arab-Israeli peace and security.

We are grateful for those principled positions
and the solidarity extended to our just cause and our
people, including to Palestine refugees through the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. However, commitment to
principles and humanitarian assistance alone cannot
remedy that abysmal situation and make peace possible.

International action, in line with legal, political and
moral duties concerning the Palestine question, must be
taken. There must be accountability. All the legitimate
tools that are politically and legally available, including
prosecution in courts and sanctions, must be pursued
without hesitation.

The Security Council must shoulder its
responsibilities and act immediately, in line with its
resolutions, to compel a halt to the occupation's crimes,
avert further deterioration of the situation, protect
innocent civilians and salvage the chances for a just
peace. Israel must bear the consequences ofits violations
and its disregard of the international community's will.

States must also act, individually and collectively,
to adhere to the relevant resolutions in both word and
deed, and to uphold their legal obligations, including the
obligation not to recognize or render aid or assistance to
the current illegal situation and the obligation to ensure
accountability. That must include action in respect of
the call for distinction in resolution 2334 (2016) and
all other relevant resolutions, including resolution 478
(1980) on Jerusalem.

Only such action and pressure can bring change and
salvage the chances for peace. Continuing to appease
and coddle Israel, the occupying Power, can only lead
to more of the same impunity and worse. We will do so
at our peril, but also at the peril of the Israeli people
and the region as a whole, which will continue to be
deprived ofthe justice, peace, security and development
that so many have long sought and struggled for. Do not
let another generation suffer that injustice.

