Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I should
like to commend the Chinese presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February for having organized
this debate. I also welcome Mr. Wang Yi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China, as
well as all the other Ministers present here today. I
thank as well the Secretary-General for his important
briefing.

When the States victorious in the Second World
War met in San Francisco in 1945 to establish the
United Nations, their hope was to envision a peaceful,
just and egalitarian world. In spite the shortcomings
at the time the Charter of the United Nations was
conceived and the changing realities of our world, the
hopes of that time remain alive today. Although the
vision set out in 1945 for a future world may diverge
from current reality, as you, Mr. President, pointed out
in your concept note (S/2015/87/annex), our world today
is still characterized by a trend towards multipolarity,
economic globalization and the desire for peace and
security. As several speakers have indicated, this
new reality undoubtedly requires a new look into the
strategies undertaken by the United Nations.

The maintenance of international peace and security
nevertheless reamains the primary objective of the
United Nations and the international community,
especially given the great suffering being endured by
civilians owing to the proliferation and intensity of
conflicts as well as the new terrorist momentum. This
situation should more than ever lead the international
community to commit to the purposes and principles
of the Charter with renewed importance. In that regard,
the Millennium Declaration, adopted by Heads of State
and Government in 2000, recognizes in the purposes
and principles of the United Nations not just a universal
value, but rather an eternal one. However, while the
aspiration to peace remains the main concern in the
world, today as it was yesterday, achieving it has become
more difficult with the passing of 70 years since the
establishment of the Organization. In that regard, we
are quite justified in questioning the effectiveness of
the Security Council in tackling these issues. However,
the reasons for this are well known- and they are not
irreversible.

It is worth recalling, if only to lament the fact,
that in today's world, characterized by inequality and
underdevelopment, injustice, disregard for human
rights and a lack of respect for the rule of law, at
both the national and international levels, one cannot
hope for peace that is in keeping with our ideals. All
of our countries, developing and developed, all share
responsibility for this situation. The sometimes abusive
recourse to force and the right of the veto at the Security
Council diminishes to zero the efforts of the Council
and prevents it from achieving its objectives. The world
still remembers the failures of the Organization in
resolving the Palestinian issue and in preventing and
managing mass crimes, such as in Rwanda, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and other more recent examples, such as
in Syria.

Today we can all agree that it is as a result ofUnited
Nations action that the world has not experienced
another major conflict. Of course, it should be possible
to do better by pooling our efforts and to obtain from the
Security Council a more cohesive and comprehensive
strategy to harness the strengths of its members to
restore peace in the world, rather than acting in a
case-by-case manner. Furthermore, in line with the
Charter, the Council should seek peace and security
first and foremost through the peaceful settlement of
disputes, as well as through preventive action. Former
Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali already set out the
outlines for such action. It is the ability to work to that
end that will open up a path towards implementing
reform of this body.

Given the nature of current regional conflicts,
the Security Council should be able to better
strengthen cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, above and beyond the periodic exercise
in consultation, so as to lend the necessary financial and
technical support to assist them in facing the situations
they face.

The primary objective of the United Nations is to
maintain international peace and security. That has
not yet been achieved, but the principles upon which
it is based have experienced various transformations
and changes, becoming today fundamental rules for
peaceful relations among States. The principles of
non-interference in domestic affairs, the non-use of
force in international affairs, the sovereign equality of
States, respect for territorial integrity and for human
rights and the rights of people to decide on their own
future are all enshrined in the 1970 Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, which today
serves to strengthen their universal nature.
Furthermore, thanks to the international
community's firm support for peoples' right to self-
determination, the United Nations has served as
the framework for all new States' independence.
Despite the tendency of certain States to interfere in
the domestic affairs of others, the use of force is no
longer a preferred approach to resolving disputes in
international relations. The United Nations, which
remains an unparalleled forum for multilateral
development cooperation, is also striving, together
with regional subregional organizations and through its
Secretariat, to offer a better framework for mediation
and contributes greatly to developing international
justice processes for the peaceful resolution of various
disputes around the world.

In conclusion, no State today can question the
legitimacy of the purposes and principles of the
United Nations. They have become universal, and their
standing is such that the entire international community
has supported them, as confirmed recently at the 2005
World Summit of Heads of State and Government.
Finally, as far as my country is concerned, we will
remain true to the ideals of the Organization. We would
like to reiterate our commitment to respect for the
Charter and the faithful implementation of international
law for a peaceful, just and equitable world.

