Mr. Kolby (Norway): Let me join others in
thanking the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Guehenno, for his
excellent briefing. I reiterate Norway's full support for
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Hans Haekkerup, and for the main priorities he has
outlined for the further work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in implementing resolution 1244 (1999).

We support the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to prepare for
province-wide elections in Kosovo. However, elections
should be held only when all necessary requirements
are met. Premature or ill-prepared elections for a
provincial assembly risk undermining the stability we
set out to bolster. Among the steps that need to be
taken is to define the role and functions of a provincial
assembly. In elaborating a framework for elections, it
will be also be crucial to ensure arrangements that
facilitate the participation of minorities and that allow
their legitimate interests to be adequately represented.

Norway agrees that another priority must be the
strengthening of the judiciary and law enforcement.
Ethnically based violence must be curbed and the
widespread criminality combated. The lack of public
trust in the law enforcement agencies and in the
judiciary makes this an urgent task.

We further appreciate the emphasis placed by Mr.
Haekkerup on the establishment of a good working
relationship with Yugoslav authorities. Such a
relationship should allow for consultations on all main
issues pertaining to resolution 1244 (1999), including
the elaboration of a framework for elections and for a
provincial assembly.

We are very concerned about the recent surge in
tension and violent clashes in Mitrovica, which
underline the need for additional confidence-building
efforts. Kosovo Serb and Kosovo Albanian leaders
must take a larger responsibility for preventing further
escalation of violence. Any attacks on international
personnel or on minorities must be condemned in the
strongest terms.

Developments in the Presevo Valley continue to
give reason for deep concern. The tense situation in the
area threatens to make it the next focal point of conflict
in the Balkans, with potential implications not only for
Serbia proper, but also for the Kosovo province as well
as for neighbouring countries. With the arrival of
spring, tension might easily escalate further. It is
therefore paramount that the crisis be addressed now.
The Belgrade authorities have taken a
constructive approach to the situation in southern
Serbia. Norway welcomes the elaboration of a
comprehensive plan on how to address the crisis, as
recently discussed in the Serbian and Federal
Governments.

The seriousness of the situation on the ground
requires a rapid implementation of the plan. The
dialogue established between the Serb authorities and
ethnic Albanian leaders in southern Serbia is an
encouraging first step in this respect. While it is urgent
to initiate further confidence-building measures, we
believe it is also important to provide international
assistance, as requested by Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia authorities, without delay. Given careful
and speedy implementation, the constructive
participation of all involved and adequate international
assistance, the plan will contribute to reducing tension
in the area.

The Kosovo Force and UNMIK must further
strengthen their efforts to curb violations of the ground
safety zone. This should be carried out in close
cooperation with the Belgrade authorities. At the same
time, local Albanian leaders must be discouraged from
providing overt or implicit support to the armed
groups.

Let me end by expressing Norway's full support
for the work of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia. Its mandate also covers
Kosovo, and we trust it will be accorded full
cooperation by all parties involved.

