I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime and Mr. Jacques Letang for shedding light on the situation in Haiti. As we all know, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has placed significant stress on Haiti's already fragile health-care system. Reports of attacks on COVID-19 patients, and on the medical facilities treating them, are deeply concerning, as fear and distrust will only worsen the situation. In this challenging time, the United States stands with Haiti. To date, we have committed over $16 million in assistance to support Haitian efforts aimed at fighting COVID-19. Because the peak for COVID-19 infections in Haiti has yet to come, it is essential that all Haitians work together to limit the spread of the virus. We note with concern the spread of COVID-19 within the country's overcrowded prisons, and call on the Haitian Government to fully follow through on its 27 March decision to release pretrial detainees accused of minor crimes and medically vulnerable prisoners nearing completion of their sentences. This is a time for action, not for talk. It is equally important that the Government continue its work on needed political, economic and social reforms. President Moise's 18 May speech stressing his commitment to holding elections is a positive step, and we encourage the Haitian Government and all political actors to reach a political accord and find a way forward, in the interests, above all, of the Haitian people. We note the gains made by the Haitian National Police (HNP) as it continues its efforts aimed at addressing community and gang violence and at reducing kidnappings. The HNP's General Inspectorate has acted positively to improve human rights accountability, a welcome step towards increased transparency. However, as we have previously noted, the continuing failure to provide the HNP with required resources places its hard-won gains at risk. Once again, this is a time for action, not just talk. We must also express our concern regarding the lack of accountability for perpetrators of human rights abuses, including in La Saline and Bel Air. Steps must be taken to avoid reinforcing an environment of impunity. Finally, as Haiti responds to the pandemic and to the underlying drivers of instability, it is essential to strengthen the rule of law and end the scourge of corruption. We are listening to Mr. Letang and we are reinforcing his concerns and supporting the citizens of Haiti. And I must say to President Moise and to all of Haiti's political leaders: It is time to set aside their differences and to come together to build the strong institutions that will deliver a more prosperous and secure future for all Haitians.
