Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
join in welcoming Judge Pocar and Judge Mose, as
well as Prosecutors Carla del Ponte and Hassan J allow,
and thank them for their presentations.

We are pleased to note that there is progress
being made by the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) as they work to
execute their respective completion strategies. We
commend the judgements that have been concluded
and delivered, and look forward to further progress in
that regard. We also note the outstanding work and
challenges that continue to confront the two Tribunals.

With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, one such challenge is the
disappointing recognition that 18 indictees still remain
at large. In our view, that makes a statement about the
lack of full cooperation by States with the ICTR.

Bearing that constraint in mind, we are pleased to
note that the ICTR is still within the scope of
implementing its completion strategy by 2008.
However, the appeals process presents a different
picture. It is doubtful whether appeals from the ICTR
can be accommodated by the ICTY Appeals Chamber
by the projected date of 2010. Obviously, as the
workload on the Trial Chambers of the two Tribunals
decreases, the load will be shifted to the Appeals
Chamber. At some point the Council may have to
address the question of increasing the number of
judges in the Appeals Chamber, to facilitate the overall
completion strategy.

Once again, we commend the ICTR for the
adoption of measures that have made it possible to
speed up trials, for the solution found with regard to
the problem of obtaining witnesses from Rwanda, and
for the Trial Chamber provisions allowing for two
defense counsels, under which, in the absence of one,
the other would be available to continue representing a
defendant.

The transfer of cases to national jurisdictions is
an important factor in the completion strategy as
provided in resolution 1503 (2003). We welcome the
fact that the ICTR Prosecutor intends to transfer five of
the 15 detainees awaiting trial at Arusha to national
jurisdictions and is also considering the transfer of
over 40 case files, including those of 12 indictees who
are yet to be apprehended.

However, we are concerned by a report that the
Office of the Prosecutor may face problems in
undertaking the transfer exercise. Some of the setbacks
are national laws that do not confer jurisdiction to
prosecute, the inability of some countries to handle the
cases and the lack of resources to support such
complex prosecutions. That is a challenge that
countries need not face alone. Indeed, we recall that
resolution 1503 (2003) called on the international
community to assist national jurisdictions, as part of
the completion strategy of the Tribunals, in improving
national capacities to prosecute cases transferred from
the ICTY and ICTR to national jurisdictions.

There is therefore a need to obtain specific
proposals from the Secretariat, and indeed from the
Tribunals, as to what concrete mechanisms can be put
in place to implement that particular element of the
resolution as a way of truly supporting the completion
strategy that the Council has established for the two
Tribunals. In addition, since the bulk of those cases
concern Rwanda, we note that the Prosecutor is still
discussing the question of the death penalty with the
Government of Rwanda. That is a sensitive issue that
risks the imposition of double standards on similar
crimes. We welcome the fact that there is progress
being made to bridge the differences that exist.

However, another important issue is that of the
availability of resources to Rwanda to enable it to
handle the workload. Rwanda is still overwhelmed by
the ongoing genocide trials. It is important to lay down
a strategy to build the capacity of the Rwandese
judicial system to enable it to handle the cases referred
to it under Rule 11 bis. We applaud the efforts that the
ICTR has exerted to that end.

Lastly, with regard to the ICTR, Tanzania
supports the request for the extension of the mandate of
11 judges for a period of 19 months beyond their
current terms. As pointed out by Judge Erik Mose, that
course of action will avert potential disruption in the
work of the Tribunal.

Turning to the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, we commend the further steps
proposed by the working group on speeding up trials,
chaired by Judge Bonomy. We pay tribute to the
sensitivity shown to the fact that the imposition of any
measures cannot be at the expense of due process.

We are conscious of the fact that while
implementing the ICTY completion strategy by 2009
remains relevant, it stands to suffer from a number of
factors, such as the availability of witnesses and
difficulties pertaining to State cooperation in the
apprehension of indictees. Such lack of cooperation not
only undermines the Tribunal's jurisdiction, it also
delays justice for the victims and for the people of the
former Yugoslavia.

It is in that sense that we consider the matter of
State cooperation as an issue of the utmost importance
for all Member States of the United Nations and for the
international community. A serious commitment by all
countries will deny shelter to fugitives from the
jurisdiction of both the ICTR and the ICTY. We have to
shoulder our responsibilities in apprehending them and
handing them over to the two bodies for justice and
closure.

Finally, we appeal to United Nations Member
States to pay their contributions to the two Tribunals in
full and on time. Contributions from Member States are
critical if the Tribunals are to fulfil their mandates and
meet their completion strategies. It is unfortunate that
those contributions have often been lacking when they
were needed most. Those circumstances need to be
reversed, in the interest of our collective pursuit of
justice, peace and stability.
