Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): My delegation had no
intention to speak at this debate, but some thoughts
expressed during the discussion encouraged us to take
the floor.

In accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, Member States conferred upon the Security
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security and agreed that, in
carrying out its duties under that responsibility, the
Council acts on their behalf. At the same time, Chapter
VIII of the Charter encourages cooperation between
the United Nations and regional arrangements in the
peaceful settlement of disputes.

Since the 2005 World Summit and the adoption
of resolution 1631 (2005), important progress has
been achieved in enhancing cooperation between the
United Nations and regional partners across a full
range of areas - from the maintenance of international
peace and security and humanitarian assistance, to
development and the protection of human rights. Indeed,
in a number of instances, the relevant international
organizations have proved to be indispensable
mechanisms for promoting international and regional
peace and security and cooperation in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. At the same time, serious challenges
remain. While regional organizations are normally well
positioned to understand the causes of armed conflict
owing to their knowledge of the region, it is obvious
that not all of them can boast the reality, political will
and institutional capacity to ensure compliance by
Member States with their statutory commitments.

First and foremost, it is critical that all Member
States adhere to their obligations as they laid out
in the Charter of the United Nations with respect
to the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States. Unfortunately, we still face
instances in which States that are responsible for
violations of international law and regional politically
binding obligations not the only continue to benefit
from membership of regional and subregional
organizations, but also abuse such a privilege with a
View to undermining the efforts towards achieving a
peaceful solution to regional security problems.

Furthermore, as far as regional arrangements
established for collective defence purposes are
concerned, it is essential to avoid any ambiguity in
terms of their area of responsibility and the conditions
of invoking collective defence and to ensure that their
respective functions are framed and guided by the
Charter of the United Nations. It is also important
that the collective defence shield not be misused by
aggressors for consolidating the situations created by
the unlawful use of force against other States.

Our firm belief is that the United Nations should
be resorted to by Member States in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Organization, and
not misused for the political advantage of those who
gravely violate international law and advocate the
culture of impunity.
It is regrettable that the contribution of the
delegation of Armenia to our debate was to focus its
statement on misinformation and misinterpretation, the
only purpose of which is to deny its responsibility for
the crimes committed in the course of its aggression
against Azerbaijan.

While speaking in the Security Council, the
representative of Armenia omitted a reference to
the relevant resolutions adopted by the Council in
response to armed attacks against Azerbaijan and the
subsequent occupation of its territories. None of the
Security Council resolutions were implemented by

Armenia, which continues to take purposeful measures
to consolidate the gains of the use of force and ethnic
cleansing and build up its military presence in the
occupied territories of Azerbaijan. By disregarding the
Charter of the United Nations and international law,
Armenia clearly demonstrates who is actually pursuing
a destructive and militaristic policy and openly
challenging the ongoing political efforts towards a
resolution of the conflict.

The meeting rose at 1.45 pm
