Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today's open debate on a topic
that the Council should indeed address and for inviting
Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, the Secretary-
General's Envoy on Youth, and Mr. Graeme Simpson,
Director of Interpeace USA. I thank them for their very
insightful briefings.

I would also like to welcome in particular Ms. Sophia
Pierre-Antoine of Haiti and Ms. Kessy Ekomo-Soignet
of the Central African Republic. France welcomes the
youth representative who is here in the Security Council
for the first time.

First, I would like to echo and underscore that
it is important to combat preconceived notions and
stereotypes about young people, embrace their true
potential and give them the trust and support they
deserve. Although, youth is synonymous with vitality
and energy, young people are paradoxically often
viewed as a burden and, as it pertains to security, even
a threat. They are puppets of the Violence deemed to be
intrinsic or easily manipulated by armed or criminal
groups. Stereotypes about young people serve to
justify the use of repressive force against them and
violations of their most basic rights, in particular their
right to peaceful protest and to be heard, including in
armed conflict.

Young people are too often the victims of
discrimination and are by and large excluded from
the decision-making processes of political institutions
and from the labour market. The majority of young
people demonstrate a genuine ability to work together
to propose innovative solutions to problems they
encounter or to the ills of the societies in which they
live. It is therefore essential to reflect on how to provide
young people with greater holistic support.

That can be achieved by improving the likelihood
of their inclusionin political, social and economic
endeavours and developing psychosocial and
reintegration support mechanisms. It can also be done
by acknowledging that the key to ending the exclusion
of young people and their recruitment by armed groups
lies in their access to quality education, in line with
Sustainable Development Goal 4. Studies on five
decades of armed conflict reveal that education is a
key factor in reducing the risk of conflict. Lastly, it
can be achieved by supporting their role as agents of
sociopolitical change and as partners ofthe development
and peace process. In that regard, I would like to cite
by way of example the Youth Forum that France has
organized with Tunisia in recent years, held in Tunisia.

Like Ms. Pierre-Antoine and Ms. Ekomo-Soignet,
young women should be seated at the negotiating table
and recognized as partners for peace. The Council
should ensure that occurs within the framework of the
women and peace and security agenda and beyond.
Young people play an increasingly important role in
the area of the maintenance of international peace and
security. The independent progress study on youth
and peace and security conducted by Mr. Simpson
highlights several instances in which organizations
led by young people have had a positive influence on
political, humanitarian and human rights situations
before, during and after conflicts.

Because such organizations often have modest
resources, results are conclusive, in particular because
they are innovative and use social and increasingly
participative media to advance their goals. The Council
cannot ignore the dynamics already at work and must
engage young people in building peace by encouraging
effective and lasting partnerships among youth
organizations, Governments, agencies of the United
Nations, civil society and the private sector. Symbolic
measures are not enough.

Secondly, we must strengthen the implementation
ofthe youth and peace and security agenda, in particular
by building on the foundation provided by resolution
2250 (2015). In that regard, I would like to thank Peru
for proposing a new draft resolution. France fully
supports that initiative and stands ready to work with
Peru and Sweden to make it as operational as possible.
It is vital that the new text be relevant to the women
and peace and security agenda and the issue of children
and armed conflict by seeking genuine value added.
France supports the idea of the publication of a regular
report of the Secretary-General on the issue. The report
should follow the United Nations For Youth calendar
by taking the various youth forums into consideration.
Without duplicating the efforts of other forums, we
hope that the Council can closely monitor the agenda
and perhaps establish an informal panel of experts
and a tripartite ad hoc group, as recommended by the
independent study. With regard to measures taken, we
welcome the efforts made by the Peacebuilding Fund
and by the United Nations Development Programme,
which already helps to support young people and youth
organizations in several countries. Such actions could
be strengthened.

Above and beyond the efforts of the Council, the
United Nations must seek to better support sustainable
development projects that assist young people, ensure
respect for their basic rights and support their political
participation. I would like to underscore the fact that
action should be taken in the area of education, which
is a priority for President Emmanuel Macron, who
has announced an increase in France's contribution to
the Global Partnership for Education to €200 million.
Nationally, France helps promote the positive role played
by young people. France will host a global forum for
peace from 11 to 13 November in Paris. The forum will
seek to bring together individuals, institutions and civil
society organizations, including youth organizations,
that reflect global diversity and are committed to
promoting multilateralism and collective action in an
effort to meet the challenges of our people 100 years
after the end of the First World War.

Projects, such as the Youth in the Sahel, are carried
out by the French Development Agency and we provide
support to United Nations funds and programmes on
the ground. A young diplomats' association, within
the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs, was
established by young people themselves and its first
international meeting, at which the issue of migration
was discussed, was held this year in Marseilles.

Young people are a dynamic force and reflect
a promise of rebirth. The Council must engage them
instead of ignoring them. They are not a problem; they
are a vital part of the solution. The United Nations as
a whole must work to acknowledge them and grant
them more power and a greater role in the area of peace
and security.

Victor Hugo wrote that young people are the
smiling face of the future. If the future is to smile on
us, we cannot ignore it. Let us work together to impart
the wisdom, the meaning and the confidence they
need for talent development so that they can make an
active contribution to the quest for international peace
and security. France will continue to work to promote
the youth, peace and security agenda and to make it
effective and fully operational.

