We wish to thank the Indonesian presidency of the Security Council for this high-level open debate, the Secretary-General for his statement and former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center on International Cooperation at New York University, for their valuable contributions. No matter how we put it, the world is facing the biggest challenge and danger since the inception of the United Nations, and we were not prepared. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis has resulted in a severe health crisis and has had devastating social and economic consequences. The role of United Nations peacekeeping missions is vital in addressing armed conflict and post-conflict situations. It is also clear that pandemics cannot be treated solely as a health issue. With the COVID-19 outbreak, people in conflict zones are now faced with yet another life-threatening danger, and we are faced with the double challenge of implementing and sustaining peacebuilding efforts around the world. Slovenia emphasizes the role of peacekeeping as a tool for the international community to maintain and safeguard peace and security. Slovenia is committed to maintaining a presence in peacekeeping and improving training. We support the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations to make peacekeeping operations an even more credible mechanism for establishing peace in crisis areas in many parts of the world. But is it absolutely necessary that we deploy well-trained and well-equipped peacekeepers, with robust and wide mandates that include a human rights component. In Slovenia we have already come to the conclusion that we need to increase our resilience. To that end, we are investing in additional airlift capabilities for the Slovenian Armed Forces. The United Nations and its specialized agencies, for their part, could make an important contribution by providing greater transparency and enhancing their early-warning capabilities. Ensuring access to clean water as a key factor in ensuring global health and food security is an immediate and long-term challenges that COVID-19 poses for peacebuilding and sustaining peace in countries affected by, and emerging from, conflict. The use of water, sanitation and hygiene, particularly hand washing, is deemed one of the most effective and cost-efficient measures for preventing the spread of COVID-19 and numerous contagious diseases. This pandemic has also forced us to become more creative, think differently and seek solutions elsewhere. Our attempts to better cope with the pandemic and sustain peace should go hand-in-hand with strengthened cooperation between States and other relevant stakeholders through water diplomacy as a mechanism for building peace and health. The COVID-19 crisis has also revealed the essential role of efficient cooperation between multilateral agencies and the United Nations with regard to the very fragmented area of water. Let me conclude by saying that multilateralism is not obsolete. On the contrary, it is the necessary guarantor of democratic dialogue and promoter of progressive solutions to many problems and challenges we face as a global family. Multilateralism, as the sum of international cooperation, with the United Nations at its core, is not a luxury, nor is it an option. It is a necessity. The Security Council holds the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. That is why upholding and implementing international agreements and norms and ensuring the rule of law, including through ongoing peacebuilding efforts and mitigating new coronavirus-related risks for fragile peace, is the basis of a functioning and democratic international community.
