Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
Argentine Republic voted in favour of this resolution
on the basis of the report submitted to the Security
Council by the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
which stated clearly that serious Violations of human
rights and crimes against humanity had been
committed and verified in Darfur.

The report stated that there was irrefutable
evidence in that respect and that the legal context for
dealing with such serious human rights violations was
the International Criminal Court, through a referral by
the Council to the Court's Prosecutor. Argentina also
understands that the International Criminal Court is the
proper forum for the international community as a
whole to combat impunity wherever it might occur and
to bring to justice those responsible for the most
serious crimes.

We believe that this resolution allows us to
provide strong support to the Court and constitutes a
significant step within the United Nations towards
ensuring the proper functioning of the international
human rights system, for which the Court is, and must
be, an essential tool.

We wish to highlight the fact that this is the first
time that the Security Council, making use of article 13
of the Rome Statute, has referred to the Prosecutor a
situation in which - according to the report, whose
veracity we do not doubt - it appears that one or more
types of crimes over which the Court has jurisdiction
have been committed. We believe that this is
undoubtedly a crucial precedent.

We believe that the letter and spirit of the Rome
Statute must be respected and that the balance of its
provisions must be preserved, taking into account the
legitimate concerns of States without weakening in any
way the powers of the Court. For that reason, we regret
that we had to adopt a text that establishes an exception
to the jurisdiction of the Court. It is our hope that this
will not become standard practice.

We would like to make it clear that the exception
provided for in paragraph 6 should be limited
exclusively to those nationals or members of the armed
forces of a State that is not party to the Rome Statute
that are participating in peacekeeping operations
established or authorized by the Security Council.

Finally, we wish to establish clearly that we are
against any position or agreement which generically
would exclude the nationals of a State from the
jurisdiction of the Court, because that would affect the
basis for such jurisdiction and thwart the letter and the
spirit of the Rome Statute.

