Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening today's
open debate of the Security Council. I also thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing on the most
recent developments in the region.

Indonesia associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and
the statement to be delivered by my colleague, the
representative of Nicaragua.

Only two weeks ago, while addressing the Council,
the Secretary-General made the same observation as
he did this morning, citing the examples not only of
Palestine, but also of other countries in the Middle East
(see S/PV.8231). He described the situation as chaotic
and stated that it has become a threat to international
peace and security. However, as we have always said,
what is happening in Palestine is the ongoing failure
of the international community to implement the two-
State solution. We reiterate our call on the Council to
emerge from its very dangerous inertia.

The Palestinian-Israeli conflict has continued for
far too long. Current global crises should not divert
our attention from the Palestinian issue. It is crucial
to put the Palestinian issue back on the international
agenda. This year marks the seventieth anniversary of
the 1948 war - the Nakba - during which more than
800,000 Palestinians were expelled from their land. It
also marks another regrettable milestone: almost three
quarters of a century has elapsed and the world still
awaits a just, lasting and comprehensive resolution to
the conflict.

In the past month, there has been tremendous
violence on the Gaza-Israeli border, with protesting
and unarmed civilians being gunned down by Israeli
forces. As of last Friday, the death toll since the weekly
protests began on 30 March stood at nearly 40, with
thousands wounded by Israeli shooters. The killing of
unarmed civilians violates every known provision of
international law and human decency. It must end.

Hundreds of resolutions and communiques on the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict have been adopted, and yet
those documents have not been implemented. What is
happening in Palestine is the persistent failure of the
international community to implement the two-State
solution. We therefore reiterate our call on the Council
to rouse itself and take action on this very dangerous
situation. We must reaffirm and preserve a negotiated
two-State solution for peace on the basis of pre-1967
borders, within a clear and defined timetable, in
accordance with the internationally recognized terms
of reference, including the Arab Peace Initiative. The
adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), which stated that
Jewish settlement of Palestinian lands has no legal
validity and is a flagrant violation of international law,
demonstrates some of the progress seen in recent years.

My delegation again calls on States to avoid
provocative actions or pronouncements that contradict
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
on the status of Jerusalem. We have already seen the
implications of such actions and pronouncements.
Accordingly, we must create conditions conducive for
the peace process. In the meantime, we must do what
we can to help the people of Palestine, including the
refugees, for whom the work of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNWRA) has been essential. That is
why the recurring financial shortfall of UNRWA raises
deep concerns. We therefore call on the international
community to recommit to supporting the work of
UNRWA. Indonesia will play its part in this regard.
We owe it to ourselves to resolve this ongoing conflict
during our lifetime.

We would like to see peace in Yemen and Syria.
Many civilians have already lost their lives or been
uprooted and become refugees or internally displaced
persons. Nothing can justify the targeting of civilians,
including the use of chemical weapons or weapons of
mass destruction. We reiterate our call for all parties to
respect international law and United Nations resolutions
and to ensure the safety of civilians.

We share the belief of many that peace in Syria can
be achieved only through a lasting and comprehensive
solution and not by military means. The solution
must also be credible and respect the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria.
Moreover, the international community must continue
to press for the cessation of hostilities and full, safe
and unhindered access for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. The international community must refrain
from any unilateral action that might jeopardize
prospects for peace.

Our meeting today could not be more timely,
following the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
We must ensure that peace goes hand in hand with
development and human rights. The high-level meeting
encourages us to do more to achieve peace in the Middle
East. What is needed is greater reconciliation. What we
do today will dictate our place in history. Let us stop
the nightmare faced by the Palestinians and make their
dream of an independent nation a reality.

