Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We,
like others, are very warmly appreciative of the work
which Ambassador Kassem and his team have done in
producing this addendum. We believe that they have
performed a sound professional job that sheds
important light on an issue of serious concern, and the
United Kingdom has confidence in their objectivity.

The presence of ministers from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its neighbouring States
honours the Council, and we appreciate this clear
signal that the Governments of the region are very
wisely taking the work of the Panel and of the Security
Council seriously.

Belgium will, on behalf of the European Union,
make a statement later today, with which the United
Kingdom fully aligns itself, but I would like to make
one or two quick points in the meantime. We have been
clear all along that our goal must be to advance the
Lusaka peace process. Of course, there are obstacles
and difficulties on the way. But our approach over the
past year has been to tackle those obstacles, one by
one, head-on, and in an even-handed way.

It is in that light that we View the issue of the
exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Council has to ensure that
this exploitation does not continue to be a factor
encouraging the continuation of the conflict. What
belongs to the Congolese people must be developed to
the benefit of the Congolese people.
That applies, of course, to the illegal exploitation
of their natural resources, but also to their need for
peace, decent Government throughout the territory and
normal economic opportunity. As the Panel report
makes clear, the only lasting solution is to end the
conflict and establish effective governance across the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and functioning
relations in the whole region.

Transparent and effective management of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's vast resource
wealth and fair and transparent trade arrangements in
the region would bring enormous benefits. All the
parties must seriously commit themselves to this goal.
Opportunistic and destructive pillage of resources,
without regard for the future of the country or the well-
being of its people, has to be brought to an end.

It is not just enough to sign on to a peace process.
The parties need to change the environment in which
this conflict flourishes - an environment of distrust,
opportunism, exploitation and violence. The Congolese
parties themselves must focus on shaping a viable and
peaceful future for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo through the dialogue. Dialogue must also
continue and deepen between the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its neighbours,
especially Rwanda, to break down distrust, to address

S/l'VA437

 

legitimate security concerns and to move forward the
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration process.

To sustain this, we need an interconnecting
package of necessary measures. The United Kingdom
would therefore support the continuation of the Panel's
work. It is clear from today's discussion that this step
is entirely necessary.

