Mr. Prendergast: In my briefing last month, I
highlighted the potential for positive change presented
by current developments in the Middle East. There
remain many risks and the possibility of setbacks, but I
am pleased to be able to report this morning that the
overall trend of recent events tends to confirm that
there exists a real opportunity to begin the long-
delayed implementation of the road map's provisions
and to start moving once again towards a settlement of
the conflict.

A new Palestinian President has been elected in a
vote that is reported to have been conducted in a
politically competitive, yet peaceful, atmosphere. We
welcome President Mahmoud Abbas as the
representative of the Palestinian people and extend our
congratulations to him and to the entire Palestinian
population in the occupied Palestinian territory. We
also congratulate the Palestinian Central Elections
Commission for the organization of credible and
genuine elections under challenging conditions. The
Palestinians have thus successfully completed another
critical step in the historic democratic transition in the
occupied Palestinian territory.

A total of 775,146 Palestinians cast their votes in
the 9 January poll, 60,000 more than voted in the 1996
elections. Some 800 international observers and 7,000
national observers monitored the vote. The observation
missions are agreed that, in the main, the election was
contested vigorously and administered fairly. The
observation mission sent by the National Democratic
Institute for International Affairs and the Carter Center
said in its preliminary statement on the vote, on
10 January:

"The election was contested vigorously and
administered fairly. Election day was orderly and
generally peaceful. [...] The successful
organization of this election demonstrates the
potential for the start of a new era in Palestinian
politics and the development of representative
and accountable governance."

Similarly, the European Union (EU) Electoral
Observation Mission's Chief Observer, former French
Prime Minister Michel Rocard, stated:

"As a result of this electoral process, the
Palestinian people will benefit from a
democratically elected and internationally
recognized leadership, which will enable them to
start to face the difficult challenges that lie
ahead."

Israel played a commendable part in facilitating
the elections, although some problems remained and
observers had to raise the issue of restrictions on the
freedom of movement. Overall, the situation remained
calm on election day, as Israeli forces generally
allowed free movement and reduced their own activity
inside the Palestinian areas.

The United Nations continued its long-standing
work in support of the Palestinian Central Elections
Commission and provided technical assistance for the
preparation and conduct of the elections. We also
established a United Nations Liaison Support Unit,
which facilitated contacts with Palestinian and Israeli
authorities and extended assistance to many of the
international observers present in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Our technical support to the
Palestinians will continue, with a focus on the
upcoming elections to the Palestinian Legislative
Council, scheduled for 17 July.

The Council will also recall that the first round of
elections to municipal councils was held in 26
communities on 23 December, with some 150,000
eligible voters choosing from among more than 800
candidates. Those elections - the first at the municipal
level since 1967 - witnessed a high-local voter
turnout of up to 81 per cent. One encouraging result of
the vote was that women won 51 out of a total of
297 seats in the 26 municipalities. The next round of
local elections is due to take place in 11 communities
in the Gaza Strip on 27 January.

The commitment of the Palestinian people to
democracy and its institutions is a strong foundation on
which President Abbas can build. We look forward to
working with the new President of the Palestinian
Authority on the implementation of the road map and
towards the realization of a viable two-State solution.

There is not only a new Palestinian leadership.
There is also a new Israeli coalition Government in
place to tackle the implementation of Prime Minister
Sharon's withdrawal initiative. The new Cabinet, in
which the Likud party has been joined by Labor, as
well as United Torah Judaism, is expected to decide
later this month on the evacuation of settlements in the
Gaza Strip and parts of the northern West Bank.

As we have previously stated in this Council, we
welcome and support the Israeli disengagement
initiative as an important step towards achieving our
common objective of an end to the occupation that
began in 1967 and the establishment of an independent,
sovereign, viable and contiguous Palestinian State
alongside a secure Israel.

Set in this context, Prime Minister Sharon's
initiative provides a real opportunity to move ahead.
The plan should be implemented as part of the road
map and in coordination between the new Israeli
Government and the new Palestinian leadership. In this
context, it is welcome news that Prime Minister Sharon
and the Palestinian President have already spoken of
their intention to meet in the coming weeks. As I said
here last month, the United Nations remains ready to
assist the parties to maintain momentum at this crucial
time and to shoulder their respective burdens.

More generally, we believe that the international
community will need to engage proactively to help the
process along and to determine how best it can
contribute to the revitalization of a sustainable peace
process between the parties. The present period of
opportunity challenges not only the parties, but all of
us.

Situations such as the present one in the Middle
East are dynamic. They either evolve positively or they
regress. They do not stand still for long. This
underlines the need to develop momentum in the peace
process and to maintain it. Confidence-building
measures can be very helpful in restoring trust on both
sides. I am glad to report the very positive
development of Israel's release of 159 Palestinian
prisoners on 27 December.

Yet, although the potential for positive change
and progress continues to be enormous, both have,
literally, come under fire on an almost daily basis since
my last briefing. In the past month, 64 Palestinians and
3 Israelis have been killed, and 243 Palestinians and
46 Israelis have been wounded.

In the six weeks before last weekend's elections,
Palestinian militants fired a total of 210 Qassam
rockets and mortar shells against Israeli settlements in
Gaza and civilian targets inside Israel. One Israeli
settler and one Thai worker were killed as a result of
those attacks. This marked increase in attacks came
despite the admirable public calls by PLO Chairman
and now President Mahmoud Abbas to end rocket
attacks against Israeli targets. We hope that the new
Palestinian leadership will meet its security reform
obligations under the road map and do its utmost to
prevent such attacks and bring to justice the
perpetrators.

In the same period, Israeli forces conducted a
total of 40 military incursions and bulldozing
operations, causing death and injury to Palestinian
civilians as well as militants. In one tragic incident, on
4 January, seven Palestinian civilians were killed,
including at least five children from the same family,
when an IDF tank shell hit an agricultural area in Beit
Lahia. During a military operation in Khan Younis that
ended on 19 December, 11 Palestinians, at least three
of whom were civilian, were killed, and 50, including
several children, were injured. Once again, we have to
remind Israel of its legal obligations under
international law to ensure the safety of Palestinian
civilians and to refrain from the disproportionate use of
force.

We call on both parties to exercise restraint and to
focus their efforts now on ending the violence, the
terror and the military operations that kill and injure
civilians and destroy civilian property and
infrastructure. In that context, it is positive to note the
new Palestinian President's reiteration of his long-
standing position of advocating an end to the armed
uprising as the way to confront the occupation. His call
appears to be in accord with majority opinion among
Palestinians. In a poll conducted by the Palestinian
Centre for Public Opinion on 21 December, some
60 per cent of Palestinians expressed support for an
end to armed struggle.

As the Council is aware, the General Assembly,
in its resolution ES-10/15, requested that the Secretary-
General establish a register of damage in connection
with the barrier. The Secretary-General, on Tuesday,
11 January 2005, sent a letter to the President of the
General Assembly setting out a framework for the
register. It will consist of an independent board, legal
and technical experts and a small secretariat - a
registry. The board will have overall responsibility for
the register and will establish rules and regulations
governing the work of the registry. We have aimed to
develop a structure that will focus on the technical task
of gathering claims of damage relating to the
construction of the barrier. Details of the staffing, size
and cost of the office remain to be worked out, and on
those issues the Secretary-General will revert to the
Assembly in due course.

The construction of the barrier and restrictions on
movement in the form of checkpoints, curfews and the
permit system are the chief reasons for the continuing
socio-economic crisis in the Palestinian areas. As we
have repeatedly stated, lifting restrictions on freedom
of movement is an indispensable ingredient of
economic recovery. World Bank President James
Wolfensohn reiterated during a recent visit to the area
that additional financial assistance to the Palestinian
Authority could be considered feasible only if Israel
eased the existing restrictions. That remains a vital
measure to be taken.

The Palestinian Authority's stability - and with
it, prospects for real and tangible reform and political
progress - is crucially dependent on a sound fiscal
base. Although the Palestinian Authority exhibited
strong revenue performance in 2004, it has remained
under pressure, owing to a much lower disbursement of
external budget support than originally envisaged and
to a growing wage bill. December salaries could be
paid only as a result of a welcome $20 million
contribution from the United States and the release of
arrears by the Government of Israel. Continued
financial support for the Palestinian Authority remains
of great significance.

I have listed the positive developments of the last
month, as well as the difficulties. How can we best
assist the parties to move forward towards peace and to
avoid the painful and all-too-frequent setbacks suffered
in the past? For that to be done effectively, we need to
start by being clear about our own priorities. Also, it is
crucial that we all work together, guided by the
framework of the Quartet and the road map process, as
agreed by the parties and by the Council. Thirdly, we
need to impress on Israelis and Palestinians that both
of them must act towards fulfilling their road map
obligations.

Both parties have important steps to take. Israeli
settlement activity - including the natural growth of
settlements - has not been frozen, as Israel is obliged
to do under the road map. During 2004, according to
recent reports, the number of people living in West
Bank and Gaza strip settlements rose by 6 per cent.
Even the settlements in the Gaza Strip that are slated
for evacuation grew by 7 per cent; indeed, three of
them recorded growth rates of between 21 and 29 per
cent over the previous year. On the Palestinian side, we
want to see the establishment of credible and reformed
institutions which make a tangible impact in terms of
efforts by the Palestinian Authority to put an end to the
violence and terror.

In this immediate transitional stage, it is crucial
to support Palestinian reform efforts - especially in
the areas of security and governance - and to ensure
that the Palestinian Authority is financially secure and
able to meet the humanitarian needs of the population.
In that context, we welcome Prime Minister Blair's
initiative to convene an international meeting, and we
believe it will provide a valuable opportunity to discuss
important issues on the agenda of the new Palestinian
leadership. We consider that initiative to be an
important step towards implementing the road map and
achieving its full objectives.

It is also urgent to encourage both parties to
resume contacts and work together to prepare for an
Israeli withdrawal from Gaza and part of the West
Bank. Coordination between the parties and active
support from the international community are needed
to achieve a successful disengagement plan that will
lead to further steps on the implementation of the road
map and the resumption of full peace negotiations.

A stark illustration of how fragile the situation is
in the Middle East was recently given on another front
of the Arab-Israeli conflict. Six months of relative
quiet along the Blue Line were disrupted on 9 January,
the day of the Palestinian election. The Security
Council was briefed on Monday about the details of
that deplorable incident, in which a Hizbullah roadside
bomb attack against an Israeli military patrol vehicle
killed one Israel Defence Forces (IDF) soldier and
wounded three others, and subsequent IDF tank and
machine-gun fire killed a French officer serving with
the United Nations Observation Group in Lebanon and
wounded a Swedish colleague.

The Hizbullah attack and its aftermath constituted
grave violations of the Blue Line. In a statement, the
Secretary-General condemned the military escalation
and urged both parties to exercise maximum restraint.
He also underscored the responsibility of both Lebanon
and Israel to ensure the safety of United Nations
personnel deployed in the region.

Prior to that incident, the situation along the Blue
Line had been relatively calm since my last briefing to
the Council. The only violations that had taken place
were Israeli overflights. Seventeen Israeli air violations
of the Blue Line were recorded - nine of them on a
single day, 29 December, when a total of 20 Israeli jets
crossed the Blue Line into Lebanese airspace. Both the
Force Commander of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon and the Secretary-General's Personal
Representative for Southern Lebanon expressed their
concern over those violations and reiterated the
Organization's call on the Israeli authorities to halt
them.

There has been no progress yet on the Syrian-
Israeli track, despite yet another offer of mediation,
this time by the Government of Turkey. The
resumption and completion of peace negotiations
between Israel and Syria and the implementation of
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) remain
indispensable ingredients of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

Let me close by saying that there is a palpable
sense of expectation of real, substantial and sustainable
change in the region. Optimism has - at least for
now - replaced long and bitter years of disillusion,
despair and hopelessness. The potential is there; but so
is the danger that the fragile new process might falter
and fail. We must not allow that to happen.

Israelis and Palestinians have a great deal of work
ahead of them. Their respective new leaderships are in
a position to carry out much of it, but they will
continue to need our help. We, the international
community - particularly through the Quartet - need
to lend our support, our assistance, our active
engagement, to make clear to both parties that we
expect real progress. The parties, in turn, need to take
those steps necessary to implement the road map, to
halt the bloodshed and suffering, and to move forward
to achieve the goal of a just, lasting and comprehensive
settlement in which two independent and viable States,
Israel and Palestine, live side by side in peace and
security.

