Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Mr. Mark Lowcock, Ms. Wafa'a Alsaidy and Ms. Raja Abdullah Ahmed Almasabi for their briefings. It is essential that the humanitarian actors and non-governmental organizations on the ground can express their views of the situation before the Security Council. It is becoming increasingly urgent to find a political solution to definitively put an end to the Yemeni conflict. We once again reiterate our full support for the efforts of the Secretary-General and the Special Envoy in that regard. We call on all parties, especially the Yemeni parties, to endorse the draft agreement proposed by Mr. Griffiths. We are encouraged by the observance of the ceasefire between the Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council. We note that the Riyadh agreement must be fully implemented without delay. We commend Saudi Arabia on its role in that regard. Only through a nationwide ceasefire, in line with resolution 2532 (2020) and the call by the Secretary- General, can we effectively fight the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in Yemen. We cannot overstate our concern about the increased attacks on civilians. All parties must respect their obligations under international humanitarian law. The protection of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel, as well as civil infrastructure, must be an absolute priority. Likewise, all efforts should be made to ensure full humanitarian access. That is essential to curb the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic in Yemen, which has the highest COVID-19 death rate in the world. With regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, we regret the lack of progress since the mid-July meeting (see S/2020/721). We call on the Houthis to honour the commitments made at the beginning of the month and to authorize, without delay, United Nations access to the oil tanker. An oil spill would have catastrophic environmental, humanitarian and economic consequences for the entire region. Urgent action is needed. France will continue to support the efforts of the United Nations to find a political solution and bring peace and security to Yemen and, more broadly, to bring about de-escalation the region.
