Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to extend its sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his detailed and objective report on
the developments in Tajikistan, which also contains a
timely recommendation for the Council's future course of
action.

It is with great concern and dismay that my delegation
has been following the deteriorating situation in Tajikistan,
which, according to the Secretary-General's report, is at
its worst and most volatile stage since the end of the civil
war of 1992. In particular, the intensification of fighting
around Tavildara since early May is a source of alarm.
We are worried that the fall of Tavildara to the opposition
on 12 May and the launching of a counter-offensive by
Government forces on 2 June may be an ominous sign of
the potential spread of violence plaguing the country.

As we are all aware, the military and the political
dimensions of any conflict are closely intertwined. The
situation in Tajikistan is no exception in this regard. In
our view, the delay in the resumption of the inter-Tajik
talks is just as disturbing as the situation on the ground.
The very fact that the cease-fire has not been faithfully
heeded by the Tajik parties confirms the vital importance
of political will for the effective implementation of the
commitment of a military nature.

In this vein, my delegation is encouraged to know
that the Government of Tajikistan and the Tajik
opposition both believe that the conflict in their country
can be resolved only through political dialogue. We
furthermore are relieved by the news that the two sides
have finally agreed on the resumption of the inter-Tajik
talks in early July.

We take this opportunity to express welcome and
support to Mr. Gerd Merrem, the Secretary-General's new
Special Representative for Tajikistan, as he vigorously
works to bridge the gap between the views of the two
parties and forge a genuine bond of national
reconciliation. In addition to facilitating the agreement on
the resumption of the inter-Tajik talks, he also played an
instrumental role in securing the temporary but critical
extension of the cease-fire agreement in May.

Although the Secretary-General requested that
enough time be allowed to see the full outcome of the
Special Representative's efforts, we are pleased that
within a fairly short period of time, his mission has
already had such positive results. Clearly, one of the
major tasks of the Special Representative under the
current circumstances is to help the Tajik parties take the
necessary steps to translate their words into meaningful
action. We pledge him our full support as he takes on
these critical challenges.

Keeping in mind that the proper functioning of
institutional frameworks is also key for improving the
situation in Tajikistan, I should like to make the following
points. First and foremost, the safety and freedom of

 

movement of the personnel of the United Nations Mission
of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) should be ensured. If
the Tajik parties truly value the role played by UNMOT in
stabilizing the situation in the country, this is the minimum
that should be provided by the parties directly concerned.

Secondly, the activities of the Joint Commission,
which has not been functioning for security reasons, should
begin again without delay. As the Joint Commission is the
only institutional framework created by the Tehran
Agreement of 1994 and as it is composed of the parties
directly concerned, we believe that the early resumption of
its work is of great importance for the effective
implementation of the cease-fire agreement.

Thirdly, UNMOT's regular contacts with the Russian
border forces and the peace-keeping forces of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, as well as the close
cooperation between UNMOT and the Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which
have to date been satisfactory, should continue to be further
encouraged. Indeed, the liaison between UNMOT and
regional arrangements serve as compelling evidence of the
mutual benefit of such cooperation.

Lastly, the establishment of an additional liaison post
at Taloqan should be expedited for the purpose of
maintaining contact with the opposition leaders stationed
there. In this regard, the speedy finalization of the
necessary arrangements between the Afghan authorities and
the United Tajik Opposition is required above all else.

Before concluding, I also wish to note the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the Council review the
United Nations commitment in the theatre of Tajikistan if
the prospects for progress have not improved by the end of
the next six months. My delegation truly hopes that this
will serve as a strong message to the parties concerned that
without the prompt restoration of an effective cease-fire, as
well as due progress in political talks, the Council may
have to respond accordingly.

As the document before us seems appropriately to
reflect all the aforementioned points, my delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution.

