Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): Allow me to start by
congratulating Poland on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of August and to thank the Foreign Minister for his
personal participation in this open debate.

(spoke in Spanish)
I would also like to commend and congratulate
Peru for its successful work during the month of July.

(spoke in English)

I have two statements to deliver. I am pleased
to speak first on behalf of the Group of Friends of
Children and Armed Conflict, an informal network
of 42 interested Member States, representing all five
regional groups at the United Nations.

We wish to thank today's briefers, in particular
Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan, for their compelling
personal testimony.

The Group is appalled by the scope and scale ofgrave
violations committed against children, as documented
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/509). On the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1882 (2009), we are
particularly concerned about the large increase in cases
of killing and maiming of children. We urge all parties
to armed conflict to fully comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law, human rights law
and refugee law, and to put in place concrete effective
protection measures for children in armed conflict.

In that regard, we welcome the recent signing of
action plans and Special Representative Gamba's direct
engagement with parties to armed conflict to end grave
violations. However, action plans are only means to an
end, not ends in themselves. Without their effective and
timely implementation, such plans will not address the
suffering of children in armed conflict. Accordingly,
the mere signing of an action plan should not form
the basis for delisting in the Secretary-General's
annual report on children and armed conflict. We
therefore commend efforts by the United Nations and
the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict to follow up on action plans and to
encourage their implementation.

The Group welcomes the recent release of more
than 13,600 children from armed forces and armed
groups and the work of the Global Coalition for the
Reintegration of Former Child Soldiers. We stress
the importance of long-term, comprehensive and
community-based rehabilitation and reintegration
efforts to provide assistance to children and prevent
re-recruitment, including in areas formerly controlled
by Da'esh. Children formerly associated with such
groups should be treated as victims first, consistent
with resolution 2427 (2018). The detention of children
in armed conflict should be used only as a last resort
and for the shortest period necessary and should be
in full respect of international humanitarian law and
applicable international human rights law. Failure to do
so will only sow the seeds of future conflict.

The Group is firmly convinced that the protection
of children affected by armed conflicts must be at the
heart of the prevention, development and sustaining
peace agendas. We further welcome the launch of the
ACT to Protect campaign to catalyse global attention
and efforts to prevent and end the six grave violations
against children. Indeed, there are several practical
protection tools available to Member States, notably the
Safe Schools Declaration, the Principles and Guidelines
on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups, the Paris Commitments and the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. We call upon
Member States to further strengthen the protection of
children in armed conflict, including through ratification
of the first Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, as well as consideration of the
endorsement of those commitments.

The Group highlights the contribution of regional
and subregional organizations, as recognized in
resolution 2427 (2018), in preventing grave violations
by reinforcing the normative framework, exchanging
best practices, mobilizing resources, coordinating
humanitarian assistance, applying pressure on parties
to armed conflict and addressing the transnational
dimensions of child recruitment. Regional groups of
friends of children in armed conflict can also play a
helpful role in that regard, and we welcome the recent
establishment of such a group in Mali.

We also welcome other measures adopted by
the Security Council this year that contribute to the
protection of children in situations of armed conflict.
Those include resolution 2467 (2019) - introduced
by Germany - which seeks to take a victim-centred
approach to sexual violence in conflict and children born
of wartime rape; resolution 2474 (2019) - introduced
by Kuwait - which addresses children missing
as a result of armed conflict; and resolution 2475
(2019) - introduced by Poland, with the support of the
United Kingdom - which stresses the specific needs of
children with disabilities in armed conflict.

The Security Council should continue to uphold
child protection through the deployment of child
protection advisers to peacekeeping operations.
However, adequate resources are also needed to deliver
mission success. Therefore, cuts to the staffing and
budgets of child protection adviser positions as well as
consolidation efforts that would undermine the United
Nations ability to deliver on the critical child protection
mandates put forth by the Security Council should
be avoided.

Lastly, the Group underlines that combating
impunity and ensuring accountability are key to
preventing grave violations. We therefore welcome
the efforts of the International Criminal Court against
war crimes and crimes against humanity, including the
recruitment of children, and note the recent conviction
of Bosco Ntaganda in that regard. But, as we heard
during the briefings earlier today, we need to recall
that true justice involves reparations and psychosocial
support for victims of such war crimes, whose trauma
may endure for years.

I will now speak in French.
(spoke in French)

Allow me now to make some additional remarks in
my national capacity. First of all, I would like to warmly
thank Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan for their enlightening
briefings. We are honoured that Ms. Kamara has made
Canada her home, thereby further enriching our diverse
nation. Her courage and resilience inspire us all. I have
read her book. I encourage representatives to buy it. I
would also like to acknowledge the importance of the
sentimental raised by Mr. Awan. The inclusion of that
aspect is absolutely key.

As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509)
clearly indicates, the situation of children in Syria,
Yemen and other conflict-affected areas is devastating.
To say that we are disappointed that the Council is
unable to maintain international peace and security in
those and other cases would be a blatant understatement,
especially given the number of children who have
been killed or maimed simply because of their place
of birth or the time when they were born. Addressing
vulnerability to serious violations is not the sole
responsibility of the Council. We all have a role to play.

Canada's efforts have above all focused on
developing the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of
Child Soldiers. The Vancouver Principles are a set
of 17 political commitments to undertake measures
to prevent the recruitment and use of children by
armed forces and armed groups in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

As a testament to the importance of the issue, 91
countries from all regional groups have endorsed the
Vancouver Principles since their launch less than two
years ago. Canada encourages States that have not
yet endorsed the Vancouver Principles or the Paris
Principles to do so without delay.

(spoke in English)

While important, we recognize that political
endorsement alone is insufficient to effect change. For
that reason, in the past year, Canada has worked with
other Member States, the United Nations Secretariat and
civil society to develop implementation guidance for
the Vancouver Principles. That new tool, launched here
at the United Nations yesterday, serves as a practical
resource for military, police and civilian organizations
engaged in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
It takes a gender lens to our efforts, recognizing the
differential impact of child recruitment on boys and
on girls.

Canada is putting that guidance into action. In June,
Canada's Minister of National Defence announced
the establishment of the Romeo Dallaire Centre of
Excellence for Peace and Security, within the Canadian
Defence Academy, led by Rear Admiral Cassivi, who
is seated behind me. The initial focus of the centre of
excellence will be to support the implementation of
the Vancouver Principles by our own forces. Canada
will also provide the Rome'o Dallaire Child Soldiers
Initiative with a contribution of more than $1 million
to conduct research and identify best practices
regarding the prevention of the recruitment and use of
child soldiers.

Canada has been a long-standing advocate for
children in situations of armed conflict. During our
last tenure on the Security Council in 1999-2000, we
introduced the first thematic debate on children and
armed conflict (see S/PV.4176). We have collectively
come a long way since then but much work remains to
be done. Should we be elected to serve again on the
Security Council for 2021-2022, we will continue to
work to put child protection at the centre of our peace
and security efforts.

