Mr. Ayafor (Cameroon) (spoke in French): My
delegation associates itself with the condolences
expressed to Turkey and the United Kingdom for the
victims who died as a result of today's terrorist attack.
We commend the Secretary-General for his statement
and we welcome the presence in our midst of the
Ministers of Mozambique and Tanzania and the
representative of the Commission of the African Union.

Allow me to thank Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes region, for his clear and informative presentation
and for his introduction to the report of the Secretary-
General on preparations for the international
conference on peace, security and development in the
Great Lakes region (S/2003/1099).

My country, by virtue of its geographical
proximity to the region, welcomes in many respects the
organization of this public meeting of the Council. We
are convinced, and have been for a long time, that the
holding of a conference of this kind would be timely
and would enable us to lay the foundation for peace
and sustainable development in order to emerge from
the cycle of violence, conflict and poverty that for
decades has been the lot of the peoples of the Great
Lakes region.

We thank and commend Mr. Ibrahima Fall for his
tireless efforts to bring about this conference and in
working towards its success. The progress made thus
far in the preparatory process also deserves
commendation. The concept paper has been prepared,
the goals and organization of the conference have been
outlined and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has initiated an intensive process of
consultations with Governments of the subregion,
donors and other interested parties.

From 23 to 24 June 2003, a meeting of National
Coordinators of the countries of the Great Lakes region
took place in Nairobi, marking the beginning of the
preparatory process. A provisional timetable for the
various stages of the preparatory process and for the
holding of the conference was proposed. We welcome
the involvement of the African Union in this process
and the appointment of Mr. Keli Walubita as special
envoy of the African Union for the Great Lakes region.

The importance of this conference to the
countries and peoples of the Great Lakes region needs
no elaboration. The success of the conference will
depend on the commitment and political will of those
countries, but will also depend, in large part, on the
support of the international community. It is therefore
crucial for the international community to continue
providing active support to the preparatory process and
to the conference itself. In this regard, my delegation
welcomes the initiative of Canada to create a group of
friends of the Great Lakes region to provide
multifaceted support to the preparation and
organization of the conference.

We support the request made by the Secretary-
General in paragraph 31 of his report, to strengthen
coordination with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes region as well as the financial and human
resources the conference would require. We welcome
the presidential statement that has been negotiated, as it
includes a positive reaction to that appeal.

Regarding the countries invited to the conference,

we should recall that there is a close interrelationship

and many similarities between the problems faced by

the Great Lakes region and the Central African region.
We should recall that the many conflicts and massacres

that have scarred the recent history of the Great Lakes

region have had repercussions in nearly every country
of Central Africa, including the influx of refugees and
illicit weapons and increased insecurity. Aware of those
realities, at the 19th Ministerial Meeting of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa, held in Brazzaville from
14 to 17 May 2003, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Central Africa demanded a greater involvement by the
countries of Central Africa in the preparatory process
and in the holding of the conference. My delegation
wishes to take the opportunity provided by this debate
to reiterate that concern and to insist on the
participation of all Governments of Central Africa in
the conference.

In conclusion, I wish to pledge my delegation's
support once again to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ibrahima Fall, and to express
our support for the content of the presidential statement
to be issued at the end of the debate.

