Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this very timely meeting. I
would like to welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General on this occasion, and I express our greetings
to the Foreign Ministers of Germany and of Serbia and
Montenegro.

As the sound of gunfire and explosions is heard
once again in the streets of Mitrovica and many other
localities, Brazil shares the indignation and sorrow of
the international community at another surge of
intolerance, revenge and ethnic violence in that region
of the world.

The peacekeeping and international police forces
reacted quickly to try to defuse yesterday's riots.
Unfortunately, their efforts could not avoid the
escalation of violence that resulted in the death of
civilians and left hundreds injured. Moreover, to our
deep regret, they became themselves victims of blind
violence, as a number of KFOR soldiers and civilian
police of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) were among the
wounded. We expect that those responsible for such
acts will face justice and that the announced
deployment of three new peacekeeping units will
strengthen the efforts of KFOR and UNMIK to prevent
further clashes.

During its five years of tireless work there, the
United Nations has helped fight the scourges of crime,
terror and ethnic cleansing. It is disheartening to see
that, despite that strenuous endeavour, the situation
threatens once again to deteriorate into rioting and
chaos. This is undoubtedly the most severe case of
unrest since the end in 1999 of the conflict in the
region, as many of those who spoke before me have
pointed out.

Our delegation has reaffirmed on many occasions
our commitment to a stable, democratic, peaceful and
multi-ethnic Kosovo. We firmly support joint action to
promote reconciliation and stability. We believe that
the full protection of human rights is essential to
achieve peace on the basis of international law. Brazil
continues to support the full implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999) and the "standards before
status" policy as the only reasonable choice for a
peaceful Kosovo.

We condemn ethnically motivated brutality. In
this regard, we add our voice to that of the Secretary-
General in his strong condemnation of the incidents
and in his call for an immediate halt to the ethnic
violence. We also fully support the work of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, Harri
Holkeri.

This alarming outbreak of violence calls for an
appropriate and vigorous reaction by the international
community. It reminds us that many important
challenges still remain. Nevertheless, nothing can
really be done without serious efforts by all parties
involved, including local authorities, both in Pristina
and in Belgrade.

A truly multi-ethnic society can be built only
through decisive involvement and participation by all
individuals and groups, including all minorities. The
ultimate responsibility for preventing Kosovo from
being engulfed once again in conflict rests with their
people and leaders. Their commitment to the
Provisional Institutions, their peaceful engagement in
the political process and their willingness to fight
corruption and adopt the necessary economic reforms
will determine their ability to find a way out of the
present deadlock.

