The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation to HE. Mr. Amara Essy, Secretary-
General of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), as well as the Ministers who participated
in the public meeting on the situation in Africa on
29 January 2002 for their invaluable contributions
to the debate on the situation in Africa.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
principles of political independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all States and their
obligation to settle their dispute by peaceful
means.

"The Security Council, recalling its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security as well as the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, underscores the importance of
partnership and enhanced coordination and
cooperation, based on complementarity and
comparative advantage, between the United
Nations, the OAU and subregional organizations
in Africa in the promotion of regional peace and
stability. It welcomes the decision of the OAU
Summit held in Lusaka in July 2001 to undertake
a review of the structures, procedures and
working methods of the Central Organ of the
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management
and Resolution (CPMR). It emphasizes the

importance of enhanced cooperation and of
ensuring better coordination between the United
Nations and the OAU with the View to achieving
a lasting solution to conflicts. In this regard, it
requests the Secretary-General to encourage the
United Nations Liaison Office to the OAU in
Addis Ababa to interact more closely with the
OAU Mechanism for CPMR on the conflicts in
Africa. The Security Council expresses its
readiness to deepen its cooperation with the OAU
and subregional organizations and invite them to
inform it at the earliest possible stage over their
decisions and initiatives that could have
implications relating to its responsibilities under
the Charter.

"The Security Council calls on the United
Nations system to intensify its cooperation,
including assistance within existing resources, to
the OAU and subregional organizations in Africa
in the field of capacity-building, particularly in
early warning conflict prevention and
peacekeeping. It also stresses the importance of
effective interaction between the United Nations
system and the OAU and subregional
organizations through the exchange of
information and analysis at the conflict
prevention stage; coordination and clear
understanding of respective roles in forwarding
peace processes; and coordinated support to
national and regional peace-building efforts. In
this regard, the Security Council welcomes the
establishment of the United Nations Office in
West Africa and requests the Secretary-General to
take all necessary measures for that Office to be
fully operational.

"The Security Council notes with
satisfaction that good offices missions carried out
by prominent political leaders of Africa
facilitated significant progress in the political
settlement of certain conflicts. It encourages the
OAU and subregional organizations, taking into
account the specific situation of conflicts, to seek
appointment of such figures as Special Envoys as
well as to employ, where appropriate, the
traditional methods of conflict resolution,
including the establishment of Councils of Elders.
The Security Council stresses the importance of
the preventive character of such efforts and
emphasizes the need for their proper

coordination. The Security Council stresses the
specific needs of women and children in peace
processes and encourages the strengthening of the
role of women and youth in the search for

solutions to conflicts in Africa.
"The Security Council encourages the
ongoing efforts undertaken by the international
community in addressing the root causes of
conflicts in Africa, as indicated in the report of
the Secretary-General on the causes of conflicts
and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa (8/1998/318).
The Security Council, bearing in mind the
linkages between conflicts in Africa and, inter
alia, poverty and development, the illicit
proliferation of small arms and light weapons, the
problems of refugees and internally displaced
persons, the illegal exploitation of natural
resources and social exclusion as a source of
intra-State conflicts, reaffirms its continued
commitment in addressing these problems and
encourages the OAU, as well as subregional
organizations and international financial
institutions, to do likewise. The Security Council
stresses that the early resumption of international
cooperation and development aid to countries
where a peace process is being implemented is of
critical importance for the success of this peace
process and further stresses the importance of the
role of the donor community and international
financial institutions in this regard.

"The Security Council stresses that good
governance, democracy, the rule of law, and the
respect of human rights and the fight against
poverty are essential for peace, stability and
sustainable development in Africa. It also stresses
the importance of national reconciliation through
dialogue in respective countries. It expresses its
strong support to the decisions of the OAU Heads
of State and Government at the Algiers Summit
held in 1999 denying recognition to Governments
that come to power through unconstitutional
means and notes with satisfaction that this
decision is being implemented. It reaffirms that
resolution of conflicts in Africa requires, above
all, the political will and courage of the parties
themselves to seek peace.

"The Security Council expresses concern
over the effects of conflicts on civilian

populations, including Violations of human rights,
in particular those affecting the most vulnerable
groups, such as the elderly, women and children.
It emphasizes the responsibility of States
concerned to put an end to impunity and
prosecute those responsible for such acts.
"The Security Council underlines the need
to address the problem of refugees and internally
displaced persons, which, in addition to
humanitarian consequences, constitute a burden
on the affected countries and which may become
a source of conflict. It notes the shortfall in
funding for refugee and internally displaced
persons programmes in Africa and reiterates its
call upon the international community to provide
such programmes with the necessary financial
resources, taking into account the substantial
needs in Africa.

"The Security Council, recalling its
resolution 1308 (2000) of 17 July 2000, inter alia
recognizing that the HIV/AIDS pandemic is also
exacerbated by the conditions of Violence and
instability and constitutes a potential risk to
stability and security, reiterates that the
pandemic, if unchecked, may pose a risk to
stability and security. The Council urges the
international community and donors to coordinate
their efforts in the fight against HIV/AIDS.

"The Security Council reiterates the
importance of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) in the process of conflict
resolution and post-conflict peace-building, and
notes the lack of adequate resources for effective
reintegration programmes. In this regard, it urges
the international community to support such
programmes, including through the
implementation of quick-impact projects.

"The Security Council notes that African
States can contribute to peace and security in the
continent by implementing transparency and
confidence-building measures. In this regard, the
Security Council reiterates its call on all States to
implement the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects.

"The Security Council welcomes the

participation of the Economic and Social Council
(ECOSOC) in its public meeting on the situation
in Africa on 29 January 2002. It reaffirms the
importance of strengthening its cooperation,
through greater interaction, with the ECOSOC, in
accordance with Article 65 of the Charter of the
United Nations, in the area of the prevention of
armed conflicts, including in addressing
economic, social, cultural and humanitarian
problems. The Security Council, taking note of
the time it devotes to discussing African conflicts
and the specificity of the problems of Africa,
underlines that economic rehabilitation and
reconstruction constitute important elements in
the long-term development of post-conflict
societies and the maintenance of lasting peace
and calls for greater international assistance in
this regard. The Security Council expresses its
resolve to seek to establish the political
conditions for non-recurrence of a particular
conflict before withdrawing any peacekeeping
operation.

"The Security Council commends and
supports the efforts of African countries within
the framework of the fight against international
terrorism.

"The Security Council welcomes the
ongoing transformation of the OAU into the
African Union and encourages and supports the
principles of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD) to create the conditions
for development and to enhance economic
integration in Africa. It recognizes that sound
economic policies will further enhance peace and
stability in the region. It calls upon the donor
countries and the Bretton Woods institutions to
continue assisting Africa in implementing the
Heavily lndebted Poor Countries initiatives and
to work with African Governments, through the
NEPAD, to create the necessary conditions to
attract and mobilize public and private sector
resources in support of economic growth and
poverty reduction.

"The Security Council notes the usefulness
of its meeting with the Secretary-General of OAU
and stresses the importance of holding such
consultations on a regular basis, at least once a
year, in the future.

"The Security Council recognizes the need
for adequate measures to prevent and resolve
conflicts in Africa and will consider the setting
up of an ad hoc Working Group to monitor the
above recommendations and to enhance
coordination with ECOSOC."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2002/2.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.35 pm.
