Mr.Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): It is a true
honour for me to have the opportunity to participate in
this meeting of the Security Council, presided over by
Guatemala for the first time in history.
I would like to associate myself with the statement
made by the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union, and I wish to add the following considerations
on behalf of my delegation.

Spain continues to be firmly committed to
supporting the effort of the Government and the people
of Haiti in the work of rebuilding the country following
the 2010 earthquake. That is demonstrated by the fact
that Spain is the third largest bilateral donor to Haiti. To
date, we have disbursed $225 million, 65 per cent of the
$346 million committed at the New York Haiti Donors'
Conference of 2010. That amount was devoted, as a
priority among other commitments and in agreement
with the Government of Haiti, to projects in the water
and sanitation, education, rural development and food
production sectors, as well as in the fight against
hunger, of course.

I wish to highlight Spain's contribution to the
cooperation fund for water and sanitation, with a total
investment of more than $150 million, which will
potentially benefit 6.5 million citizens, or 70 per cent
of the country's population. In the business sector,
working with the Inter-American Development Bank,
Spain in finalizing the implementation ofa specific fund
for promoting small - and medium-sized businesses.
In addition, the President of the Government of Spain,
Mr. Mariano Rajoy Brey, proposed to President Michel
Joseph Martelly, here in New York last week, that Spain
would facilitate deploying to Haiti a mission of Spanish
businesspeople to explore new forms of cooperation
with the private sector. Spain has also participated
in the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission and the
Haiti Reconstruction Fund, donating$20 million to the
latter. Following the end of the Commission's mandate,
in October 2011, Spain has supported the Haitian
Government's proposal to designate the Ministry of
Planning and External Cooperation as the counterpart
of the Haiti Reconstruction Fund. We believe that is
the best way of directly encouraging ownership and
capacity-building in the Haitian administration.

We are pleased with the progress that has taken
place in the Haitian political situation since the previous
debate in the Chamber, in March (see S/PV.6732).
Signs of stability after the appointment of the new
Prime Minister, Mr. Laurent Salvador Lamothe, and
the formation of the bodies provided for in the 1987
Constitution are very good news. It is our hope that the
Haitian Government will also be able to make progress
in constituting the Permanent Electoral Council, such
that in the electoral processes to be held in 2013, the
Council will be able to take over the functions assigned
to it by the Constitution.

On the matter of security, Spain reiterates its
commitment to strengthening the Haitian National
Police. The objective is for the police to gradually take
over its responsibilities for public order, and for Haiti to
take over the responsibility for its own security. In the
meantime, Spain believes that the work of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti' continues to be
essential. We therefore support the recommendation to
renew its mandate.

Finally, Iwish to addmy voice to those who welcomed

the new aid coordination mechanism presented by Prime
Minister Lamothe on 26 September here in New York
during the ministerial meeting held under the slogan
"Haiti Partners". The motto for Spanish cooperation in
Haiti has always been "Everything for Haiti, but with
Haiti". Spain is therefore prepared to participate in the
new mechanism, the objective of which is to increase
the effectiveness and transparency of assistance, reduce
overlaps and make it possible for Haitian authorities to
take greater ownership of the process. We hope that the
mechanism, along with the progress made towards a
more stable political environment, will make it possible
to increase disbursements of development assistance.

Finally, I wish to thank Ambassador Fernandez
Amunategui for the work he has done.

