Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): Let me
begin by thanking the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their
very comprehensive briefings.

Two decades ago, the Security Council opened a
new chapter in the history of international criminal
justice by establishing the Tribunals. The advances
made in international criminal justice are arguably the
most positive development in international relations in
the past generation. We welcome the fact that this year
marks the ICTY's twentieth anniversary. We commend
both the ICTY and the ICTR for their valuable
contributions to the fight against impunity and the
development of key precedents in international criminal
law. We hope that the Mechanism will maintain and
build upon the achievements of the Tribunals.

Regarding the ICTY, we note that as of today
12 individuals are on trial and 13 are in appeal
proceedings, with no outstanding fugitives.

We recognize the Tribunal's efforts in connection
with the submission of a consolidated comprehensive
plan on the completion strategy, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 2081 (2012). The Tribunal
still faces challenges related to belated arrests and
the loss of experienced staff members, among others.
Nevertheless, we urge the Tribunal to continue its
efforts to promptly meet completion targets while
conforming to the principles ofjustice.

We share the concern of the ICTY President at
the fact that only Judge Antonetti will be available for
redeployment in October 2013 to the Appeals Chamber,
where nearly all trial activity will be centred. We
welcome the fact that the Council can now provide a
solution to such concerns in due course.

As for the ICTR, we are pleased to note that the
transition from the ICTR to the Mechanism is now well
under way. We take note of the Tribunal's projection
that all remaining appeals but one will be completed in
2014. We look forward to the Tribunal's completing its
final appeal by July 2015, as projected.

The relocation of acquitted persons and those who
have already served their sentences is a very important
humanitarian issue and a widely shared concern. We
commend the ICTR President on having taken a very
active role with the Registrar in that regard. We call on
the Tribunal, together with States, to continue to exert
all efforts necessary to address that problem.

We support the Council's earlier decision in
resolution 2054 (2012) that Judge Joensen continue to
perform his functions as President of the ICTR until
31 December 2014.
We welcome the progress made in ensuring a
smooth transition to the Mechanism. In particular,
on 9 April 2013 the trial judgement in the ICTR case
of The Prosecutor v. Benard Munyagishari has led to
litigation before a bench of the Appeals Chamber of the
Mechanism. We hope that The Hague branch will be
fully functional on 1 July 2013, as scheduled.

Regrettably, nine fugitives are still at large. Their
arrest and prosecution remains a top priority for the
Mechanism. We note that in April, the Mechanism
duty judge replaced the ICTR warrants with those of
the Mechanism for the arrest of the three high-ranking
fugitives. We encourage the Mechanism to continue
its efforts to track down fugitives and to secure the
cooperation of States.

In conclusion, the Tribunals have decisively
contributed to the development of international
humanitarian law and to the establishment of the ICC.
We are strongly committed to providing the support
that the Tribunals and the Mechanism will need to
succeed now and in future.

