In recent months, the world has come together to fight the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). While these times have presented the international community with challenges, the upcoming months present it with opportunities to reaffirm its commitment to international peace and security, not only in words but in actions as well. Some have used the pandemic to try to distract from their malicious behaviour. The Iranian regime has continued to be the leading source of instability in the Middle East and proven to be a threat in the region and beyond. Despite a worldwide pandemic that hit the Iranian people especially hard, the regime surged ahead with its aggression. The Iranian regime has continued to proliferate advanced weaponry. It arms itself and its proxies, in a systematic violation of the arms embargo imposed on it under resolution 2231 (2015) and puts those weapons to use in an effort to destabilize the region. Iran did not waste a moment after signing the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and began violating the embargo right away. The Iranian regime has also threatened to withdraw from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to stop adhering to the few elements of the JCPOA by which they do still abide. These threats should not be taken lightly, as the regime has proven time and again that it should not be trusted to uphold agreements. For example, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) investigations clearly indicate that Iran has carried out banned nuclear activities at undeclared sites and has never reported their existence or activities. Furthermore, the regime refuses IAEA inspectors access to nuclear facilities. The Iranian regime cannot be trusted, and it cannot be allowed to obtain nuclear weapons. Preventing this dangerous regime from possessing nuclear weapons must be a priority for the Security Council and the entire international community. The threat that Iran poses to the region is not limited to the actions it carries out on its own. The Iranian regime is dedicated to forcing a radical and dangerous revolution throughout the region. Central to this strategy are its proxies, which it trains and arms, in violation of the Security Council-imposed embargo. Wherever the Iranian regime's proxies have spread, terror and violence against innocent civilians have followed. The situation in Lebanon is dire. The COVID-19 pandemic has only amplified the economic crisis and the social unrest in the country. And yet, Hizbullah, true to its title of Iranian proxy, serves the interests of the Iranian regime instead of those of the people of Lebanon. It diverts funds from helping Lebanese people to building an arsenal of weapons. Hizbullah has more than 150,000 missiles and rockets, the majority of which have been transferred from Iran. They are aimed at Israeli civilians and constitute a grave security threat to Israel and the entire region. One cannot fight COVID-19 and an economic crisis with precision- guided missiles. The Iranian regime and Hizbullah have increased their efforts of converting existing rockets into precision-guided missiles on Lebanese soil. Iran transfers advanced technologies and the components necessary to enable the terrorist organization to manufacture and convert missiles and rockets, so that they have increased range, accuracy and sophistication. The local population is used as a human shield for these illicit activities, once again putting Iranian unlawful interests before the people of Lebanon. This worrisome development constitutes another blatant violation of resolutions 2231 (2015), 1701 (2006) and 1559 (2004), and should be unacceptable to anyone whose goal is to avoid another conflict in our region. Hizbullah has also increased its activity is southern Lebanon, where it deprives the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) of its ability to fulfil its mandate. Hizbullah denies UNIFIL access to significant parts of southern Lebanon, arguing that they are private properties, attacks UNIFIL personnel in order to intimidate them and carries out acts of aggression against Israel from UNIFIL's area of operation. Earlier this month, Ambassadors to Israel of many of the Council members and the troop-contributing countries participated in a briefing on the Israel-Lebanon border. They toured a Hizbullah attack tunnel and saw with their own eyes how Hizbullah has built offensive infrastructure in UNIFIL's area of operation and into Israeli territory, in violation of Israel's sovereignty and of Security Council resolutions. In Syria, the Iranian Quds Force has been deployed alongside Hizbullah to keep Bashar Al-Assad in power. Over 400,000 Syrian civilians have lost their lives in the civil war, many at the hands of people trained by the Iranian regime and using weapons the regime provided in violation of the embargo. Yemen is the largest humanitarian crisis in the world. Some 80 per cent of the population is in need of humanitarian assistance, including more than 12 million children. Instead of helping solve the crisis, the Iranian regime exacerbates it. The regime illicitly provides the Houthis with weapons, in violation of resolutions 2216 (2015) and 2231 (2015). Those weapons were used in the attacks against Saudi targets, as confirmed in the Secretary-General's ninth report on resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2020/531). The illegally transferred arms also help the Houthis put weapons in the hands of their more than 18,000 child soldiers. In Iraq, Iranian Shiite militias, armed with ballistic missiles obtained in violation of the embargo, violently quash any opposition. As has been made evident by recent events in the country, when Iran increases its presence and its transfer of arms, instability and violence increase, putting civilians at risk. That advanced weaponry I mentioned, freely transported throughout the Middle East and used by armed militias and terrorist groups, poses a strategic threat to the entire region. The Iranian regime spreads its weapons in order to promote instability, and it has not allowed an international pandemic to slow it down, on the contrary. The coming months present the international community as a whole, and the Security Council in particular, with three tangible ways to promote peace and stability in the region. The first is to extend the arms embargo on the Iranian regime, which will otherwise expire in October. Thirteen years ago, in response to the regime's reckless and dangerous behaviour, the Security Council adopted resolutions 1747 (2007), 1929 (2010) and, later, resolution 2231 (2015), which placed the essential weapons embargo on the regime. As Iran's actions show, the embargo is more crucial than ever. The Iranian regime is spreading arms across the region, and indeed around the world, causing instability and encouraging violence. Without the embargo, Iran will scale up its military arsenal and acquire a large variety of weapon systems, which it will then transfer to its rogue State and terrorist organization proxies. This will multiply the existing threat that Iran poses and will be disastrous for peace and security in the region and beyond. It is therefore vital that the Security Council renew the embargo and reaffirm its commitment to prevent this destabilizing and dangerous regime from obtaining nuclear weapons. The second way to promote peace and security in the region is to grant UNIFIL the power and tools necessary to effectively implement its mandate in the upcoming mandate renewal. Hizbullah's actions in southern Lebanon have rendered UNIFIL unable to discharge its mandate. The renewed mandate must reflect the challenges posed by Hizbullah and substantially improve UNIFIL's modus operandi. All the necessary steps must be taken by the Council to ensure freedom of movement for UNIFIL forces and more comprehensive and accurate reporting on the implementation of the arms embargo and of incidents in the area. Steps to ensure that thorough investigations of such incidents must also be taken. Only if these concerns are addressed can the deployment of such a sizable force to the region be justified. The third way the international community and the Council can promote peace and security in the Middle East in the coming months is by adopting the realistic and pragmatic approach of President Trump's peace initiative. Israel has always and will always work towards building a just and lasting peace with our neighbours. Just as we have done with Jordan and Egypt, we hope to do with our other neighbours. Israel is committed to advancing President Trump's plan responsibly, while maintaining all of its peace agreements and strategic interests, and in full coordination with the United States. We call on the Palestinians to stop rejecting opportunities for peace and come to the negotiating table. President Trump's peace initiative is a real opportunity to bring peace and security to the Middle East. It represents a realistic outlook and a pragmatic approach to ending conflict. The international community should urge the Palestinians not to miss another opportunity. The spirit of the plan should not only be adopted because it is the most realistic path to peace in decades, but because it sends a strong message that needs to be heard throughout the Middle East: rigid positions that do not reflect reality will not lead to peace. Peace and security cannot be achieved by threatening the other side with resolutions in the General Assembly or the Security Council. It can be achieved only through negotiations and dialogue. By embracing the plan and encouraging the Palestinians to join Israel at the negotiating table, the international community will send a clear message to the entire region: we are committed to ending violence and finding just, lasting and realistic peace. As the entire world navigates the COVID-19 pandemic, the Middle East must also deal with increasing threats to stability in the region. The coming months present the international community with three opportunities to prove that it is committed to promoting peace and security in the region. The arms embargo against Iran must be renewed, UNIFIL must be granted the tools to discharge its mandate and the spirit of President Trump's peace initiative must be embraced so that realistic and just peace can be reached.
