Mr. Takasu (Japan): Japan voted in favour of
resolution 1929 (2010). I would like to explain the
reasons for Japan's support for this important
resolution.

The Iranian nuclear issue has been a source of
serious concern to the international community since
Iran's extensive nuclear activities were revealed in
2002. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
and the Security Council have been closely engaged
and taken a series of decisions to resolve this issue of
international concern. As a country strongly committed
to the regime of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, Japan upholds the importance of
nuclear non-proliferation and the peaceful use of
nuclear energy. It should be stressed, however, that the
right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy entails the
responsibility to comply with requirements and
obligations under the relevant IAEA and Security
Council resolutions. The Council needs to squarely
address the fact that Iran continues to violate its
resolutions and fails to meet IAEA requirements.

The Tehran declaration on the exchange of
Iranian low-enriched uranium and nuclear fuel for the
Tehran Research Reactor would be a positive step if it
were properly implemented. We pay tribute to the
efforts of Brazil and Turkey to contribute to a
diplomatic solution. However, this accord does not
address the core issue of Iran's obligations under
Security Council resolutions. That is to say that Iran is
obliged to suspend all enrichment-related activities
until it fully satisfies and clarifies the international
community's concerns about the nuclear programme
and thereby restores confidence. Even after the Tehran
declaration, Iran continues to enrich and accumulate
more low-enriched uranium, including activities to
enrich up to 20 per cent, in violation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. The recent report of the
IAEA Director General of 31 May once again states
that Iran has not provided the necessary cooperation to

permit the IAEA to confirm that all nuclear material in
Iran is for peaceful activities.

Japan supports the dual-track approach taken by
the E3+3 group - and endorsed by the Security
Council - to solve the Iranian nuclear issue through
dialogue and the necessary pressure, since resolution
1929 (2010) contains a firm but targeted and balanced
message urging Iran to change its policy. Iran should
intensify its cooperation with the IAEA to fully clarify
outstanding and new issues in order to prove that its
extensive nuclear activities are exclusively for peaceful
purposes. Iran should also faithfully implement the
decisions of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 1929 (2010), so as to restore
international trust and confidence.

Resolution 1929 (2010) is in line with the dual-
track approach. In no way does it mean closing doors
to continuing efforts to achieve diplomatic solutions
through dialogue with Iran. I would like to underscore
that the window for diplomatic efforts is open. Such
thinking is well reflected in resolution 1929 (2010). On
its part, Japan continues to seize every opportunity to
urge Iran to take the strategic decision to seek a
constructive solution to the nuclear issue.

