Mr. Kryzhanivskyi (Ukraine): At the outset, let
me join my colleagues in welcoming you, Sir, as
President of the Security Council. I also welcome
Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic, President of the
Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija, and Mr. Agim Ceku, Prime
Minister of Kosovo.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his profound report (S/2006/707) on the situation in
Kosovo and to express our appreciation to Mr. Joachim
Rficker, the newly appointed Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his detailed briefing. My
country would like to assure the Special Representative
of its full support and to wish him every success in his
important international mission at this very sensitive
time.

I would like to flag several points that, in my
delegation's view, are of crucial importance in the
context of today's debate. When we read through the
current report of the Secretary-General, we can see
some signs of positive developments in Kosovo; at the
same time we get a clear picture of the many problems
that remain to be addressed there. We welcome the
progress made in reforming and strengthening the
capacities of the province's Institutions of Self-
Government and in solving community-related issues,
although there is an urgent need for more concrete and
decisive steps in the overall implementation of
standards.

As essential preconditions for a successful
settlement of Kosovo's future status, the issues of
returns, broader engagement by Kosovo Serbs in
political and institutional life at the municipal and
central levels and the protection of minority rights and
of Orthodox religious and cultural sites continue to be
high on the agenda, much to our regret. Given the
ongoing political process, we also find it particularly
disturbing that security incidents, affecting primarily
the Serb population of the province, continue to take
place. To prevent a possible worsening of the situation,
those responsible must be brought to justice
immediately.

Agreeing on the need to give new impetus to the
ongoing political process, and supporting efforts to
achieve a viable and lasting settlement of the situation
in Kosovo, Ukraine consistently advocates stabilizing
the political, economic and security situation in
Kosovo on the basis of the fundamental relevant
Security Council decisions, including resolution 1244
(1999), as well as fully observing the principles of
international law.

We welcome the direct negotiations between
Belgrade and Pristina on defining the political status of
Kosovo, conducted under the auspices of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ahtisaari,
although the results achieved so far are not as
convincing as we expected at the beginning of the
entire process. Nevertheless, we appreciate the
progress made on technical issues, which could
constitute a good basis for major compromises on other
important issues.

In our view, the establishment of effective
dialogue among all Kosovo communities and engaging
all stakeholders are the only way out, leading to a
mutually acceptable and comprehensive compromise
settlement. It is obvious that any decision on the future
status of Kosovo should guarantee the further
implementation of the democratic standards and full
respect for human rights and the rights of all ethnic
Kosovo groups. In our View, it should first and
foremost promote long-term regional security.

Ukraine believes that, given the fragile situation
in Kosovo itself and in the wider area, the political
process of determining the future status of Kosovo
should be handled with the maximum level of
responsibility by all the parties involved. Any imposed
decision or hasty actions leading to the unilateral
change of the borders of an internationally recognized
democratic State in the Balkan region will destabilize
the situation and set a dangerous precedent in Europe
and the entire world. We are especially concerned that
the Kosovo model could be taken as a scenario by
separatist movements in the post-Soviet era.

To our great disappointment, we are witnessing
the unfolding of such an undesirable scenario, with
attempts by some self-proclaimed regimes in the post-
Soviet space to use the settlement of the situation in
Kosovo as a precedent to claim independence. Despite
the concerted efforts of the international community to
resolve frozen conflicts, with full respect for the
territorial integrity of the countries concerned,
announcements of independence referendums in the
Transdniestria region of the Republic of Moldova and
in South Ossetia, Georgia, in our View pose a major
threat and challenge to the stability and continuity of
the process of the settlement of those conflicts.

In this context, it is particularly important to
ensure that the eventual decision of the Security
Council on the final status of Kosovo does not impose
a solution, but is taken only with the clearly expressed
consent of both parties concerned.

