I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on the historic occasion of your country's non-permanent membership of the Security Council and for presiding over the Council for the first time ever. South Africa is grateful for the decision that you made to coordinate and work closely with the African members of the Security Council, which has led to the establishment of the historic A3+1. The partnership has strengthened its voice and has firmly solidified the historic and cultural bonds between the Caribbean countries and the African continent. I also take this opportunity to commend you, Mr President, for your sterling leadership of the Caribbean Community. As a recent report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace by a group of independent eminent persons commissioned by the Secretary-General point out, "[tloday's conflicts are multidimensional, marked to varying degrees by persistent exclusion, inequalities and grievances, including refugee flows, internal displacement and humanitarian spillovers of conflict, weak governance and State capacity, and compounded by climate change, violent extremism and the perverse use of new technologies". (S/2020/678, annex IT, p. 4). We wish to thank the group of independent eminent persons and the Secretary- General for highlighting those contemporary drivers of conflict. We also wish, in this regard, to thank the Peacebuilding Commission and the co-facilitators of the ongoing formal phase of the third peacebuilding architecture review, New Zealand and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, for the commendable work done thus far. It is indeed necessary that the Council organize more periodic discussions on socioeconomic and other emerging conflict drivers to raise awareness of their destabilizing effects and promote efforts to address such problems. It is important to understand the impact of contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity as we look at the dynamic between peace and security and sustainable development. Indeed, we agree that peace and security are inextricably linked to development, and countries that grapple with armed conflict also face significant challenges to their sustainable development, owing to their institutional and governance capacities becoming overwhelmed. Equally important is to understand how contemporary drivers of conflict bring about conflict and perpetuate insecurity. We must be cognizant that countries that struggle with underdevelopment also struggle with the maintenance of their own security and may be particularly susceptible to the effects of organized crime, intercommunal violence and terrorism. In 2020, we have seen how the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has added a further layer of complexity to conflict resolution, peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Our view is that COVID-19, climate change and other such system-wide social and ecological stressors should motivate the United Nations and its partners to work more closely together, including with national and local peacebuilders, to maximize their collective capabilities and resources and focus their efforts where most needed. Drought, water scarcity, food insecurity and desertification, as well as violent and erratic natural disasters, which are thought to be caused or exacerbated by climate change, increase the risk of violent conflicts. There is evidence to suggest that this is the case in the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin, as well as the Horn of Africa and some parts of the Caribbean. Climatic pressures associated with climate change are contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity. They escalate tensions and conflict by placing further strain on scarce resources. Sustainable Development Goal 13, on climate action, together with the other 16 Sustainable Development Goals, remains critical to the effective pursuit by all of humankind of the basic tenets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, namely, the alleviation of poverty by leaving no one behind on the path to sustainable development and by first assisting those furthest behind. In order to mitigate the effects of the contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity, we need to work closely with the relevant United Nations agencies to address the root causes of underdevelopment and draw on the experience of the Security Council in resolving conflict. It is clear that a holistic approach is needed to deal with the ramifications of threats and risk multipliers, which escalate tensions and conflict. We encourage the Security Council to work closely with other United Nations organizations and processes, such as the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Convention on Biological Diversity, as well as with relevant regional organizations, such as the African Union. These collaborations will ensure that the Security Council can obtain information on the potential impact of contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity. Coordinated action between the Security Council, its sister United Nations agencies and bodies, as well as relevant regional organizations, will give us the best chance to manage disputes before they occur, resolve conflict when it arises and manage ensuing instability through peacebuilding measures after conflict has been resolved.
