Mr. Amorim (Brazil): I would like first of all to
congratulate you, Madam, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of February. We
are confident that under your skilled guidance the work of
the Security Council will be conducted with great
efficiency. Let me also take this opportunity to thank your
predecessor, Sir John Weston, for the competence with
which he conducted the business of the Council during the
month of January.

I wish to express my delegation's appreciation for the
Secretary-General's report on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), contained in
document S/1996/75, which presents a comprehensive
picture of the situation in Angola.
The Secretary-General, both personally and through
his Special Representative, Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye,
has been indefatigable in his effort to build confidence and
in assisting in the consolidation of the peace process.
Likewise, the endeavours of the troika of observer States to
stimulate better understanding between the Government and
the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola
(UNITA) also deserve credit. I would like to recall in this
context the important official visit to Angola by President
Mario Soares of Portugal.

Your own trip to Angola, Madam President, was also
a timely and positive initiative, as it underscored the keen
interest of the Security Council, and indeed of the
international community, in bringing peace to Angola once
and for all. There is reason to believe that the letters from
the President of Council which you delivered to both
President dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi, as well as your own
de'marches, have produced a significant impact.

Brazil is fully committed to the peace process in
Angola. Our involvement in the creation of UNAVEM. III
dates from the last period during which we served on the
Council, 1993 to 1994. In my former capacity as Minister
of External Relations of Brazil, I had the privilege of
representing Brazil during the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol in November 1994, the only non-African
authority of ministerial level to be present at that event.
We have now become the largest troop contributor to
UNAVEM. III, with an engineering company, two medical
units and an infantry battalion, as well as military
observers and police observers. This participation reflects
a long-term commitment to Angola and its people, based
on common cultural and historical roots as well as on
similar aspirations to social and economic development.
We are convinced that all Angolans, regardless of what
side they may have fought for in the past, are tired of war
and ready for reconciliation.

However, we must agree with the Secretary-General
in his assessment that

"the peace process in Angola has been proceeding at
a disappointingly slow pace". (S/1996/75, para. 37)

We also agree that efforts by the Government of Angola
and by UNITA to implement the Lusaka Protocol have
been very different indeed and, of course, have had very
different effects on the peace process.

Since the military movements of last December, the
Government has undertaken a series of actions that have
clearly demonstrated its commitment to the peace process,
first by withdrawing its forces from Pedra do Alemao, but
more significantly by starting to quarter its rapid reaction
police. Up to now, more than 2,100 troops from the rapid
reaction police have been quartered. All prisoners
identified have been freed. A large group of personnel
from the firm Executive Outcomes has been repatriated.

On the UNITA side, unfortunately, the picture is far
less encouraging. The quartering of UNITA forces is way
behind schedule. In spite of Mr. Savimbi's promises to
you, Madam President, to the effect that UNITA would
quarter 16,500 troops by 8 February, only 3,651 UNITA
troops had been quartered as of yesterday, 5 February.
We have had slightly bigger figures for today, but they
are still far from what was promised. Prisoners are still
being held by UNITA. The last planned summit between
President Jose Eduardo dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi was
postponed upon UNITA's request.

Yesterday's meeting with contributors of troops to
UNAVEM. III provided us with a useful opportunity to
examine the situation in Angola and to exchange views

 

on the future of the Verification Mission. While aware of
the differences in the parties' compliance with their
obligations in Angola, we remain convinced that the
international community should continue to respond
positively to the construction of a peaceful environment in
that war-torn country, and we intend to maintain our own
involvement in the United Nations peace effort. It is in this
light that we would deem it appropriate for the mandate of
UNAVEM. III to be renewed for an additional six months,
as has been proposed by the Secretary-General. This is not
incompatible, in our view, with sending strong signals to
UNITA as regards the need for full cooperation and
compliance with previously agreed military and political
objectives. This in fact has been our position for a long
time, and we are glad to see that many others have come to
share this View.

At the current stage of events in Angola, we believe
that a six-month extension will allow UNAVEM. III to
continue to fulfil a very important role. It is clear, however,
that the Council must continue to keep a watchful eye on
events in Angola and renew efforts to persuade the less
cooperative party to commit itself to the consolidation of
peace, without reservations, for the benefit of all Angolans.

