Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I, too, thank
Ambassador Gary Quinlan for presenting the quarterly
report on the activities of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and for all the work
he has done with his team as its Chair.

The rapid development of the Iranian nuclear
programme has been a matter of grave concern to the
international community for more than a decade. The
uncertainties over the exclusively peaceful purposes of
that programme and Iran's refusal to negotiate have led
the Council to establish a sanctions regime. However,
we have always kept the door for dialogue open.

The adoption of the Joint Plan of Action of
24 November 2013, which got Iran to suspend the most
sensitive activities of its nuclear programme for six
months, opened a new page in the discussions between
the P5+1 and Tehran. Those discussions will resume on
2 July in Vienna and should continue until the deadline
provided for by the joint plan of action, that is to say,
20 July.

To date, the negotiations have been difficult. The
positions of the P5+1 and Iran remain apart on several
key aspects of the discussion. With our partners of
the E3+3, we are committed to reaching a long-term
solution that makes it possible to establish and to ensure
over time the exclusively peaceful purposes of the
Iranian nuclear programme. However, to that end, Iran
must commit to taking the technical steps to assure the
international community that it will not seek to acquire
a nuclear weapon in the future.

Moreover, it remains essential that Iran engage with
the International Atomic Energy (IAEA) in a fruitful
dialogue on the possible military dimension, past and
present, of its nuclear programme. The slight progress
at this stage on that aspect must be followed by specific
actions on the part of the Iranians. The resolution of
all outstanding issues with the IAEA is crucial to
achieving a long-term solution. I also wish to recall that
the Security Council resolutions on Iran remain fully
in force pending a comprehensive settlement of the
proliferation crisis. The Joint Plan of Action explicitly
states that.

It is therefore with concern that we learned the
conclusions of the investigation conducted by the
Committee's Panel of Experts on the interception of
the ship Klos C by the Israeli authorities. The report
affirms that the transfer of missiles, possibly Syrian,
and of ammunition are a clear violation of the arms
embargo provided for under resolution 1747 (2007).
That incident is worrying on several respects. Not
only does it confirm that weapons coming from Iran
continue to be spread throughout the Middle East and
feed the spiral of violence in the region, but it could
also call into question Iran's good faith in its express
willingness to respond to the concerns of the Security
Council.

It is now up to the 1737 Committee to take
appropriate measures to respond to the incident. A first
useful response would be to transmit to the Member
States the lessons that the Committee might learn from
the violation.

We welcome the publication of the final report
of the Panel of Experts (S/2014/394, annex). That
document is a precious source of information related to
Iran's illicit programme and the means used by Tehran
to circumvent the sanctions. It also makes simple
operational recommendations that the Committee
should implement. We hope that all States Members of
the United Nations will take note of the final report and
use it to improve as much as possible the implementation
of resolutions of the Security Council on Iran.

