Ms. Sison (United States of America): As we
head into September and a new General Assembly
high season, it is appropriate for us to take a moment
to consider some of the Security Council priorities we
have addressed during the busy month of August, which
we will need to continue to address moving forward.
In particular, I would like to focus on the Council's
work on Syria and South Sudan and to briefly touch
on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and
our ongoing deliberations on the selection of the next
Secretary-General.

As we have for so many months, in August the
Council focussed on the political, humanitarian and
security situations in Syria, as other colleagues have
noted. I, too, would like to take a moment to recall the
very moving Arria Forumula meeting that the United
Kingdom, France, New Zealand and Ukraine hosted
with us, where we heard directly from those who
witnessed the siege in Aleppo. They were individuals
who had worked so hard to try to relieve some of the
terrible suffering there, including medical doctors
and first-responder White Helmets. The scenes they
described and images they shared showed clearly a
humanitarian catastrophe of searing scale. Cutting off
food and medicine to hundreds of thousands of innocent
civilians undermines the cessation of hostilities and
plays into the hands of violent extremist groups. The
next day, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Stephen O'Brien and Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura met with the Council and called for an
immediate renewal of the cessation of hostilities and a
pause to enable humanitarian access.

Incredibly, largely because of the Syrian regime's
obstruction, no inter-agency United Nations convoys
were able to deliver assistance from 1 to 23 August,
and from 23 to 29 August just four United Nations
inter-agency convoys delivered assistance to besieged
or hard-to-reach areas in Syria. We simply must see
improvements in humanitarian access. As I said in the
Chamber a little more than one week ago, while the
United States condemns all parties to the conflict that
use siege tactics, we must be clear that the Al-Assad
regime and its international backers are responsible for
the suffering of the overwhelming majority of Syrians
living under siege.

That leads me to a point I would like to make
regarding the use of chemical weapons in Syria. Just
yesterday, we received a disturbing but important
briefing from High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs Kim Won-soo and Joint Investigative
Mechanism Head Virginia Gamba. We are reviewing
the findings of the Joint Investigative Mechanism
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and United Nations. But, based on what we
have heard, the case is strong and clear that a robust
Council response is warranted. It is essential that we
come together to ensure consequences for those who
have used chemical weapons in Syria.

Another country where the status quo is unbearable
is South Sudan. The Security Council took important
action this month to respond to calls from key regional
partners to establish a regional protection force within
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
Resolution 2304 (2016) sets out three priorities for the
4,000-strong regional protection force: first, facilitaing
safe and free movement in Juba; secondly, protecting
key facilities; and, thirdly, preventing attacks against
civilians, the United Nations and humanitarian actors.
The force will have the authority to use all the necessary
means to carry out those responsibilities. Those efforts
will support the broader mission of UNMISS to protect
civilians, monitor human rights, facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and support the implementation
of the peace agreement. We look forward to the Council
mission that Senegal and the United States will lead to
South Sudan starting tomorrow.

Another challenge on the Council's docket that
requires resolve involves the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. Again, and more than once, the
Council was required to meet urgently to address a new
provocation by North Korea. The Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's actions, and the advancements in
its ballistic-missile capabilities in particular, cannot
be ignored.

I would also like to mention our work on the
selection of the next Secretary-General. The Council
held its second and third straw polls in August, and we
feel that the process is moving in the right direction.
But we must stay focussed on our deliberations, despite
the busy month ahead. Even as we plan for the arrival
of many of our countries' leaders in just a few weeks,
we look forward to continuing our efforts in September
to identify the best qualified candidate to lead the
Organization into the next decade.

Finally, I would like to thank Malaysia for its superb
leadership of the Council this month, and to offer our
support to New Zealand as it takes up the gavel in the
busy month of September.

