I thank the President of the Security Council for having convened this meeting to discuss the situation in the Great Lakes region. We thank Special Envoy Mr. Huang Xia for his briefing. I deliver this statement on behalf of the three African countries that are members of the Security Council - Tunisia, South Africa and the Niger - and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. The positive trends that have the potential to usher in a new era in the region run a high risk of being undermined by the spread of the deadly coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Our immediate task is to further consolidate those achievements in order to mitigate the potential threat of the pandemic. Those achievements include the peaceful democratic transfer of power in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the new dynamic that emerged in the region at the initiative of the country's new leadership. The finalization of the Government's national plan, in December 2019, is also a positive development. In addition, the efforts made by the leaders of the region to promote regional cooperation and the de-escalation of tensions reflect a strong commitment to the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. We also commend the convening of the quadripartite ministerial summits and welcome the latest outcome of the fourth quadripartite summit among the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Rwanda and Angola. These developments clearly reflect the new spirit of cooperation prevailing in the region. We share the concerns of the Secretary-General in his latest report (S/2020/272) that the security situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains fragile given the continued challenges in the eastern part of the country. However, we commend the Democratic Republic of the Congo for its commitment to end the activities of foreign armed groups in the east of the country, as well as the joint efforts of countries in the region aimed at the neutralization of foreign armed forces. In addition, we welcome the progress made towards a comprehensive approach, including military and non-military measures, to prevent a regrouping and remobilization of those forces. We call on all stakeholders, including the guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, to strongly support the recently established contact coordination group, designed to promote cross-border coordination and collaboration to neutralize those negative forces. We note some relatively positive political developments in South Sudan, with the appointment of the Transitional Government of National Unity and the improved relations between the Sudan and South Sudan, which have led to the reopening of their common border to facilitate bilateral trade. In the same vein, we encourage the positive developments in the Central African Republic, with all the efforts under way, including the electoral process in December, and call on the armed groups not to obstruct the holding of elections. We reaffirm our support for the initiative of the African Union and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic with regard to the stabilization of the country in the particular context of COVID-19. 17/30 18/30 We also note the ongoing preparations for the general elections in Burundi as the only viable alternative to lead the country to consolidate a peaceful and stable political environment. With all those developments, the region is on a path to sustainable stability. Accordingly, the three African members and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines call upon the international community to continue to support countries in the region to preserve those gains and push forward regional cooperation. We share the sentiments of the Special Envoy that it is imperative to shift the narrative of the Great Lakes from a conflict-dominated region to that of a region on a development trajectory. In that respect, we commend the work done thus far in preparation for the Great Lakes Investment and Trade Conference to promote the Conference and its overarching development and integration objectives. Countries of the region should seize this opportunity to promote solidarity and cooperation through advancing economic cooperation, cross-border trade, infrastructure development and regional integration and by curbing the illicit exploitation and trafficking of natural resources. The African members and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines call on the international community to provide the necessary development funding in accordance with national plans and needs in order to provide opportunities for legitimate socioeconomic activity. We emphasize that all efforts to bring development to the region must work in the best interests of the peoples of the region. As we continue to work towards silencing the guns in Africa, we must remain resolute in our efforts to bring peace and stability to the Great Lakes region. We are deeply concerned by the impact of the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic on the countries and the peoples of the Great Lakes region and by the unprecedented and unpredictable consequences it may bring to an already fragile situation there. We echo the concerns raised at the seventh meeting of the guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, held on 2 April, that, if not well contained, the pandemic could cause considerable economic disruption, social tensions and human suffering. In that spirit, we would like to express our full support to the joint efforts by the countries of the region to fight the pandemic, both at the national and regional levels, including the outcome of the meetings of Ministers of Health of the Southern African Development Community and of the East African Community, held on 9 March and 25 March, respectively. We reiterate the calls made by the African Union Bureau of the Assembly of Heads of States and Government on 2 April, identifying the need for rapid and concrete support by the international community to the local Governments with a view to assisting them to contain the spread of the deadly disease and to ensure regional supply of necessary and vital goods. It is therefore of critical importance that the provision of humanitarian support be unhindered and that special measures be put in place to allow for direct support to those countries vulnerable to the possible destabilizing impact of the virus and the possible undermining of peacebuilding efforts. We welcome ongoing initiatives, including the revival of the Regional Women's Forum under the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, designed to promote women's empowerment across the Great Lakes region, as well as their equal and meaningful participation and representation in political and electoral processes. In conclusion, we would like to express our full support to the Secretary- General's initiative to be led by his Special Envoy to develop, in close consultation with stakeholders and relevant partners, such as the signatories and guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, a peace and security strategy for the Great Lakes region designed to review the United Nations support to conflict prevention and peacebuilding in the region.
