Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Let me thank you, Sir, for
organizing this important debate; in the same breath, I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his insightful
report (S/ 1999/957) on this very important issue.

The question of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is not new. From traditional society to our modern
world with its elaborate written laws, it has always been
understood that persons who are not involved in combat
during an armed conflict should not be subject to attack.
The Geneva Conventions of 1949 and other international
instruments of humanitarian and human rights law prohibit
the targeting or endangering of civilians during times of
hostilities.

However, as we are all aware, civilians, particularly
children and women, have become habitual targets of war
at a time when we should be considering ourselves more
civilized than our ancestors. Children are habitually
abducted and turned into killers, couriers and the sexual
slaves of armed thugs. Women are raped in order to shame
the enemy or destroy its morale. Whole groups of civilians,
by virtue of their ethnicity or religion, are with wanton
regularity decimated, "cleansed" and threatened with
extinction. In short, today's wars, particularly those that go
by the misnomer of civil wars, are nothing more than
glorified acts of terrorism in which the laws of war are
totally ignored.

All of these atrocities are being perpetrated while we
have in place institutions and instruments created to avert
them and punish the perpetrators. We therefore need to ask
ourselves how we can endeavour to become more effective
at utilizing these institutions and instruments. It was with
this in mind that we found the report of the Secretary-
General of paramount importance and relevance. While all
its contents and recommendations may not curry favour
with everybody in this Organization, we dare say that we
find most of them to be quite appealing. They reinforce
what we have always thought should be done in situations
of armed conflict and in endeavours to prevent the eruption
of conflict.

Our central vocation as the United Nations is to
discourage recourse to the use of force, to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. We fully share the
Secretary-General's View on nipping potential conflict
situations in the bud, so to speak. The United Nations
should utilize this capacity early, when signs of a
potentially explosive situation are there. The experiences
of Rwanda, and recently of East Timor, should teach us
a lesson. Timely use of the Secretary-General's good
offices and cooperation with regional organizations in
preventive diplomacy should be exploited to the full.

There can be no doubt that, whenever the situation
so demands, no effort should be spared to attempt some
preventive deployment of peacekeepers, negotiators or
mediators. We fully subscribe to the Secretary-General's
observation that this form of deployment had an
immeasurable impact in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. Where the situation has gone beyond
preventive action, the Security Council should at least
develop the habit of instantly informing the parties to a
conflict about their obligations towards civilians and the
consequences of violating international humanitarian and
human rights law. It should be made clear that children in
particular should not be used as soldiers or otherwise
targeted. The Security Council should not just threaten,
but should make good on its threat. There should be no
hesitation over imposing an arms embargo or other
targeted sanctions where evidence exists that a party or
parties to an armed conflict are deliberately targeting
civilians.

Humanitarian assistance to civilians is essential
during an armed conflict. Parties to a conflict should
therefore allow unimpeded access and provide security
guarantees to humanitarian agencies and their personnel
in the discharge of their duties. Anyone who fails to do
so, in our view, should be held to account under
international humanitarian law. It is becoming quite clear
that denial of access to humanitarian assistance by a party
or parties to an armed conflict has become a valuable
weapon of war.

It is indeed disturbing that even though the majority
of Member States of the United Nations are party to the
international instruments on humanitarian and human
rights law, such instruments continue to be violated with
impunity. My delegation finds merit in the
recommendation by the Secretary-General that where war
crimes and crimes against humanity have been committed,
the Security Council should act without fear or favour.
The Council should not only put in place a mechanism
for ensuring that the suspects are apprehended and
punished, but must also do all in its power to enforce the
warrants of arrest.

 

My delegation also supports the recommendation that
as Member States of the United Nations, we should strive
for the early ratification of the Statute of the International
Criminal Court. If this can be achieved sooner rather than
later, it will go a long way in enabling us to enforce respect
for humanitarian and human rights law.

We are also of the View that the minimum age for
recruitment and participation in hostilities should be raised
to 18. This is quite consistent with our own policy and
practice as a country. Furthermore, we are supportive of the
call for accelerating the process of negotiating an optional
protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on
children in armed conflict.

In conclusion, we fully agree that peacekeeping and
peace-making missions should be structured in such a way
that the special protection of assistance requirements for
children and women and the elderly will always be
paramount.

