Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today is the day when the Security Council
and the world community should raise their voices
in the defence of peace, security, the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. Every delegation
in this Chamber is a sovereign country, and no one
should attempt to pressure or dictate to any of us how
to interpret international law and the Charter of the
United Nations, or how to consult our own consciences.

We have never hesitated to vote in accordance
with the dictates of international law, the Charter, our
conscience and truth. Today's meeting confirms that
the United States, Britain and France, all permanent
members of the Security Council, continue to plunge
world politics and diplomacy into a realm of myths,
myths that have been created in Washington, London
and Paris. That is dangerous work, representing a
kind of diplomacy that traffics in myths, hypocrisy,
deceit and counterfeit ideas. Soon we will arrive at the
diplomacy of the absurd. These three countries create
these myths and try to force everyone to believe in them.
We counter their myths with facts and a true picture of
what is going on. But they do not want to see or hear.
They simply ignore what they are told. They have come
up with a legend about Russia as a constant wielder of
the Security Council veto whom they purposely provoke
into using the veto so as to then present themselves in a
favourable light, especially right now.

They are distorting international law and replacing
its concepts with counterfeits. They are unabashedly
hypocritical. They demand an investigation, and before
the investigation has even started they name and punish
the guilty parties. Why did they not wait for the result
of the investigation that they themselves all called for?

The Security Council is paralysed because of
these countries' persistent deceptions both of us
and the international community. They are not only
putting themselves above international law, they are
trying to rewrite it. They violate international law and
try to convince everyone that their actions are legal.
The representative of the United Kingdom gave three
reasons justifying the missile strikes based on the
concept of humanitarian intervention. They are trying
to substitute them for the Charter. That is why we
and other countries did not support it then and do not
support it now, because we do not want it to become the
justification for their crimes. We demand once again
that that they halt this aggression immediately and
refrain from the illegal use of force in the future.

Today we once again showed the whole world how
we play our underhanded games. In Soviet times there
was a pamphlet entitled Where Does the Threat to Peace
Come From? that described Washington and the NATO
countries' military preparations. Nothing has changed.
The threat to peace comes from exactly the same place.
Look at what they say and listen to the war drums that
they are beating in Washington today in the guise of
hypocritical concern for democracy, human rights and
people in general. The five-minute rule in the latest
presidential note's rules of procedure (S/2017/507) will
not allow me to list them, because the list is too long.
I could cite other examples, as for example how the
President of France showed interest in a conversation
with President Putin in an investigation in Douma and
was ready to send French experts there when that idea
suddenly disappeared. Because a different algorithm
was put forward. That is obvious.

Today is a sad day. It is a sad day for the world,
the United Nations and its Charter, which has been
blatantly violated, and the Security Council, which has
shirked its responsibilities. I should like to believe that
will not see another day as bad as today.

