The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.

Mr. Lal (India). I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate on the Middle East. These
quarterly meetings of the Security Council serve as
a stark reminder that the situation in the Middle East
remains fragile and that peace and reconciliation
continue to elude us. Violence and terror continue
unabated, leading to widespread suffering and
large-scale exoduses of refugees. Those effects are
being felt far and wide.

These quarterly deliberations are also a pointer
towards the interconnectedness of peace and security
across regions and the importance, therefore, that the
international community attaches to the pursuit of a
peaceful and just resolution of those conflicts. However,
international efforts have proved largely insufficient
and ineffective in addressing the multiple challenges to
peace and security in the region.

Despite that gloomy backdrop, we can discern, as
we commence a new year, at least some developments
that can offer some hope, including the Middle East
peace process, the recent Syrian truce and the formation
of a national unity Government in Lebanon.

The lack of any significant forward movement on
the Palestine issue, ever since the collapse of talks
nearly three years ago, continues to be a cause for
concern. The past one and half years has seen a further
deterioration of the security situation in Palestine.
Only a negotiated two-State solution can bring about
sustainable peace and lasting security.

There is therefore an imperative need for restraint
and moderation on all sides. We stress that it is the
collective responsibility of the two sides to ensure that
they move closer to a solution. We welcome the latest
efforts by the international community to promote
peace through the recently concluded Middle East
Peace Conference in Paris, in which more than 70
countries, including India, participated. At the same
time, India continues to invest through its development
efforts, including through capacity-building and skills-
development, so as to empower Palestinian youth with
opportunities to improve their lives.

The truce in Syria, which came into effect on
30 December, was a much-needed positive development.
We welcome all efforts to end violence in Syria and
to jump-start the political process. In that context, we
welcome resolution 2336 (2016), adopted a few weeks
ago. During his recent visit to Syria, India's Minister
of State for External Affairs, Mr. Mobashar Jawed
Akbar, expressed the hope that the age of destruction
would give way to reconstruction in Syria, and that
the solution to the crisis in Syria should be worked out
through a comprehensive political process that achieves
and accommodates the aspirations ofthe Syrian people.

We look forward to the outcome of the direct
talks scheduled for later this month in Astana. It is
encouraging that the process is committed to the
principles of the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic and is
led and owned by Syria. Meaningful involvement by
the United Nations is also essential to the process.

In Lebanon, the recent election of President Michel
Aoun and the subsequent formation of a national unity
Government, under the leadership of Prime Minister
Saad Hariri, have been further positive developments.
In his congratulatory message, the President of India
expressed our hope that the new presidency will usher
in an era of political stability and progress in Lebanon.
We hope that those developments will also be helpful
from the perspective of regional stability. Lebanon's
example of resolving complex sectarian issues via
institutional means through political processes can
serve as valuable lessons for other similar situations in
the region.

'

Whether it is "salaam' or "shalom", the deep-
seated yearning for peace across peoples is only too
evident. We hope that 2017 will bring about a surge in
diplomacy for peace, as has been called for by the new
Secretary-General. Pragmatism and compromise are
essential for moving forward for the greater interests of
all. History has shown that only peaceful coexistence is
sustainable in the long term.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Venezuela.


