The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Uruguay.

I would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for South Sudan, Mr. David Shearer,
for participating in this meeting and for his briefing,
which gives us a complete overview of the latest
developments in South Sudan, of which we have taken
careful note.

Uruguay reiterates its deep concern and alarm at
the political, security, humanitarian and economic
crisis that South Sudan is going through. Today, I
would like to refer specifically to the following: first,
the launch of the national dialogue and the unilateral
ceasefire declaration by the President of South Sudan,
Mr. Salva Kiir; and, secondly, the performance of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and
the deployment of the Regional Protection Force.

Last Monday, the President of South Sudan formally
launched the national dialogue process and, at the same
time, declared a unilateral ceasefire. We acknowledge
that both actions point in the right direction, towards
the peaceful settlement of the conflict in South Sudan,
through a process of dialogue and not through military
operations. However, it should be underscored that it
is essential to carefully monitor the dialogue process
and the effective implementation of the ceasefire. In
that respect, we encourage continued efforts aimed at
making the existing platform for dialogue increasingly
more inclusive and representative of all South Sudanese.
Only an inclusive process of dialogue will have the
legitimacy needed to provide a way out of the conflict.

The international community, including the
United Nations, the African Union and subregional
organizations, must contribute in a coordinated fashion
to ensuring that the dialogue in South Sudan meets
the necessary conditions for legitimacy. We will also
closely follow the implementation of the unilateral
ceasefire by the Government, and we call on the other
political and military stakeholders in the country to
also put an end to hostilities throughout the territory of
the country. The complete and immediate cessation of
armed action in South Sudan is key to the viability of
the dialogue process.

With regard to the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan, I would like to recognize the
difficult work that it is carrying out to prevent further
atrocities and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to the neediest, all in an extremely dangerous
operating environment. In that connection, the Council
has been advised by the Secretary-General that, eight
months after the adoption of resolution 2304 (2016),
which established the Regional Protection Force, the
deployment of some elements of that force has only just
begun, and differences persist between the Government
and United Nations as to the additional grounds needed
by the United Nations and the tasks that the force
will carry out. We therefore urge the Government of
South Sudan to cooperate fully in the implementation
of resolution 2327 (2016), including the deployment of
the Regional Protection Force and the lifting of any
restrictions on UNMISS, in accordance with the terms
of the status of forces agreement.

I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
South Sudan.

