Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): We have
benefited today from several statements which have been in
agreement and expressed convergent views. Mr.
Prendergast's statement was detailed and rigorous;
Ambassador Fowler made an enlightening statement -
we can never congratulate the Chairman of the sanctions
Committee enough for the persistence and willingness he
has displayed in trying to give meaning to the action of
the Security Council and weight to the sanctions; finally,
we heard the statement by the Vice-Minister of External
Relations of Angola.

All of those statements were in agreement and
expressed convergent views. We associate ourselves with
the comments made on behalf of the troika by the
Ambassador of the Russian Federation. But I would also
like to draw attention to the statement made by
Ambassador Greenstock, who referred to a statement
made by the European Union. I believe that, quite rightly,
Ambassador Greenstock recalled that the European Union,
which welcomed the turn of events and the extension of
the Angolan Government's administration, has appealed
to the Luandan authorities in Angola and encouraged
them to establish the political, social and economic
conditions which would make it possible for the rule of
law and democracy to develop in Angola.

As the Luanda Government is reaffirming its
authority throughout Angola, it is good that it is able to
show that it is adhering to those values of good
governance and democratic values, which confirm the
consolidation of a free civil society. That is the goal of
the international community in supporting the Luanda
Government. Therefore, we cannot help but be pleased by
all that is being done in this area by the Angolan
authorities.

What other lessons can we draw from this debate?
First, with regard to the sanctions, as I have already
said - and as has been proved by Ambassador Fowler -
the will of a Chairman of the sanctions Committee and
the means made available to that Chairman to carry out
his functions lead to results. It is evident that such results
have been manifested on the ground with UNITA's loss
of influence and its difficulties. I repeat: this is all due to
the way in which the sanctions Committee has
successfully carried out the rigorous implementation of
Security Council decisions.

You are also right, Mr. President, to impose a
logical sequence on our debates this month, and you were
inspired in inviting Mrs. Ogata here, because today, when
we are talking about Angola, we must bear in mind what
she said about the humanitarian situation. You were right,
Sir, when a few days ago you questioned the limits of the

 

mandate of Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. The problem in Angola is
certainly one of refugees, as there are hundreds of
thousands of Angolan refugees in neighbouring countries.
But above all, there is a considerable problem of several
million displaced persons. Even more disturbing is the fact
that almost 4 million people are affected by the war, and
we should bear that in mind. We must, therefore, follow up
the appeal made by Mrs. Ogata for international assistance,
and we should respond favourably to the United Nations
Consolidated Inter-agency Appeal for Angola, which
amounts to $258 million. Lastly, we should take into
account what was said by Mrs. Ogata regarding the
continuing problems caused by anti-personnel landmines.
Some of those problems have existed since the beginning
of the fighting. That is not the only problem in Angola, but
it strengthens our conviction of the need for a complete
prohibition on anti-personnel landmines.

Another comment that arises from the statements made
is the obvious link among all the crises in Africa. Angola
was led to intervene in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo because UNITA sought to operate from that
territory. We can see that the conflict is now spreading to
other countries in the region; very recently our Namibian
friends were affected, and there have been civilian losses in
Namibia as well. This underlines the need for us, the
Security Council, to deal with all the crises in the region
comprehensively, because each of them affects security in
neighbouring countries.

Obviously, these comments lead us to understand the
necessity of the role of the United Nations. The
Ambassador of Mali rightly recalled the memory of Maitre
Blondin Beye, who was from Mali. Out of respect for his
memory, we must try to preserve the role of the United
Nations in Angola, and we therefore hope that the Status-
of-Mission Agreement will soon be concluded definitively
and implemented. We welcome the Secretary-General's
decision to entrust Ambassador Gambari, his Special
Adviser on Africa, with a special mission in Angola.

However, we must reflect on lessons of the past. The
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) was
criticized for not having seen that UNITA was not
respecting its commitments under the Lusaka Protocol,
particularly as regards disarmament and demobilization. I
believe we must reflect upon this aspect of the Angolan
tragedy. If MONUA was unable to fully discharge its
mandate, we must ensure that the United Nations is not
exposed to such criticism or the repetition of similar
observations, when, in a few days' time, we will take
important decisions on the deployment of observers in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo who will monitor
respect for the Lusaka Agreement.

I think that we must bear very much in mind the
lessons of Angola and avoid repetition of the same errors.
If we underestimate and undersupply a United Nations
mission - that is, if our estimates of the personnel
necessary are insufficient - we could deprive that
mission of the critical mass, of the adequate size, essential
for it to be able to discharge its mandate. A failure in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo means that we might
run the risk of helplessly witnessing a resumption of
hostilities, as was our sad experience in Angola. I think
it is essential that the Security Council, under your
authority, Mr. President, bear very clearly in mind this
experience of Angola when it takes an important decision
relating to the scope and the configuration of the
operation that we wish to set up for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

