Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): Let me join
other speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate on a very important topic. I
also wish to thank France for its successful
chairmanship of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and congratulate Mexico on its
assumption of the chairmanship of that key body of the
Security Council earlier this year. I thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2009/158) and his
briefing. In addition, I am grateful to Special
Representative Coomaraswamy, Under-Secretary-
General Le Roy and UNICEF Executive Director
Veneman for their briefings.

My delegation is pleased to learn from both
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations on the ground that tangible progress has
been made in certain places in the world in the
protection of children in armed conflict. The success in
setting up monitoring and reporting mechanisms on
grave violations of children's rights and in developing
and implementing action plans, as well as other kinds
of concrete commitments related to situations of armed
conflict, is equally heartening.

In that connection, we commend the dedicated
and effective efforts of all related institutional and
individual actors, without whom such progress and
success would be impossible. We especially appreciate
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and her team for their
work in this challenging field, including their country
visits, which have considerably helped to facilitate the
collaboration between the United Nations and relevant
partners in implementing resolution 1612 (2005).

However, my delegation is deeply concerned
about the fact that, with armed conflicts escalating in
many parts of the world, children continue to fall
victim to killing, maiming and all other sorts of
violence, including, in particular, sexual violence,
recruitment and attacks targeting schools and hospitals.
We reiterate our consistent position that, in situations
of conflict, all parties concerned are obliged to comply
with international human rights and humanitarian law.
We therefore condemn all such acts of violence and
abuse against children and call on the United Nations
system and the rest of the international community to
make greater efforts for the sake of children caught in
armed conflicts.

We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the child protection mandate of
all relevant United Nations peacekeeping and political
missions be further enhanced, including by formulating
specific provisions for the protection of children and
deploying child protection advisers. We endorse the

idea of establishing appropriate strategies and
coordination mechanisms among relevant Member
States, United Nations peacekeeping and political
missions and United Nations country teams for
information exchange and cooperation on cross-border
child protection concerns.

Given the long-term adverse impact of armed
conflicts and related violations and abuses against
children, it is our view that the Security Council should
pay equal attention to all grave violations and address
them accordingly. At the same time, if disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes for
children are to be effective and sustainable, timely and
adequate human, material and financial support is
essential.

Moreover, all necessary measures to be taken in
that connection should be undertaken within the
framework of a broader strategy of conflict prevention
and response that deals with, inter alia, the root causes
of armed conflict - hunger and poverty - and covers
social, economic and development issues during and
after conflicts. Such a strategy can and should involve
and be assisted by the United Nations, particularly
through close collaboration among United Nations
bodies, including peacekeeping and political missions,
UNICEF, the United Nations Development Programme
and other specialized agencies.

Finally, let me emphasize the importance of
education as an important means of preventing armed
conflict and of addressing violations against children in
conflict areas. The public - including, first and
foremost, children themselves needs to be equipped
with knowledge about children's rights and ways to
ensure their implementation, so that it will be willing
to report cases of violations and participate in fighting
them.

 

With that in mind, we support activities to raise
public awareness about children's rights and to
disseminate best practices in the protection of children
in conflict areas. We strongly believe that United
Nations agencies, particularly UNICEF, and other
international organizations can be of great help in that
regard. We also encourage civil society organizations
to energetically engage in and constructively contribute
to such endeavours.

