The President (spoke in French): I note the
presence at the Council table of His Excellency Mr.
Theo-Ben Gurirab, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Namibia.

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Pierre Elliott Trudeau,
former Prime Minister of Canada

The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Council I should like to convey my heartfelt
condolences to the Government and people of Canada,
and to the bereaved family, on the death of Mr. Pierre
Elliott Trudeau, former Prime Minister of Canada. His
deep dedication to the cause of international peace and
his firm support for the United Nations and its
activities are appreciated by the entire international
community.

I invite members of the Council to stand and
observe a minute of silence.

The members of the Council observed a minute of
silence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Burundi


The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Burundi in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion Without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nteturuye
(Burundi) took the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Nelson Mandela,
Facilitator of the Arusha process.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mandela to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I give the floor to the Secretary-General.


