Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. James Swan, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, for
his comprehensive briefing on developments in the
country. We also thank Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict; Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia and Head ofthe African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and Ms. Amina Arale
for their briefings.

We agree that the political situation in Somalia
remains fragile. There are complexities in relations
between Mogadishu and the federal member states.
The situation is also complicated by the conflict among
various clans in some states and by the start of the
electoral cycle. The general elections planned for 2020-
2021 also pose a serious challenge for the country.
We are particularly concerned about the activities of
the terrorist group Al-Shabaab. It continues to control
broad swathes of the country and is also a threat to the
region. In Kenya, terrorists have virtually been able to
establish a full-fledged independent cell. We are also
extremely concerned about Al-Shabaab's incursions
and use of improvised explosive devices. Our
delegation specifically asked for a separate briefing at
today's meeting by the Director of the United Nations
Mine Action Service on the threat from such devices in
Somalia. We regret that the Director was unable to meet
our request.

We welcome the successes that have been achieved
in the joint military operations between the Somali
armed forces and AMISOM. against Al-Shabaab in
South Shabelle. Those activities should be continued.
We believe that in order to cut off the terrorist threat,
there is a need for effective joint work to establish a
unified national security architecture. The main goal is
to ensure the gradual transfer of responsibility for the
country's security to the Somalis themselves. We trust
that this process will be carried out in line with existing
plans and take into account specific developments on
the ground.

AMISOM. continues to play a key role in addressing
security challenges in Somalia. Its reconfiguration
should go hand in hand with the establishment of Somali
military and law-enforcement structures. Cuts in the
number of African peacekeepers in current conditions
are not only counterproductive but also dangerous.

We also must address the humanitarian situation
in the country. We note with concern that the lack of
rainfall and the forced displacement of the population
have caused the situation in the area to deteriorate
further in recent months. Despite all the difficulties,
we also note the encouraging trends in Somali
State-building. We commend Mogadishu's efforts to
build bridges with the federal member states.

Strides have been made in constitutional reform.
Progress has also been made in the reconciliation
process in Galmudug and South-West State. There has
also been renewed cooperation between the two houses
of the Parliament. Moreover, a positive trend is being
maintained in establishing the legal framework for the
upcoming electoral cycle. The financial and economic
sector is being effectively restructured as well.

In conclusion, we would like to note that an effective
fight against the challenges that I have listed is possible
only through strict respect for Somali sovereignty and
the non-interference of external players in the internal
affairs of the country. We hope that those are the
principles that will guide the work of the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia.
In that regard, we welcome the determination of the
country's authorities to continue fruitful cooperation
with the United Nations presence.

