The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of Slovenia.

I would like to begin by expressing my delegation's
appreciation to Assistant Secretary-General Ibrahim Fall for
his briefing today. His briefing and other information that
we are receiving show that this debate is indeed timely.

Burundi is a situation of grave political crisis and one
where a humanitarian drama is evolving. We have learned
about 10,000 refugees since the beginning of October, a
number which has to be added to 300,000 refugees in
Tanzania and about 800,000 internally displaced persons in
Burundi. The reports which we receive from the United
Nations Children's Fund speak about the very rapidly
deteriorating health situation of children. One of the
illustrations is that of 287 health centres, which barely
deliver basic health services, 30 have been closed. If this
trend continues, the situation will become much worse.
Hence, there is a reason for saying that this is a timely
debate and for pointing out that this tragedy has to be
stopped.

Today's open debate can also be considered timely
because it is an opportunity for the Security Council to
reconfirm its support for the Arusha peace process. Every
speaker this afternoon and this morning has expressed
regret over the unfortunate, untimely passing of Mwalimu
Julius Nyerere, the Facilitator of the Arusha peace process.
Ambassador van Walsum said that many of us had
expectations at the beginning of the year that the peace
process in Arusha would be completed by the end of this
year, and now we know that that goal will not be realized.
Now it is clear that peace efforts for the restoration of
constitutional rule and the promotion of peace and
reconciliation will have to continue next year.

The appointment of a new facilitator is a task of
critical importance, and we share the disappointment over
the fact that the appointment has been postponed again. We
think that this is a priority task which has to be pursued
vigorously. Furthermore, we believe that it is essential that
all parties be given the opportunity and that they
participate. A peace agreement which does not enjoy the
support of all the players in Burundi will be meaningless
and will probably not be accepted by the entire
population.

Another basic problem which needs to be mentioned,
and has been mentioned by everybody in the discussion
today, is that of the safety and security of international
personnel. The sad events of 12 October 1999, when we
learned about the attack on an inter-agency evaluation
mission which was visiting a camp of displaced persons
in the province of Rutana, near the border of Tanzania,
showed how fragile and precarious is the situation in the
country, and how persistent is the violence. We believe
that every effort needs to be made to bring the
perpetrators to justice and to take the experience of this
tragic event as yet further proof of the need to
reinvigorate the peace process in Arusha.

The problems are many and they are frightening, and
the Security Council must be able to react. We hope that
the visit of the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Kieran
Prendergast, will bring fresh information, new ideas and
proposals as to how the Security Council can contribute
to the overall efforts and how the United Nations can
support the efforts of the regional organizations. We hope
that the Council will be ready not only to follow events,
but also to act when necessary and make proposals or
recommendations as appropriate.

I shall now resume my function as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Finland. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

