Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I welcome you,
Mr. President, back to New York and thank you for
convening this important discussion today. I also thank
Ambassador Patriota, not only for his briefing today,
but also for his chairmanship of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). We value that very much.

Finally, I thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for his briefing. We particularly appreciate the fact
that the Secretary-General's report not only includes
some very useful and illustrative examples of country-
specific situations in which particular peacebuilding
mechanisms have worked, but also gives us examples
of where they have not. That, I think, is the real value
as a report such as this.

This briefing and the presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/2 we have just adopted come at the
start of a very important year for peacebuilding as
the 2015 comprehensive review gets under way. It is
central to the work of the Council that we achieve the
best possible peacebuilding architecture. The Deputy
Secretary-General spoke of that as being core to our
operation, so New Zealand encourages the expert panel
to be ambitious in its work and in its recommendations.
We would also encourage the panel to be mindful of,
and where possible to coordinate its activities with, the
high-level review of United Nations peace operations,
which is proceeding contemporaneously.

A robust assessment of lessons learned from
countries on the PBC agenda will be important in
ensuring that the Panel's findings are underpinned by
real-world examples, not least those built on proven
linkages among development, human rights and peace
and security. It is our view and feeling that it is much
more difficult to dispute proven facts, on which the
Panel will rely, than it is to argue unproven theory.
Facts work; theories are just theories.

New Zealand comes to the Council to promote
practical approaches and practical solutions, so
we attach very real importance to the review. We
particularly welcome the case-study model that has
been endorsed by the Council, and overall we shall be
looking for a process that, in due time, sees the Council
and the General Assembly adopting recommendations
that make a practical difference by better equipping
United Nations peacebuilding to prevent relapses into
violent conflict.

As the review team begins its work, and drawing
on New Zealand's experience - not least through
participation in United Nations missions in Timor-
Leste and others in our region and beyond - I want to
offer six very brief thoughts.

First, we echo the Secretary- General's call for United
Nations peacebuilding work to be more integrated and
coherent. It is essential that peacebuilding be carefully
integrated into broader post-conflict efforts, so we
have been very pleased with recent efforts to improve
the integration of mandated peacebuilding tasks into
the earliest possible phases of mission planning and
deployment. Coordination among peacebuilding
actors is also important. A thorough assessment of
the comparative advantage of all actors in specific
situations - including those that are not part of the
United Nations system - is key to avoiding duplication
and to ensuring that the most capable entity is given the
job and can then get on with the job.

Secondly, New Zealand supports the Secretary-
General's observation concerning the crucial role
played by regional actors and neighbouring States.
In the Pacific, the involvement since 2003 of all 15
members of the Pacific Islands Forum in the Regional
Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands exemplifies the
success of strong regional peacebuilding partnerships.

Thirdly, we would urge the Panel to focus its
attention on progress made in strengthening the United
Nations own capacity for rapid identification and
deployment of relevant peacebuilding expertise, not
least by drawing on recommendations from the civilian
capacity review.

Fourthly, careful planning of peacekeeping
transitions is essential for building on early
peacebuilding gains. The reconfiguration of the
United Nations presence in Timor-Leste preceding the
withdrawal of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste in 2012 provided valuable lessons in that
regard, so we are pleased to see Timor-Leste included
as one of the Panel's case studies.

Fifthly, it is time for us to address how we can
tangibly strengthen the interaction between the Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission. The PBC's work
is so intimately linked with ours that more frequent,
in-depth interaction is in the best interests of both
entities. We would, for example, see value in the Council
making much better use of the first-hand knowledge,
expertise and analysis of PBC country-configuration
Chairs, including their more consistent inclusion in
relevant Council consultations.

Finally, New Zealand encourages the review team to
draw on the peacebuilding work of the Group of Seven
Plus, led by Timor-Leste, reflecting insights drawn
from decades of peacebuilding practice, and from the
unique perspective of the recipients of peacebuilding
assistance.

Successful peacebuilding helps lay the foundations
for sustainable peace. Again, I echo the Deputy
Secretary-General's comment that it is core to the
work of the Council. The Council has a major stake
in ensuring that the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture is capable of delivering the results the
international community demands and, above all, the
very positive results and the very positive outcomes
that are so deserved by communities emerging from
violent conflict.

