The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of the United
States.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for taking the time to come and talk to us about
peacekeeping and, more important, for his efforts and
willingness to look at peacekeeping reform in a way
in which we can make it more effective for those who
need it.

I also would like to thank my colleagues for
participating in this important discussion. I think
that so much of what they said was valuable but,
more important, there is a collective effort to reform
peacekeeping so that it does more for people on the
ground in a manner in which it is not only efficient but
effective. I thank them for taking the time to do that.

If asked what the United Nations does, the average
person would most likely say peacekeeping. The Blue
Helmet is the most recognizable symbol of how the
United Nations extends its presence and shows value in
the world. With more than a 100,000 total personnel and
a budget close to $8 billion, peacekeeping is the United
Nations most powerful tool to promote international
peace and security. We recognize in particular the
courage of those men and women who risk their lives
serving in peacekeeping missions, and we pay tribute
to the more than 3,500 peacekeepers who have lost
their lives to keep others safe. By drawing troops
and resources from many countries, peacekeeping
helps share the burden of promoting global security.
When peacekeeping works well, we see countries that
have been able to end internal conflicts, re-establish
democratic political processes and develop their own
capacities to protect their people.

I think that we can all agree that peacekeeping
is far from perfect. Many of the Security Council's
past discussions on reform focused on operations and
efficiency issues, and that is all extremely important.
Those efforts need to continue but, when I think about
United Nations peacekeeping, I go back to what I
learned as a young accountant: go back to the basics and
ensure that there are measurables and accountability.
We need to work smarter. We need to show results.
We need to find value, and not just financial value. We
need to focus on what the original intent was. Are we
actually on track in accomplishing that intent? Are we
meeting the needs of the people?

Because we cannot continue these massive
missions forever, we need to focus on the people whom
we are supposed to lift up, the peacekeepers who lack
the support or the direction that they need and the
taxpayers who pay the bills. The simple fact is that, in
many cases, United Nations peacekeeping is just not
working. In Darfur, a 17,000-strong force designed for
yesterday's challenges is not built for the needs of today.
In South Sudan, where United Nations staff helped save
hundreds of thousands of civilians, those vulnerable
people have no hope of returning to a normal life. In
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Government
uses the United Nations to neutralize only the armed
groups that it wants, while leaving others untouched.
Outside of Africa, we have our mission in Kosovo that,
if we are honest with ourselves, has no real reason
for being.

The risk is that of creating an artificial, subsidized
peace that discourages real home-grown resolutions
to those crises. That is why we need to think and why
we need this kind of honest strategic review. We invite
Council members to join us in evaluating each of our
peacekeeping missions as their mandates are renewed.
Our goal is to identify those missions that lack the
underlying political conditions for a resolution, which
numerous studies have concluded is central to mission
success. To help guide us, we have developed a set of
principles to which, we think, missions should be held.

We have already touched on the first principle,
which is that missions must support political solutions.
The mission in South Sudan, for example, involves a
Government entangled in a civil war. At this time there's
no credible political path to peace. The Government
lacks the incentive to end the conflict, and has made
the job more difficult for our peacekeepers. We cannot
manage our way out of that problem. While it may be
easier to accept and prolong the status quo, we are not
doing ourselves or the people on the ground any favours.
The Council must commit to bringing its political
pressure to bear on non-cooperative Governments.

The second principle is also fundamental. We need
host-country cooperation. This is not to say that the
Council should shy away from countries in which it is
not welcome or forego to exercise its right as mandated
by the Charter of the United Nations to intervene when
needed. But we need to acknowledge that, time and again,
missions have failed to help those on the ground when
host Government's chose to obstruct them. In Darfur,
the Government sought to restrict our peacekeepers
from day one. It delayed visas, prevented freedom of
movement and delayed customs clearance for food and
equipment. The mission has suffered, which means that
the people on the ground have suffered.

Thirdly, peacekeeping mandates must be realistic
and achievable. Mandates should be targeted to the
challenges facing the country and given the resources
and the capabilities to do the job. At the same time,
we must avoid mission creep. It is common practice for
missions to gradually snowball over time as they pick
up increasing tasks and staff. What we end up with is
a monster mission with unclear priorities or reporting
lines. In Lebanon, for instance, the mission does critical
work to maintain stability along the Blue Line but,
beyond those core-monitoring tasks, the mission does
everything from publishing magazines to providing
a navy.

Fourthly, we must have an exit strategy. We should
agree early on what success looks like, how to achieve
it and how to set the country or region on the path
to independence from the mission. These strategies
should be considered at the earliest stages of mission
planning and should be central to United Nations
regular reporting.

Lastly, we must be willing to adjust mandates
both when situations improve and when they fail to
improve. Lifting up the people of those regions must
be our objective. When this is achieved, institutional
inertia cannot be allowed to prolong operations. When
circumstances fail to progress, we must be willing to
draw down or restructure the mission and look at other
ways in which to bring about stability.

We have already begun to apply these principles to
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
The Mission is working in a country in which it is
increasingly clear that the Government is preying on
its own people. Recent reporting revealed that the
State was responsible for human rights violations,
including the killing of 480 civilians. Yet we ask our
peacekeepers to support the same Government. That
is why the changes that we made to MONUSCO's
mandate last week were so critical. Henceforth, we will
focus on the protection of civilians and support for the
democratic transition of power. We will develop an exit
strategy, and we will demand real accountability from
troop-contributing countries.

I recognize that much of the commentary about
peacekeeping reform in the weeks to come will centre
on budgets and troop levels, but I believe that experience
shows that funding is no guarantee for success. I also

recognize that there are those who say this initiative
represents a withdrawal of the United States from the
global stage. Nothing could be further from the truth.
The United States will continue to lead both here at
the United Nations and out in the real world. Part of
leadership is knowing when something needs to be
fixed and having the will to do something about it. I
look forward to working with all Council members to
do just that.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

The meeting rose at 6.50 pm.
