The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank the
Egyptian presidency for convening today's open debate.
This is an opportunity to discuss how we can best
counter terrorist narratives and ideologies, as well as to
recall the fundamental interests and values connected
to that pursuit.

The Council is all too aware of the volatile mix of
protracted conflicts, terrorism and violent extremism
in today's world. It has mourned fallen soldiers,
police and peacekeepers, as well as the tragically high
numbers of civilian Victims of atrocities committed by
terrorists. It has used sanctions and other measures to
stop their activities. It has understood the serious threat
posed by terrorist groups, which control territories and
population centres and attempt to blur borders between
sovereign States.

We all know that terrorist groups are exploiting
religious beliefs in order to incite hatred and Violence
and to cause division and polarization in our societies.
We see that happening all over the world today. They
blatantly challenge the values enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and our shared pursuit of peace, justice
and human dignity.

We must be aware that terrorist bombs are aimed
at devastating more than human lives. They target our
common values. They aim to spread fear. We therefore
have a responsibility to shield people from harm and
fear and to protect universal values from erosion. When
we fulfil this responsibility, we gain both a moral and
strategic advantage. Faith in fundamental human rights
and in the dignity and worth of the human person, and
the primacy of global solidarity represent the greatest
force in our hands to counter terrorist narratives
and ideologies.

There is around the world a great deal of legitimate
concern about young people falling prey to terrorist
narratives and ideologies. We know that youths
may be vulnerable to the lure of terrorists who offer
them a sense of belonging, a salary and a promise of
glory - even paradise. We all know that their promises
are patently false, but we also know that young people
are capable of discerning the truth and recognizing
siren songs. I believe, in fact, that the vast majority of
young people are naturally inclined towards building a
good life for themselves and others. I am confident that
they are eager to make contributions to peaceful and
thriving societies for all.

The Security Council recognized the value and role
of young people and young peacebuilders in its historic
resolution 2250 (2015) of December last year. That
resolution will, I am sure, turn out to be the equivalent
for young people of what resolution 1325 (2000) is for
women and security.

I dare say that if young people are considered good
enough to fight wars, they certainly deserve the chance
to make peace. I call on Council members and all
Member States to translate the resolution into practice.
We must do more than repeat general statements about
young people being the leaders of the future, as we
often say. We must invest in youth today with material
resources and meaningful political empowerment.
We must not only work for youth; we must work with
youth. Instead of viewing young people as part of the
problem, we must harness their immense potential to
forge solutions.

In today's world, young people have superior
communications skills, extensive social media networks
and often more influential voices than their elders. We
need only check with our children and grandchildren.
If we are to counter terrorist narratives, we have to
motivate and mobilize this generation of youth i the
largest in history - to amplify our messages ofcommon
humanity. Young people are thirsty for visionary ideas.
Good governance and respect for human rights and
the rule of law should therefore be central components
of any inspiring vision. When we give young people
avenues and arenas for engagement and action, they
will see hope and be ready to build peaceful societies
to the benefit of generations to come.

The Secretary-General has often stressed that
terrorism and violent extremism are not related to any
single ethnic group, nationality or religion. Terrorists
are united in their nihilistic and anti-humanistic beliefs.
We must respond by uniting as one human family that
defends our shared values and embraces diversity.
The United Nations is a wonderful platform for such
mobilization. The incitement and recruitment of
terrorists, as well as conditions conducive to terrorism,
have been addressed in several Security Council
resolutions, the General Assembly's Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and the Secretary-General's Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.

The Secretary-General has called for a
comprehensive approach to respond to the complex
factors that drive people to violent extremism. It is
necessary to counter and refute false and nefarious
narratives. Such narratives must be replaced with
compelling alternative visions, backed by tangible
opportunities for meaningful and constructive
engagement, including jobs, as youth unemployment is
a scourge around the world.

When we are to address terrorist threats, security
and military responses remain important - let us state
that clearly - but they are not enough. The Secretary-
General strongly focuses on a preventive approach in
his Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. We
need to spread positive messages and take pre-emptive
actions. Such messages and actions should address
conditions that are conducive to terrorism and
violent extremism.

We also need to listen carefully to affected
communities. We need to engage at the grass-roots
level. We need to partner with faith leaders, women
and young people. They are the ones on the front lines,
facing and standing up to violent extremists, and they
know best how to respond at the local and individual
levels. The Internet is a powerful tool that violent
extremists have used to spread their messages of hate.
We should encourage more study and research on how
violent extremists are using the Internet and social
media.

At the same time, it is important to uphold the
freedoms of speech, expression and assembly. Efforts
should be redoubled to protect pluralism and diversity,
including in the media. The protection of free media
can be a defence against terrorist narratives. There
must be no arbitrary or excessive punishment against
people who are simply expressing their opinions. Space
for civil society and non-governmental organizations to
operate freely is essential. And journalists and human
rights defenders deserve safety and support.

Terrorists are aiming to create a climate of fear and
hysteria where human rights are suppressed. We must
answer by adamantly preserving our common values,
amplifying moderate voices and enabling individual
freedom. The fight against terrorism must not be
carried out in such a way that we infringe upon basic
freedoms. Violations of human rights in the name of
countering violent extremism will give terrorists their
best recruitment tools. Marginalizing or demonizing
certain groups, whoever they may be, fuel the us-
against-them menality, which is one of the gravest
threats in our world today.

In a deeper sense, the best narrative to counter
violent extremism may perhaps not be a narrative.
This whole discussion is not about a story; it is about
action to build peace, development and human rights. It
is about standing together in global solidarity against
forces that want to divide and scare us, which want us to
forget the beauty of diversity and the tremendous power
of fundamental and universal values and principles.

