Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon (Republic of Korea): At
the outset, let me join the others in welcoming to the
Council Ms. Sandra Honore, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. I thank Ms. Honore for her
comprehensive briefing.

First, it is encouraging to note that the overall
security situation in Haiti has steadily improved.
Stability, although fragile, has gradually taken root
in Haitian society, thanks to the resilient efforts of
the Haitian people themselves and the dedication of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH).

Notably important progress has been made in
police capacity-building. Its performance has been
improved and training of the Haitian National Police
has proceeded as planned. While international support
is still needed to ensure the successful completion of the
important task of police capacity-building, we believe
that the recent developments provided fresh impetus
to the Mission to move forward in its conditions-based
consolidation plan.

On the political process, however, my delegation is
deeply concerned over the ongoing political stalemate,
including continuing delays in senatorial, municipal and
local elections. Particularly, further delay in senatorial
elections threatens dysfunction of the Senate and, by
extension, the National Assembly, thereby creating an
institutional vacuum in the legislative branch. Such a
setback could not only erode confidence in the political
system, but could undermine the valuable progress
achieved so far. It is something we cannot afford.

We once again urge that fair, inclusive and
transparent elections be held before the end of the
year. To that end, we hope that political leaders will
demonstrate their firm determination to reach the
necessary agreement and compromise as soon as
possible.

Continued attention is needed in terms of the
humanitarian situation in Haiti. While the establishment
of the interministerial commission on human rights
was a positive step forward, the situation on the ground
has not kept pace with expectations. Sexual violence
and gender-based crimes persist. Perpetrators often go
unpunished.

Even more disturbing is the fact that more than half
of the crimes committed against minors relate to sexual
violence. We raise an urgent call for a strengthened
police and judicial response to sexual Violence. In that
regard, we express our strong support for MINUSTAH's
efforts to raise awareness on those issues through
workshops and police training programmes.

Finally, on MINUSTAH, it should be noted that
the political landscape surrounding MINUSTAH has
evolved since the Mission was deployed, in 2004.
The recent developments, such as police capacity
improvement, an improved security situation and
overall stability, demand the reconfiguration of
MINUSTAH in its nature and scope.

In that regard, we appreciate that MINUSTAH's
consolidation plan has proceeded without disruption
or setback. We support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General for a 15 per cent reduction in the
Mission's uniformed strength. However, we believe
that the adjustment process should proceed with great
prudence and in response to developments on the
ground. We also support the extension of the Mission's
mandate for another year.

In conclusion, we appreciate the dynamism
provided by the Special Representative to the Mission
during this crucial period. We assure the Special
Representative of our strong support in undertaking her
important responsibilities.

