At the outset, I would like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. I echo his call for an immediate, complete and lasting nationwide ceasefire in Syria. It is an absolute priority in the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). France is deeply concerned about the growing instability throughout Syria. The situation in the north-west is of particular concern, and we will continue to closely monitor its evolution. Although on the whole the ceasefire is holding for now, shelling continues and the military build-up on each side is particularly worrisome. It is essential that the regime and its allies do not restart an offensive. Terrorist groups continue to pose a serious threat for international security. That is the case in the north-east, where the significant threat of Da'esh warrants our careful attention. Terrorist groups have also recently gained a foothold in regime- controlled areas. Nevertheless, the fight against terrorism cannot justify blatant violations of human rights or international humanitarian law. The deterioration of the security situation in the south-west over the past few months is also worrisome. It clearly shows that returning to the regime's predation and security stranglehold cannot bring stability in the short term or in the long term. It is therefore urgent to implement the call of the Secretary-General and his Envoy for a complete nationwide ceasefire, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). It is of the utmost importance that their call be heeded in order to enable the response to COVID-19 throughout Syria. We call on all parties to commit genuinely to that objective. In that regard, we recall that the Syrian regime has not responded to their appeal. The spread of the pandemic will further worsen the dire humanitarian situation in Syria, particularly in Idlib and in the north-east, and must be prevented. We will return to that point this afternoon. The United Nations must be at the forefront of the efforts aimed at securing a nationwide ceasefire. That is in the mandate for it set forth in resolution 2254 (2015). Most important, it is the only way to guarantee a lasting and verifiable ceasefire that will not be a mere tactical pause and to create the conditions for the renewal of a credible political process. Secondly, there is an urgent need to overcome the current political deadlock and to relaunch a broader peace process. We have taken note of the agreement reached by the parties on the agenda of the Constitutional Committee last month. However, the regime continues to block the work of the Constitutional Committee by trying to backtrack on this agreement and by refusing to allow any video-teleconference meeting of the Committee. In contrast, the opposition has consistently showed flexibility and openness. This situation has been going on for too long. We cannot continue to let the regime undermine the credibility of the United Nations and the Security Council. In this context, we call on Geir Pedersen to make it clear to the Council when he deems it that he is no longer able to continue his efforts with respect to the Constitutional Committee. This is why it is key in parallel to launch a broader political process based on all elements of resolution 2254 (2015). The Special Envoy has our full support in this regard. There is also an urgent need to secure progress on the subject of detainees, especially in the context of the spread of COVID-19. France fully supports the calls of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for a large-scale release of detainees and abductees and for access to all detention facilities. Let me recall that over 100,000 persons have ended up in jail or in the hands of the security branches of the regime. We urge the Syrian regime to allow the release of the most vulnerable and of political prisoners who have not been granted presidential amnesty. Now is the time to move beyond the one-for-one approach and enhance the role of the United Nations. As elections are looming, we need to reaffirm the conditions and standards for a transparent, free and fair ballot, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The elections should take place in a safe and secure country, under United Nations supervision and with the participation of all Syrians, including those from the diaspora. Absent those conditions, any election in Syria would again have no value. Moreover, let me reaffirm that, without a credible political process firmly under way, France and the European Union will not fund the reconstruction in Syria. Although time is passing, the crimes of the Syrian regime cannot be forgotten or remain unpunished. The commission of inquiry set up by the Secretary-General and the Investigation and Identification Team of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons have clearly pointed to the responsibility of the Syrian regime in attacks against de-conflicted medical infrastructure and in the use of chemical weapons. As the trials that have commenced in Germany against senior members of the Al-Assad regime and the ongoing proceedings in France confirm, war crimes and crimes against humanity will not go unpunished. France will continue to firmly support all efforts to collect and preserve evidence and fight impunity, including through the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. 7124
