Mr. Wais: I very much welcome the opportunity to
address the Security Council today on the successful
recent conclusion of the High-level Revitalization
Forum on the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.

Almost one and a half years ago, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) Assembly of Heads
of State and Government mandated the High-level
Revitalization Forum of the South Sudanese parties and
stakeholders to discuss concrete measures for achieving
a permanent ceasefire and the full and inclusive
implementation of the Agreement, as well as to develop
a revised and realistic timeline and implementation
schedule towards democratic elections at the end of the
transition period. The Assembly further mandated the
IGAD Council of Ministers to convene and facilitate
that process and instructed the Chairperson of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, the IGAD
secretariat and my Office to support the Council of
Ministers. I am happy to inform the Council today
that IGAD member States, together with the support
of Council members and the international community,
have successfully completed that noble process, with
all the South Sudanese parties and stakeholders signing
the revitalized Agreement.

I would like to take this opportunity to very
briefly highlight our achievements and outcomes to
the Council. I will highlight some key progress made
following the decision of the IGAD Assembly at its
thirty-second extraordinary session, held in Addis
Ababa on 12 June, during which the Assembly, inter
alia, mandated His Excellency President Omer Hassan
Al-Bashir to facilitate the second round of face-to-face
discussions between President Salva Kiir and Mr. Riek
Machar to discuss and resolve the outstanding issues
on governance and security arrangements, including
measures proposed in the revised bridging proposal of
the IGAD Council of Ministers.

In accordance with the decision of the Assembly,
the Khartoum round of talks was launched on 25 June
as a continuation of the two phases of the High-level
Revitalization Forum and the face-to-face talks held in
Addis Ababa. The Khartoum talks followed the signing

of the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities, Protection
of Civilians and Humanitarian Access, on 21 December
2017, and the initialling of several agreed governance
and security issues here in Addis Ababa. The Khartoum
talks, including a round of face-to-face meetings held in
Entebbe, Uganda, quickly produced results, including
an agreement between the two principals, namely,
President Kiir and former Vice-President Machar, to
work together to end the conflict.

Prior to the current revitalized Agreement, the
South Sudanese parties and stakeholders concluded the
following agreements: first, the Khartoum declaration
of agreement among the parties of the conflict of South
Sudan, signed on 27 June; secondly, the agreement on
the outstanding transitional security arrangements,
signed on 6 July; thirdly, the agreement on outstanding
governance issues for the transitional period, signed
on 25 July; and, lastly, the agreement on outstanding
issues of governance, signed on 5 August.

I am pleased to inform the Council that most
contentious issues were amicably resolved, and
the parties signed the revitalized Agreement on
12 September. The signing ceremony was witnessed by
IGAD Heads ofState and Government. The signing ofthe
July text of the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan is a
milestone and marks the end of formal negotiations at
the High-level Revitalization Forum. However, the task
ahead ofimplementing the Agreement requires us all to
join hands and mobilize the requisite resources - both
political and financial - to make peace sustainable and
rejuvenate the rebuilding of the new South Sudan. The
signing of the revitalized Agreement was followed by
the development of a comprehensive implementation
matrix, initialled on 2 September. A permanent
transitional security arrangement workshop was
convened from 3 to 5 September, the outcome of which
the parties initialled.

The High-level Revitalization Forum was all-
inclusive process that enabled all parties to the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan, including estranged
groups and other South Sudanese stakeholders, faith-
based groups, South Sudanese refugees, civil society
organizations and women and youth, to participate.

Allow me now briefly to update the Council on
some of the IGAD Assembly decisions. The Assembly
decided that, until his final status is determined at the
upcoming Ordinary Summit of the IGAD Assembly,
the leader of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/
Army in Opposition Mr. Machar Teny, shall be allowed
to stay in a country of his choice in the region. The
Assembly also resolved that IGAD shall engage the
Security Council to ensure that the Regional Protection
Force (RPF) is fully deployed to execute its mandate
in accordance with resolutions 2304 (2016) and
2406 (2018), and shall request a further review of its
mandate to allow the Sudan, Uganda, Djibouti and
Somalia, as guarantors, to contribute forces to enhance
protection and security throughout the implementation
of the revitalized Agreement. The Assembly further
mandated the IGAD Chiefs of Staff to assess the
operational needs and elaborate the necessary tasks
of the RPF in the light of the current situation on the
ground, and the prospected expansion, as a basis for
a securing endorsement from the African Union Peace
and Security Council and the Security Council.

As I conclude, allow me to congratulate all the
South Sudanese parties on this historic occasion. The
determination and resilience has paid off. I thank the
Chairperson ofthe IGAD Council of Ministers, Council
members, the high-level facilitators, the Chairperson of
the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission and
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism and members of the task force
for the enormous support to the process, without which
we would not have come this far. My special thanks
also go to the Government of the Sudan, which hosted
the process for the past three months. The Government
spared no time, effort or resources to lead the process
to success. The role of His Excellency Mr. Eldirdiri
Mohamed Ahmed, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Sudan, was outstanding. I wholeheartedly thank the
African Union Commission, the United Nations, the
European Union, the troika on South Sudan, China,
Japan and members of the IGAD Partners Forum for
their contribution to the process.

Finally, I want again to express my sincere
appreciation and gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council. I look
forward to closely working with you in implementing
the revitalized Agreement. Security challenges, the
dark humanitarian situation in and the rebuilding of
South Sudan requires our collective action.

