Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to convey my sincere condolences to the
delegation of China for the catastrophe that has struck
their country. I wish to thank the State Secretary of
Sweden, Mr. Dahlgren, and Assistant Secretary-
General Turk for their briefings on the outcome of the
Stockholm Process.

Sanctions are not an end in themselves; they are
part of a broader strategy aimed at resolving a conflict.
Sanctions that through their deficiency in design affect
innocent persons or that are easily flouted can only
undermine the trust of the international community,
leading it to question the credibility of the United
Nations. As well, the unjust consequences of a set of
sanctions that are inadequately targeted offer the
sanctions' intended targets a perfect opportunity to
exploit to their own advantage criticism of measures
that harm innocent citizens of their own country but
never - or almost never - impact on the leadership
elite. Spain therefore unreservedly supports carrying
out periodic reviews to appraise the unfavourable
impact of specific sanctions regimes on the socio-
economic, humanitarian and political situations.

Whether we like it or not, sanctions are one of the
most visible aspects of the activities of the United
Nations around the world. In a broad range of public
opinion, there is a degree of ignorance concerning the
reasons for, and the objectives of, sanctions. We
endorse the proposal of the Stockholm Process to
establish a system of regular briefings for the media.
To be effective, sanctions also need flexibility
and agility. For this reason, Spain resolutely supports
the recommendation to introduce the possibility of
administrative or judicial processes to correct possible
errors or simply to take into account a possible change
in the conduct of the sanctions' targets. Some types of
sanctions, such as arms embargoes and travel bans,
have in common a limited degree of effectiveness. The
model suggested by the Stockholm and Bonn-Berlin
processes offers practical and imaginative solutions to
enhance the accuracy of sanctions to the greatest
possible degree; we therefore consider their application
to be of great interest.

With respect to the means of the Secretariat, we
feel that the coordinating role of the sanctions branch
should be promoted in order to avoid any overlaps.
Notwithstanding, political will in itself is not enough to
ensure that a sanctions regime is effective. The
implementation of a sanctions regime requires
appropriate mechanisms in all States. And the more
precisely targeted sanctions are, the more complex the
instruments employed must be. We believe that the
sanctions committees should demand that all States
submit rigorous reports on the measures taken to
comply with sanctions.

In conclusion, for all those reasons, it is
necessary to strengthen, and to create incentives for,
the provision of technical and financial assistance to
those countries with insufficiencies that negatively
impact on the implementation of sanctions. In that
regard, the private sector may have something to
contribute. Likewise, the Council must be very aware
of the role that should be played by regional
organizations such as the European Union and the
African Union. We believe that the actions of the
European Union in that regard provide a model that can
be used as an example.

