Ms. Bangura: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council and for your
continued and unwavering support in addressing sexual
violence in conflict.

Today I am here to plead with the Council on behalf
ofthe victims of sexual violence in Syria. Those victims
have been raped, tortured and humiliated. They are
either internally displaced or live as refugees. They do
not have a voice, and they are not part of any statistics.
We estimate that there are hundreds of survivors, but
this could be only the tip of the iceberg.

Women and girls displaced by the conflict relate
that sexual violence, including rape, is one of the main
reasons why they have fled their homes and left the
country. We hear of girls being raped in front of their
fathers, wives in front of their husbands. We are aware
that both Government forces and opposition fighters
are abducting women and girls to extract intelligence,
at times using them as leverage for the release of
prisoners. With the conflict becoming increasingly
sectarian and violations more militarized, the presence
of foreign fighters, including those affiliated with
Islamist groups, who have joined armed opposition
groups have increased the vulnerability of civilians and
the possibility of revenge rapes against them.

Earlier this year, in February, I briefed the Security
Council and brought to the Council's attention the
incidents of sexual violence highlighted in the report of
the international commission of inquiry on Syria. The
commission noted numerous cases of sexual violence
committed by Government forces and the Shabbiha,
including the use of sexual violence in detention, the
targeting of family members of opposition fighters, and
the rape of women and girls during house searches and
at checkpoints, which could amount to crimes against
humanity or war crimes.

The commission, in its March update, reported
that those widespread patterns of sexual violations
continued. In one indicative case, between 25 and
60 women were forcibly disembarked from a bus and
detained by Government forces, with multiple accounts
alleging that the women were sexually abused.

The systematic practice of sexual violence in
detention as part of an organized policy against women,
men and even children is also appalling. A 14-year old
boy was threatened with rape during interrogation,
while a 14-year old girl, whose mother had links with
the opposition, was abducted from the streets by four
men, two of whom were in military uniform. The girl
was held captive for days. During interrogation, she
was beaten with electrical wire, given injections and
had cigarettes extinguished on her chest. She was
denied food and water for extended periods of time and
was then raped by four men. On her release, the girl
was taken out of the country. Since then, she has tried
to commit suicide three times.

What was those children's crimes? The boy
could have been our son; the girl could have been our
daughter. We know that war can be brutal, but to fight
it on the bodies of women and children - humiliating
and punishing them and subjecting them to absolute
terror - can never be acceptable.

In response to my briefing to the Security Council
in February, the Syrian Government shared with me,
in a letter, details of some incidents of kidnapping,
sexual violence, torture and other serious human
rights violations carried out by opposition fighters,
as well as information about the arrests of some of
those perpetrators by Syrian security forces. The
International Federation for Human Rights interviewed
a Syrian man who had witnessed the kidnapping of a
young girl by elements of the Free Syrian Army. The
girl was raped and then killed. Her body was thrown in
front of her house, with the blame allegedly attributed
to the Syrian Army. I strongly urge the leadership of
the Free Syrian Army and other armed groups to halt
such violations, to issue clear directives to commanders
throughout their chains of command to prevent sexual
violence, and to hold those who commit, command or
condone such crimes accountable.

I also urge President Al-Assad, in the strongest
terms possible, to ensure that all persons in Government
custody are treated humanely, in accordance with
international human rights and humanitarian law. I
reiterate my call for the Syrian authorities to investigate
all allegations of sexual violence and to hold each and
every perpetrator accountable.

The perpetrators I have referred to know that the
world is watching. They know that the international
community will hold those responsible for such heinous
acts liable. They can misinform and they can lie, but my
message to them is clear: justice may be delayed, but it
will not be denied. We will pursue them by any and all
means, we will find them, and one day bring them to
justice.

It is a terrible truth that sexual violence maims the
survivors not only physically, but also psychologically
and socially, with deep and long-lasting consequences.
The stigma that attaches to survivors means that crimes
are rarely reported. Victims face the risk of honour
killings by their family members or of being forcibly
married to their rapists. Survivors feel they would

rather be killed than raped. In fact, many have tried to
commit suicide.

While we work to end conflicts, we must not forget
our obligations to the survivors of sexual violence. They
need support to rebuild their lives, with urgent access
to emergency medical services, including services to
prevent pregnancy, HIV and other sexually transmitted
infections, as well as legal assistance and social
support. The United Nations and non-governmental
organization partners are putting in place services
and referral and coordination mechanisms in some
neighbouring countries, but greater support and more
targeted funding are required. One ofthe priorities is to
establish medical centres in border areas to address war
injuries, including sexual violence. It is also imperative
that services for survivors be made available and
accessible inside Syria.

As wejust heard from my two colleagues, thousands
ofpeople flee Syria every day to neighbouring countries
in search of safety and protection, but they continue to
be vulnerable. In various refugee camps, a distressing
trend of coerced marriage of young Syrian girls has
emerged, with families seeking to lessen the burden of
dependents on their dwindling resources. However, I
am heartened to note that at least one report from a
camp in Jordan indicates that families are rejecting
marriage offers from outsiders and have chosen to
delay the marriage of their girls in view of the unstable
environment. Allegations of the human trafficking of
young women and girls are also on the rise, while a
severe shortage ofmedical and psychosocial counselling
services remains.

There are also those in Syria who are less visible
and less heard from, but no less vulnerable - the
Syrians who are uprooted within their country, many of
whom, as we just heard from my colleague, Ms. Amos,
remain out of reach of international assistance and
media attention. What do we know about the human
rights violations that are being perpetrated against
displaced women and children? What measures can we
put in place to prevent and respond to sexual violence
against them?

As I recently saw in Somalia, the insecure nature
of internally displaced person camps and settlements,
the presence of armed men in and around such camps
and the fact that the camp population consists mostly of
single women, female-headed households and widows
means that they are easy prey for sexual violence. It is
imperative that the Government allow access for human
rights monitors with a view to reporting, as well as for
service providers to be able to respond to survivors of
sexual violence.

We have watched and we have discussed, and now
it is time to take concrete action. My resolve in fighting
sexual violence in conflict is strengthened, and I intend
to visit Syria as soon as possible. In my corner, I have
the support of the Security Council and the support,
expressed in a declaration signed last week, of the
Group of Eight. Therefore, on behalf of the survivors, I
once again plead with the members of Security Council
and Governments with influence over the parties to
the conflict to demonstrate their commitment and to
translate their will into results by ending the carnage
and protecting the Syrian people, especially women
and children.

