Mr. Lacroix: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
Secretary-General's 90-day report (S/2017/505) on the
situation in South Sudan.

I should state at the outset that the people of South
Sudan remain desperate for peace. More than half of
the country requires food aid, despite its tremendous
potential for food production. One third of the
population is displaced. Half of those displaced are
refugees, who have been arriving in Uganda at a rate of
50,000 for each month of this year. Others have fled to
the Sudan in record numbers, and Kenya and Ethiopia
are also hosting thousands of South Sudanese.

We must not lose sight of the fact that this tragedy
is man-made. It is neither a meteorological phenomenon
nor the result of traditional enmities between local
communities. It is the result of decisions by the Sudan
People's Liberation Army (SPLA) in Government,
the SPLA in Opposition and various other entities to
pursue and sustain armed conflict in order to achieve
political goals. Extreme violence continues to create
ever deeper divisions among the people of South Sudan
and make it even more difficult for us to put the country
back on a path to peace and development. Hostilities
have persisted well after the ceasefire commitment
made by President Salva Kiir and continue to unfold
in various parts of the country. In the North, the SPLA
has dislodged Opposition forces from their strongholds
on the west bank of the Nile River. In the East, it has
taken towns in northern Greater Jonglei. In the west,
clashes between Government and Opposition forces
around Wau have forced 22,000 people to take refuge
with the Mission. And fighting in the South has left
towns in the Equatorias with as little as 10 per cent of
their previous populations.

In the midst of those hostilities, displacements and
human rights abuses, the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) has been doing its utmost to
protect civilians. Our peacekeepers persevere in getting
through checkpoints to reach vulnerable populations
even when their patrols are threatened and sometimes
shot at. Their proactive approach directly supports the
South Sudanese people, giving them confidence that
we are there to protect them, enabling us to report
human rights abuses, and helping us to support our
humanitarian partners in ensuring that assistance goes
to those who need it most.

In the meantime, we continue to press forward with
the deployment of the Regional Protection Force (RPF).
The advance parties of the RPF vanguard units have
begun arriving, including those of the engineering and
high-readiness companies. The main bodies of both
contingents are on track to arrive by late July. Subject
to cargo readiness, security clearances and final tax
exemptions from the Government, the expected time
for the Ethiopian advance infantry company to begin
to deploy is July at the earliest. The commencement
of the Kenyan troops' deployment remains subject
to completion of the ongoing repatriation of Kenya's
contingent-owned equipment from Wau and its
subsequent refurbishment to meet the needs of its
RPF contribution.

Concerning the Government's allocation of the
required second plot of land for the northern base
site of the RPF, the Government informed UNMISS,
in a letter dated 11 April, that it had allocated a site
approximately 12 kilometres north of central Juba. On
19 April, an UNMISS integrated team, accompanied by
community leaders and country and local Government
representatives, visited the site to assess its suitability.
The Mission has a number of reservations about the
operational suitability and accessibility of the site, but
we continue to explore options for its use in conjunction
with existing bases at Tomping and United Nations
House, in order to ensure that the land issue does
not further delay the RPF's deployment, since that is
still an important enabler for the political process in
South Sudan.

While we welcome the commitments made by
President Salva Kiir at the swearing-in of the National
Dialogue Steering Committee, we note with concern
that the unilateral ceasefire he announced has so
far not materialized. With regard to his pledge to
release political prisoners, I should point out to the
Council that, while one United Nations staff member
was recently released, two others have been held for
two years without being charged and another has
recently been detained in Rumbek. We must judge the
President's commitments by his actions. And, critically,
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism should finally be granted full
freedom of movement to monitor and verify ceasefire
violations. UNMISS and the Monitoring Mechanism
have been dealing with far too many obstructions
of their movements, making their work extremely
challenging and in some cases impossible.

We are encouraged by the communique of 13 June
from the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), which included a number of concrete steps
aimed at resuscitating the South Sudan political
process. The proposed high-level revitalization forum
to be convened by the IGAD Council of Ministers and
the meeting ofthe chiefs of defence staff of the RPF are
welcome initiatives that we hope to see happen soon.
Allow me to register our strong support for IGAD and
regional partners as they move forward to actualize
the various initiatives spelled out in the communique.
The Mission and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations are ready to provide whatever support may
be required to that end.

I believe it important to take this opportunity
to emphasize our views on recent references to the
prospect of elections in South Sudan. Under the 2015
peace agreement, elections are to be held towards the
end of the transitional period, which was originally
estimated to be in 2018. We must be clear that if the
current situation of armed conflict, political paralysis,
massive displacement, humanitarian and protection
needs, and ongoing human rights abuses were to persist,
then credible, free and fair elections will not be possible
in South Sudan. Elections are the ultimate democratic
process and would require pervasive stability and
an environment in which people can freely express
their political opinions.They would also require that
the transitional institutions established by the peace
agreement be genuinely inclusive of all groups and
political persuasions, as envisaged in the agreement.

Operative paragraph 34 of resolution 2327 (2016)
requested that the Secretary-General provide the
Council with a review ofthe progress made by the parties
in ceasing hostilities, returning to the path of dialogue
and achieving inclusiveness within the Government,
as well as recommend any relevant adjustments to
the UNMISS mandate. In the light of the lack of real
progress in these key areas and the continuation of the
political and security crisis that plagues South Sudan,
we cannot recommend any adjustments to the Mission's
current mandate. The persistence of significant
military operations on the ground, the lack of dialogue
between the parties and the absence of authentic
inclusivity within the governmental structures in
South Sudan mean, unfortunately, that UNMISS's
mandate, as currently structured under resolution 2327
(2016), remains relevant and suited to purpose; this
includes the role of the Regional Protection Force in
enhancing security and the protection of civilians in
the capital. Should a genuine cessation of hostilities
take hold, buttressed by the full implementation of
the peace agreement, revisiting the UNMISS mandate
and the tasks of the Regional Protection Force would
be warranted.

In conclusion, let me emphasize that the Secretariat
is continuing to make every effort to take forward the
core tasks of its mandate, including with respect to
expediting the deployment of the RPF. Meanwhile,
although the President declared a unilateral ceasefire
and the launch of the national dialogue on 22 May, it
remains to be seen whether these developments will
yield any tangible improvement in the security or
humanitarian situation on the ground. We cannot lose
sight of the fact that neither the RPF nor UNMISS
is a panacea for this crisis. Only a truly inclusive
political process and the genuine political will of the
key protagonists to end the conflict and implement
the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan will bring peace to
this country.

