Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo)(sp0ke in French): Mr. President, your presidency of the Security
Council for this month has been placed under the sign of
Africa. My delegation would therefore like to congratulate
you for this praiseworthy initiative and take this opportunity
to express our hope, which is entirely legitimate, that during
this month many scourges now afflicting the African
continent will begin to be solved in a concrete and credible
way.

My delegation would like to congratulate you as well
for having organized this special Security Council meeting
particularly devoted to the struggle against HIV/AIDS in
Africa. The opening of the meeting by the Vice-President
of the United States of America is undoubtedly a sign of
the growing interest his country has in committing the
international community as a whole to an effective
campaign against this virus which is decimating the entire
continent.

My delegation shares your view, Mr. President,
when you say that the devastating figures on AIDS in
Africa demonstrate that this is much more than a question
of health. It is truly a question of security, as well as of
the deteriorating economy and of poverty, because by
decimating elites and creating millions of orphans, this
disease is in effect creating and provoking economic and
social crises which destabilize fragile societies and give
rise to armed conflicts which themselves help to spread
AIDS.

In sub-Saharan Africa, a region of which my
country, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, is part,
the AIDS pandemic is now undergoing its greatest spread.
The Governments of the region have indeed committed
themselves to struggle to find various ways of preventing
even greater spread. They continue to seek even more
effective means to reduce the effects of AIDS, despite the
enormous difficulties they are undergoing due to limited
resources, which are always on a downward curve, to
poverty and to all types of wars. Thus, my delegation
welcomes the measures announced today by the Vice-
President of the United States while expressing our hope
that they will be put into effect quickly.

In the past, my country was in the forefront of the
struggle against AIDS in Central Africa. Benefiting from
consistent bilateral and multilateral cooperation, it
developed with the assistance of the donor community an
AIDS project which seriously attacked the effects of the
virus and which was a success mainly in the field of
prevention and access to information about AIDS.

Unfortunately, in 1991 and 1993 my country
underwent large-scale pillaging which destroyed that
infrastructure. Furthermore, the nameless embargo which
my country has suffered for more than a decade has made
obsolete any hope of resumption of this cooperation,
which was nevertheless beneficial to all the Congolese
people.

In 1994, my country was the unwilling host of
millions of refugees who came mainly from neighbouring
Rwanda. Their presence on our soil was a disaster
ecologically, socially and economically. In the eastern
provinces this undesired presence was also the vector of
sexually transmitted diseases and very clearly of the
HIV/AIDS virus as well.

Since 2 August 1998, my country has been
undergoing the horrors of aggression on the part of an
armed coalition of the regular forces of Rwanda, Uganda

 

and Burundi. This war, with its accompanying suffering,
displaced populations and new flows of refugees living in
extremely precarious sanitary conditions, is a major
contribution to the spread of AIDS.

However, it is true that during the past year the
leading cause of death in my country has remained malaria,
closely followed by the direct victims of war and of AIDS.
But the impact of this war should not be underestimated. At
the present time, both in the occupied provinces and the
free zones, war is the main source of the general
deterioration of the living conditions of the Congolese
people, thus making it difficult, even impossible, for our
people to have access to such things as basic health care.
The Congolese people have thus become a feeding ground
for all sorts of diseases, including viruses that had been
unsuspected until very recently - the Ebola virus and the
Marburg virus - and for which, just as for AIDS, there is
no vaccine.

The war has also witnessed an increase in a military
practice that, to say the least, is of a strange nature,
practised by the armed forces of Uganda - that is, the
sending into the field of operations thousands of AIDS-
infected or seropositive soldiers whose mission is to rape
women and young girls in order to spread AIDS. The
international community is duty-bound to end this crime
against humanity committed by Rwanda, Burundi and
Uganda on the territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

This month of Africa and this year of the millennium
provide the Security Council with an opportunity to
shoulder its responsibilities with full knowledge of the facts
in order to allow the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
confront the twenty-first century with optimism. The
international community is also duty-bound to assist the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in its efforts to return to
peace, to bring about an economic recovery and
reconstruction of its infrastructure, including health and
medical reconstruction, so that present and future Congolese
generations can again hope for a better and more radiant
future.

