Mr. Rowe (Sierra Leone): We are grateful for
your decision, Madam, to be present here today to lead
our discussion on one of the most pathetic situations in
the world today - that of children affected by armed
conflict.

I should also like to extend my delegation's
sincere appreciation to two leading and dedicated
advocates for children in the United Nations family:
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, and
the Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF), Ms. Carol Bellamy, for
their informative and, indeed, instructive, account and
picture of the situation of children victims of armed
conflict.

This meeting is the logical follow-up to that
convened by the Security Council yesterday on the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. In our
statement yesterday, my delegation spoke of the need
to acknowledge that the illicit trade in those weapons
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
It is a threat that must been seen in the context of the
unnecessary suffering that it has caused and that it
continues to inflict on innocent children throughout the
world, especially in developing countries such as Sierra
Leone.

From what we have experienced in Sierra Leone
and other parts of the West African subregion, one has
every reason to conclude that the illicit trade in and
circulation of small arms and light weapons promotes
extreme cruelty against and by children. It helps to
create child combatants and child perpetrators of
heinous crimes against not only adults, but also
children. In short, it creates the condition in which
children become the victims and perpetrators of such
practices as rape, abduction, amputation, sexual slavery
and wanton and indiscriminate killing.

All children, whether or not they are currently
affected by armed conflict, will be the principal
beneficiaries of measures now under way to prevent,
combat and eradicate the scourge of the illicit trade in
these weapons - what one could describe as weapons
of mass destruction because of the magnitude and
devastation they have caused to human life and
property. We are by no means exaggerating the linkage
between the illicit flow of small arms and the terrible
situation in which children find themselves in areas of
conflict. This linkage is a reality; it is a challenge
which we must all accept.

My delegation welcomes with appreciation the
most recent report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of children in armed conflict. The list of
advances made over the past few years towards the
protection of children affected by armed conflict is
encouraging. It covers many of the important legal and
political measures taken by States and international and
regional organizations. The list and the report as a
whole also affirm the crucial role that public advocacy,
such as that undertaken by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and non-governmental
organizations, can continue to play in the complex task
of ensuring effective protection of war-affected
children.

In this regard, we note some of the measures
contained in the report that pertain directly to the
situation in Sierra Leone. Reference is made, for
example, to the establishment of the National
Commission for War-Affected Children, which was
initiated Mr. Otunnu, and the organization of the
Children's Forum Network. Reference is also made to
the "Voice of Children" radio project, which provides a
platform for one of the 10 imperatives endorsed in the
worldwide "Say Yes for Children" campaign organized
by UNICEF about two years ago - namely, "Listen to
children".

An important development that is not in the
Secretary-General's report, but that my delegation
would like to highlight, is the fact that among the
crimes alleged in the recent indictments at the Special
Court for Sierra Leone is the use of child combatants.
The crime of conscripting and enlisting and/or the use
of boys and girls to participate in active hostilities is
punishable under article 4 (c) of the Statute of the
Special Court. This could serve as a deterrent to future
attempts to recruit children for combat and for the
purpose of perpetrating acts of sheer brutality.

Just over a year ago, a young Sierra Leonean - a
former child combatant - appeared before the Council
to relate the story of his abduction and participation in
what the Special Court for Sierra Leone has
characterized as the "criminal enterprise". Articulating
his vision of life after a brutal conflict, the young man
also brought a message - a signpost, so to speak -
which the Security Council should follow in devising
ways and means of advancing the promotion and
protection of the rights of children, especially those
affected by armed conflict. This is a very important
development in the area of accountability that should
not go unnoticed.

Although the rebel war in Sierra Leone and the
recruitment and participation of child combatants is no
longer an issue, and although disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes
are under way in Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire, we are
seriously concerned about the cross-border movement
of armed children and youth in the subregion. These
are "the new home-grown mercenaries" who, for one
reason or the other, slip through DDR programmes,
regroup and create new pockets of armed rebellion
aimed at ruthless and protracted destabilization of the
subregion. They are also the precursors of urban
criminal elements in post-conflict situations.

We note that on the list of recent advances
towards the protection of children in armed conflict,
the Secretary-General highlights, among other things,
the fact that children's issues have been incorporated
into peace agreements and peace accords. This is
commendable, since those agreements also include
provisions for disarmament and demobilization.

The Sierra Leone delegation endorses the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report, especially those relating to concrete measures
that the Security Council can take in the context of its
responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security. These measures
should include, where necessary and appropriate,
targeted arms embargoes and travel restrictions.
However, effective monitoring mechanisms would have
to be put in place.

We wish also to recall Ms. Bellamy's statement
this morning that funding should not entirely depend
on voluntary contributions. She stated that resources
need to be made available for child demobilization as
early as possible, well before the DDR process. We
attach great importance to this.

In his final recommendation, in paragraph 105,
the Secretary-General rightly suggests that greater and
more concerted efforts should be deployed to end
ongoing conflicts - conflicts that we agree are
destroying the lives of millions of children. He adds
that efforts should be made to address "the key factors
that facilitate the occurrence and recurrence of
conflicts".

My delegation interprets this as a call for
concerted efforts for the prevention of armed conflict.
If indeed we are committed to the promotion and
protection of children, particularly those affected by
armed conflict, we should also deal with the root
causes of armed conflict, especially those that are
directly linked to the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons, and in precious natural resources, such
as diamonds from Sierra Leone. The prescriptions we
are preparing and administering are essential, but they
must be accompanied by preventive measures. As the
saying goes, prevention is better than cure.

Since the United Nations is now fully aware of
the international dimensions of these phenomena, and
in view of their implications for international peace and
security, my delegation would like to take this
opportunity to appeal to the Security Council to assume
a more proactive role in the search for concrete and
effective solutions, as well as preventive measures, for
our children's sake.

Meanwhile, my delegation looks forward to the
results of the comprehensive assessment now being
undertaken by the Secretary-General of the scope and
effectiveness of the response by the United Nations
system to the issue of children in armed conflict, with a
view to strengthening, mainstreaming, integrating and
sustaining these activities.

