Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like first to thank the Japanese presidency of the
Security Council for having taken the initiative to
convene this debate, which is especially welcome in
the current context, and the Secretary-General for his
enlightening briefing.

The debates and discussions that we have held
throughout this year have shown that the current
challenges to peace and international security are
both complex and multifaceted and that they call for
a response that is comprehensive its approach and
diversified in its application, and that is able to adapt to
the specificities of each crisis.

As the world has globalized so, too, have the threats
it faces. Terrorism knows no borders, While epidemics
or climate change sometimes have very real effects on
the stability of countries and can threaten the security
of an entire region. The United Nations must be able to
respond to them, using all of its tools and acting in an
integrated manner on the root causes of these threats.
That is the entire purpose of the Secretary-General's
reform, which seekss to endow the United Nations with
the capacity to work in an integrated manner to prevent
conflicts and address their root causes. The Member
States must also respond, acting collectively, just as the
Council is mandated to do.

Without seeking to be exhaustive, I would like

to refer to two of these complex challenges and one
major issue:

The first challenge is terrorism. Terrorism today
is one of the main threats to international peace and
security. Be it groups such as Al-Qaida, Da'esh and
Boko Haram, or individuals inspired by their barbaric
ideology, the terrorist threat has never been so high.
The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters and
the massive use of the Internet and social media for
recruiting, financing or calling for action has also
added a new dimension to the threat.

While nothing justifies terrorism, we know that
it feeds on poverty, insecurity, displacement and
economic and social imbalances. It also feeds on
transnational organized crime and its many forms of
trafficking. Faced with a threat of this magnitude, it
is essential that States adopt a holistic approach and
consider all economic, political, cultural and social
comprehensive. Against those who oppose barbarism
to our way of life, our freedom and our democracy,
we must wage together an implacable frontier fight on
multiple fronts, with respect of our values and with the
weapons of the law.

Terrorism is now one of those major global
challenges that States can no longer meet alone.
France is convinced, as President Macron reminded
the General Assembly in September (see A/72/PV.4),
that multilateralism is the right answer, with respect
not only to legitimacy but also to its effectiveness in
meeting these challenges.

The situation in the Sahel illustrates the dangers of
terrorism and the need for a comprehensive response.
The security threat to the States of the Sahel concerns
us all and calls for a collective response. On the
security front, the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) is an example of a joint and
concerted response to this threat, which calls for strong
and coordinated support from the United Nations and
all of us.

That is the meaning of resolution 2391 (2017),
which the Security Council adopted recently. This
response must go hand in hand with strong support for
development, which can bring lasting solutions to the
region's problems. This is the meaning of the support
efforts made within the framework of the Alliance for
the Sahel, in particular to improve the employability

and education of young people, agriculture, energy,
governance and security.

The second challenge is climate change. The
root causes of a crisis are often multiple, and global
warming is an aggravating factor in fragile contexts.
This has been the warmest year on record. Extreme
climatic events are characterized by their intensity and
frequency. No country is spared today. We can no longer
ignore its profoundly destabilizing consequences.
The most vulnerable populations, already exposed to
other factors of conflict, whether political, social or
environmental, are the first victims. For small island
developing States and coastal countries, their very
survival is at stake. Their submersion, linked to ocean
rise, would also lead to massive migratory waves that
are particularly destabilizing for the security of these
regions. The same is true in areas where desertification
forces people to abandon their fields.

We now have the technological and financial
means to build a clean and secure future and protect
future generations. Climate change is not - or not
yet - inevitable. France is convinced that the answer
must be found first and foremost through the effective
and swift implementation of the Paris Agreement.
Our immediate priority is to fully implement it
because climate action is the best way to prevent
global-warming crises. This is the purpose of the
international conference on financing climate action
that President Macron organized a few days ago in
Paris with the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the President of the World Bank.

The major challenge to international peace and
security that I wish to highlight is that of respect for
human rights. Many contemporary conflicts originate
in massive violations of human rights. I will cite but
two examples. In Syria, after years of repression by the
regime of Bashar Al-Assad against its own people, it
was the bloody crushing of peaceful demonstrations by
the civilian population calling for respect for their most
basic rights that brought about the situation we know
today. In Burma, it was the serious violations of human
rights, in Rakhine state in particular - violations
of civil and political rights including the right to
citizenship, disproportionate use of force, and sexual
violence - that led to thousands of Rohingyas fleeing
their region to the detriment of regional stability,
as described by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Pramila Patten last week in this very
Chamber (S/PV.8133).

When human rights are violated, it is regional
security that is threatened. That is why, in order to
respond swiftly to serious human rights violations, it is
essential that the Security Council be informed by the
relevant mechanisms, including the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, whose early-warning
role is essential. That is also why it is important to
equip peacekeeping operations with robust human
rights and civilian-protection mandates and to ensure
the full implementation of those mandates.

Finally, the impunity of those responsible for
unconscionable violations is also a threat to the
sustainable restoration of peace. It undermines the
civil society's trust and with it prospects for political
solutions. This reveals the extent to which the fight
against impunity through the relevant legal mechanisms,
in particular the International Criminal Court, when it
has jurisdiction, is both crucial in itself and essential to
peace and reconciliation.

In conclusion, these complex challenges, combined
with the long-standing but still-present threats, such as
inter-State conflict or nuclear proliferation, affect us
all immediately and collectively. All of us - each of
us - must, therefore, collectively, respond to it. The
United Nations must also be able to do so. We welcome
the Secretary-General's willingness to ensure that the
Organization can meet this challenge by reforming
it and making it more agile, coherent and effective.
France fully supports these efforts.

What the debate today shows is that all of our
contemporary challenges are global and therefore call
for a comprehensive response that links peace and
security, development and human rights, and which is
anchored in dialogue and multilateralism. It is by taking
decisive action on these three fronts, while respecting
the universal founding values of the United Nations,
which protect individuals everywhere and guarantee
their dignity, that we will succeed in responding
collectively and sustainably to these challenges.

