Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate. We commend you
for your able stewardship of the Council. We are
grateful to Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his statement.
We also thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Jan Kubis for his presentation to the Security
Council today. Under his able leadership, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
is implementing a challenging mandate. Pakistan has
always supported and facilitated the work of UNAMA.
We will continue to do so.

Since its inception, UNAMA has led international
State-building efforts in Afghanistan. As Afghan
institutions come of age, complete national ownership
will be essential for the further consolidation of
statehood. We look forward to the increasingly
effective role of the Afghan leadership in consolidating
its institutions and transitioning to full responsibilities
in all sectors.

With a reviewed mandate, UNAMA should
continue to align itself with the transition process. To
an extent, UNAMA's success will depend on our
collective work in the Security Council. The Council
must enable UNAMA to accomplish its goals through
clear mandates based on current and emerging realities.
UNAMA should not be used to impose concepts and
values alien to Afghanistan. We must therefore pay
closer attention to the aspirations of Afghanistan's
leaders, as well as the sentiments ofits people.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2012/133)
under consideration today provides useful updates on
the situation in Afghanistan. It documents progress in
the transition process against pre-identified
benchmarks. The Secretary-General has rightly
observed that progress in governance, development and
the sustainable transition of security responsibilities is
fundamentally interlinked.

The Secretary-General's report also highlights
fiscal sustainability and potential funding gaps in
meeting the various targets in transition. It also
cautions against donor fatigue and fiscal constraints in
the international economic climate.

Pakistan would underline the need to maintain the
current political and financial interest in the transition
process with a view to setting Afghanistan on a
sustainable course. The value of long-term
international support and private-sector investment in
facilitating the transition cannot be overemphasized.

Pakistan is committed to peace, stability and
development in Afghanistan. As agreed by our two
Foreign Ministers in Kabul on 1 February in the joint
communique, a strong, robust and independent bilateral
relationship between the two countries would greatly
contribute to peace and stability in the region.

Our two countries are deepening interaction in
diverse fields, including security, development, transit
trade, economic and investment linkages, as well as
infrastructure and energy. Our documented bilateral
trade has reached $2.5 billion, and the target set by our
leadership to double it by 2015 is well within reach.
Our bilateral assistance to Afghanistan is more than we
provide to any other country.

The Pakistan-Afghanistan Joint Economic
Commission met in Islamabad last month to discuss the
modalities and timelines of various transregional
economic projects. Our scholarship programme for
facilitating higher education for Afghan students in
Pakistan continues. More than 1,400 Afghan students
have so far benefited from the programme, while some
7,000 are enrolled in Pakistani universities and
professional colleges.

High-level contacts between Pakistan and
Afghanistan drive our bilateral cooperation. We were
privileged to receive the Afghan President, together
with the President of Iran, for the third Trilateral
Summit in Islamabad last month. As mentioned earlier,
our Foreign Minister visited Kabul last month.
Parliamentary exchanges between the two countries are
strengthening mutual understanding and goodwill.

In the area of security, Pakistan has always
sought closer engagement with Afghanistan and its
international partners on real issues that lie beyond
polemics. The interdiction of illegal cross-border
movement is vital to counter-terrorism, drug trafficking
and commercial smuggling. It is a joint responsibility
that needs to be discharged more vigorously. Pakistan
has established over 1,000 posts along its border with
Afghanistan. More than 120,000 Pakistani troops are
deployed on our side of the border, at considerable
financial cost. That needs to be matched on the other
side of the international border.

In a country suffering from four decades of war,
the vexing question of security cannot be resolved by
externalizing the problem or by imposing another war.
Military action cannot solve problems. We only
disregard the lessons of history at our peril. A
comprehensive approach, under complete Afghan
ownership, is essential to address that challenge.

Pakistan has always supported an Afghan-led and
inclusive reconciliation process. The Prime Minister of
Pakistan, in response to an unprecedented appeal from
the President of Afghanistan, issued an important
statement on 24 February to reiterate our long-standing
support for reconciliation in Afghanistan. Allow me to
share some portions of the Prime Minister's statement.

"Pakistan firmly believes that respect for
Afghanistan's sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity, as well as adherence to
the principles of non-interference in internal
affairs of Afghanistan, are of critical importance.

"We also believe that the process of national
reconciliation must be Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned. It is imperative to promote an intra-
Afghan consensus for a durable political
settlement that accords with the aspirations of the
people ofAfghanistan as a whole.

"It is now time to turn a new leaf and open a
new chapter in the history of Afghanistan. It is
time to now combine the strengths of the Afghan
people, in the true spirit of our noble religion,
Islam, and in accordance with the glorious
traditions of the Afghans to build peace and bring
prosperity to Afghanistan.

"In this spirit, I would like to appeal to the
Taliban leadership as well as to all other Afghan
groups, including Hezb-e Islami, to participate in
an intra-Afghan process for national
reconciliation and peace.

"It is our sincere hope that the Taliban
leadership, Hezb-e Islami and all other political
leaders will respond positively to my appeal and
agree to enter into direct negotiations in the
framework of an intra-Afghan process for
reconciliation and peace in Afghanistan.

"Pakistan, on its part, will support such
authentic Afghan processes and is prepared to do
whatever it can for its success.

"I would like to appeal to the international
community to support fully national
reconciliation and peace in Afghanistan.

"We are appreciative of the important
initiative taken by President Hamid Karzai and
wish the intra-Afghan process every success".

I will conclude by highlighting two issues of
great importance that I hope will be duly prioritized in
the work of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Kubis and in our collective deliberations on
Afghanistan.

The first is Afghanistan's drug situation, which is
a serious and growing challenge not only for
Afghanistan but also for the rest of the world. Our
collective goal must be the complete eradication of
poppy cultivation in Afghanistan and the progressive
elimination of manufacturing and trafficking of its
higher derivatives. We need to pay more attention to
this issue, which, regrettably, has worsened recently.
Pakistan will also support regional efforts and
initiatives to counter that threat.

Another issue is the presence of a large number
of Afghan refugees in Pakistan and Iran. We would like
to remind the Council that, during the past 10 years,
Pakistan's average annual budget for Afghan refugees
has nearly doubled in proportion with international
assistance, despite a decrease in the number of
refugees. After 10 years of internationally assisted
State- and institution-building in Afghanistan, this
trend should be reversed and more refugees should be
repatriated. We urge further international focus on the
issue and hope that the forthcoming conference in
Switzerland will be a success. I will also urge the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
record the trends and figures relating to the return or
otherwise of Afghan refugees in his quarterly reports
on a regular basis.

