Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset to thank Minister Portas for
his presence here today and for presiding over our
meeting. I should also like to thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste, Mr. Da Costa, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Haq, for their comments.

China welcomes the fact that, during the period
under review, the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste, with the assistance of the international
community, have made positive progress in the
building of the country. We would also note that Timor-
Leste, because of its fairly low point of departure in the
process, still faces challenges in terms of improving
living conditions and maintaining stability in the
country.

I should like to focus my statement on three
areas.

First, we hope that the leaders of the various
Timorese parties will continue to resolve their
differences through dialogue. China appreciates the
efforts deployed by President Ramos-Horta and Special
Representative Haq to promote dialogue between the
parties, and we call on the various parties in Timor-
Leste, in the interests of the people and of national
unity, to endeavour to resolve any differences through
communication and cooperation so as to enable the
people to concentrate their efforts on building the
country. We hope that the presidential and legislative
elections to be held next year will provide a fresh
opportunity to the people to consolidate their political
stability.

Secondly, we believe that Timor-Leste should
continue to strengthen its security and stability. The
national police has already fully assumed its security
functions. To date, the security situation has been very
stable throughout the country. There have not been any
serious incidents, and China welcomes this. We hope
that Timor-Leste will continue to strengthen its
autonomous security forces so as to ensure the security
of its people. It is important to ensure that the
presidential and legislative elections next year are
conducted under positive conditions, in an atmosphere

of security. We hope that the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), in its remaining
mandate, will train police officers as a priority in its
work, in order to help them to strengthen their
capacity.

Thirdly, in order to ensure lasting peace and
security in Timor-Leste, the economy must be further
developed and living conditions improved. China
supports the efforts undertaken by the Government of
Timor-Leste to develop the economy and create jobs
while continuing to maintain social stability and
concentrating their efforts on building infrastructure
and developing human resources. China calls on the
international community to continue to support Timor-
Leste in its development efforts in order to ensure that
it achieves sustainable development.

China very much appreciates the joint transition
plan developed jointly by UNMIT and the Government
of Timor-Leste, and we hope that the two parties will
cooperate closely in the transition process. We hope
that UNMIT will be able to withdraw as planned from
Timor-Leste under favourable conditions so that the
country can become a success story of the United
Nations with regard to both the deployment of
peacekeeping missions and exit strategies. China
believes that, after the eventual withdrawal of UNMIT,
the United Nations, in accordance with the wishes of
the Government of Timor-Leste, should continue to
provide it with assistance.

