The President: I thank Mr. Ould-Abdallah for his
comments and, once again, for his gift.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, recalling its relevant
resolutions and the statements of its President,
stresses the importance of addressing the issue of
peace consolidation in West Africa in a
comprehensive and coordinated manner. It
recognizes the need for such an approach for
durable solutions to the conflicts in West Africa
and to explore ways and means to promote
sustainable peace, security and development.

"The Security Council welcomes the
transition from war to democratic rule in Sierra
Leone, Guinea-Bissau and Liberia, as well as
current efforts aimed at implementing measures
leading to free and fair elections in C6te d'Ivoire.
It also notes that the security situation in those
countries remains generally stable but fragile.

"The Security Council stresses the need to
build the capacity of national institutions to
address the root causes of conflict as an essential
part of peace consolidation, especially in the
areas of political and economic governance as
well as the rule of law and the fight against
impunity.

"The Security Council recalls the measures
it has implemented on the illegal exploitation of
natural resources in the region and encourages
member States of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) to promote
transparent and sustainable exploitation of such
resources.

"The Security Council stresses the primary
role of each West African Government in peace
consolidation for the benefit of all citizens and
reiterates the importance of all leaders working
together for peace and security in the region.

"The Security Council considers that illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons still
poses a threat to peace and security in the region.
In this connection, it welcomes the decision of
ECOWAS member States to transform the
Moratorium on the Import, Export and
Manufacture of Light weapons into a binding
Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons,
Their Ammunition and Other Related Materials.
It further urges all States, both within and outside
the region, to ensure compliance with its existing
arms embargoes in West Africa and for States
within ECOWAS to ratify the Convention as soon
as possible to enable it to come into effect
promptly.

"The Security Council considers that civil
society, including women's organizations, has a
role to play in supporting peace consolidation
initiatives in the region and that their efforts in
this regard deserve to be supported as
appropriate.

"The Security Council underlines the
crucial importance of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of ex-
combatants, taking into account the special needs
of child soldiers and women, and encourages the
international community to work in close
partnership with the countries concerned. It
further affirms the need to find lasting solutions
to the problem of youth unemployment in order
to prevent the recruitment of such youth by
illegal armed groups.

"The Security Council considers reform of
the security sector an essential element for
sustainable peace and stability in West Africa and
urgently calls on the donor community and the
international financial institutions to coordinate
their efforts to support the States concerned.

"The Security Council stresses the
continued need for assisting West African States
and ECOWAS to curb illicit cross-border
activities.

"The Security Council reiterates the
importance of finding effective solutions to the
problem of refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs) in the region and urges the States
in the region, in collaboration with relevant
international organizations and donor countries,
to create the necessary conditions for their
voluntary and safe return.

"The Security Council welcomes the
positive role played by the international
community and civil society in addressing the
humanitarian situation in many parts of the region
and urges them to provide adequate resources as
part of a coordinated humanitarian response
strategy to improve the human security of the
people of West Africa in need of such protection.

"The Security Council stresses the need to
ensure improved coordination of donor initiatives
in order to make the best use of available
the

resources, as well as encourages donor partners to
redeem their pledges in a timely manner.

"The Security Council further stresses the
need for continued and enhanced cooperation
between the United Nations, ECOWAS and the
African Union in peace consolidation initiatives,
based on an integrated approach and with the aim
of maximizing the use of available resources.

In this connection, it commends the role of the
United Nations Office in West Africa, as well as
other United Nations offices, missions and
agencies in the region in facilitating, in close
cooperation with the ECOWAS Executive
Secretariat and its member States, the
achievement of peace and security priorities of
the region. It further encourages the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa and the United Nations missions in the
region to continue their efforts in coordinating
United Nations activities to ensure their improved
cohesion and maximum efficiency.

"The Security Council underscores the
importance and the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in assisting countries emerging from
conflict to achieve sustainable peace and stability.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
regional dimension of peace and security in West
Africa and requests the Secretary-General, in
consultation with the ECOWAS secretariat, to
submit to it by the end of the year a report with
recommendations on the cooperation between the
United Nations missions deployed in the region
and on the cross-border issues in West Africa."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2006/38.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my

list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.
