Mr. Al-Khalifa (Bahrain)(interpretation from Arabic): Permit me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir,
on behalf of the delegation of the State of Bahrain, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We hope that your efforts in the
maintenance of international peace and security will be
crowned with success. I should be remiss were I not also
to express my appreciation and thanks to your
predecessor, Ambassador Eitel of Germany, for his efforts
during his presidency of the Council last month.

 

The State of Bahrain views with deep concern the
tragic events that have taken place in the Palestinian
territories in recent days. A few days ago, we were
surprised at the opening by the Israeli authorities of the
tunnel under the historic Islamic sites in occupied Jerusalem
in an attempt to judaize the Islamic character of that city.
The Israeli measure gave rise to outrage in the Palestinian
territories in particular, and in the Islamic world in general,
where it was viewed as an act of aggression against the
Islamic holy places and an affront to the feelings of
Muslims and Arabs.

It is regrettable that the Israeli authorities have dealt
with the angry and legitimate reaction in the Palestinian
territories in a manner that runs counter to the search for
peace in the area. Israeli armed forces have opened fire
upon defenceless Palestinians demonstrating against the
Israeli action, claiming the lives of scores and injuring
hundreds more. We condemn the Israeli policy that has led
to the massacre of defenceless Palestinians and we
denounce the Israeli measures designed to alter the Islamic
character of historic sites.

We call upon Israel to close the tunnel from Baruch
Square under the western wall of the Al-Aqsa Mosque
because it jeopardizes the integrity of the Mosque as well
as other Islamic sites in the area. At the same time, we call
upon Israel to comply with relevant Security Council
resolutions with regard to Jerusalem and with the provisions
of the Fourth Geneva Convention concerning occupied
territories.

Bahrain, which is anxious to see the peace process in
the Middle East continue, supports the statement by the
Council of the League of Arab States on 21 September and
appeals to the international community, the members of the
European Union and the sponsors of the peace process to
bring pressure to bear upon Israel to cease its practices
designed to judaize the city of Jerusalem and alter its
demographic and legal character.

We also call upon the international community to
bring pressure to bear upon Israel to change its views on
settlements in the Arab territories and to act in a way
consonant with the peace process in the area. In that
connection, we should like to reaffirm the necessity of
pursuing the peace process in the Middle East, convinced
as we are that that is the strategic option in that region for
the sake of its prosperity, future and peoples. We believe
that peace must be based on justice and equity and on the
restoration of rights that cannot be denied and on
commitments that cannot be withdrawn. Should Israel
continue to flout its commitments, to ignore the bases of
the peace process, to renege on its promises and pledges
entered into within the framework of that process, and to
prevaricate and procrastinate over their implementation,
that can only lead to a set-back in the peace process and
subject the region to a cycle of violence and tension once
again.

We call upon this Council to adopt a resolution that
will prompt the Israeli Government to stop its oppressive
practices against the Palestinian people and to honour the
pledges and agreements it has made in the interests of
maintaining international peace and security.

