Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I also wish to thank
Mr. Yury Fedotov for his detailed briefing.

Drug trafficking and organized crime
compromise the full enjoyment of human rights by
millions of people around the world, including through
their negative effects on economic and social
development. The international community must
continue to work towards a strong and coherent
response to these transnational problems. We applaud
the contributions of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and other relevant United
Nations bodies to that response.

Organized crime and drug trafficking are complex
problems that manifest themselves differently in
different parts of the world. There is no silver bullet
that will resolve these issues. Facing them requires a
case-by-case approach that takes due account of the
multidimensional nature of transnational crime. In
particular, we cannot attempt to deal with them
exclusively by using security-related tools.

Repression alone is not enough for a long-term
solution. Effectively combating the problem requires
sustained attention to its underlying causes, which in
many cases include the lack of development, high
unemployment and economic difficulties.
Brazil believes that efforts to support countries in
the struggle against organized crime must be of a
cooperative nature and fostered by the principle of
shared responsibility, with a view to resolving all
aspects of the problem. In that regard, we must work
on the basis of the pertinent United Nations
conventions. Moreover, it is imperative to recognize
that addressing the world drug problem will require
active engagement by the world's largest consumers of
illicit drugs.

Coordinated action by the United Nations system,
including by UNODC, the United Nations
Development Programme and the other agencies, funds
and programmes is more important than ever. Their
work can help to prevent organized crime and drug
trafficking from threatening international peace and
security.

Regional organizations can also play a crucial
role, given their understanding of the specificities of
each situation. In our own region, the establishment of
the South American Council to Combat Drug
Trafficking is an example of the promising avenues of
cooperation that such organizations can foster. In that
respect, Brazil welcomes the West Africa Coast
Initiative's important contribution to fighting drug
trafficking and organized crime in a critical region.

When organized crime or drug trafficking
threaten international peace and security, the Council
may have a role to play in accordance with its Charter
responsibilities. In such cases, it must take into account
the specificities and the need to cooperate with other
relevant actors in order to address all relevant
dimensions of the issue.

It is our view that the Council's role ultimately
must be to ensure support to national authorities so that
they can better fulfil their responsibilities.

