Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish to thank you, Mr. President, and your delegation
for having convened today's open debate, and
congratulate you on having assumed the leadership
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions with responsibility
and integrity. We are also grateful for the briefings
delivered by Ms. Karin Landgren, Executive Director
of Security Council Report, and Mr. James Cockayne
from the United Nations University.

Costa Rica associates itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Switzerland, on behalf
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
(ACT) group, and of Sweden, on behalf of the Group of
Like-minded States on Targeted Sanctions.

We are pleased to have seen the progress made in
recent years - albeit slowly - in the definition of the
working methods of the Security Council, as reflected
in presidential note 507 and its updates, which, in our
view, contributes to bolstering the transparency of the
work of the Security Council. While acknowledging the
progress made on this topic, there are still many aspects
that must be addressed in order to not only increase the
effectiveness of the Council's work but also enhance
the democratization of its functioning and ensure the
equitable inclusion of all members of the Council in
carrying out the work of that organ.

First of all, we wish to underscore that the
responsibilities of the Security Council must be
distributed equitably. In that regard, and in respect of
the subsidiary bodies, we call for greater transparency
in the appointment of chairpersons to those bodies and
for those appointments to be carried out in a timely
manner and in consultation with new members of the
Council. We also reiterate our view that any member
of the Council should be able to act as penholder for
draft resolutions or, failing that, as co-penholder in
the drafting of Council resolutions. We call for greater
participation to be encouraged among the 10 elected
members of the Council, as well as the holding of
consultations among all members of the Council in
the decision-making process regarding the distribution
of those responsibilities. We also call for continued
progress to be made in coordinating elected members
of the Council with a View to allowing more open
discussion and allowing those members to generate
support from others for their potential new initiatives.

With regard to open debates, it is imperative that
spaces be provided for stakeholders who may be able to
contribute positively to those debates. The participation
of civil society must be guaranteed, especially that of
women representatives, who can provide insight based
on their experiences and understanding of their rights.
We believe that the Council should show greater interest
in receiving input from those who have a legitimate
interest in or may be affected by its decisions. In order
for open debates to contribute substantively to the
work of the Council, it would be advisable to take into
consideration the contributions made by participants in
those debates as input to the decisions or outcomes that
may be adopted.

In order to encourage the transparency and
accountability of the Security Council, the annual
report of the Council to the General Assembly should
be submitted in a timely manner and should contain
analytical elements of its daily work, avoiding a simple
description of what it has carried out, in order for
States to have the opportunity to participate actively
in an interactive and inclusive debate on that analysis.
We urge the Council to comply as soon as possible by
submitting its annual report for the year 2018 for the
consideration of the General Assembly. We reiterate
the need to improve the relationship, communication
and cooperation between the General Assembly
and other relevant organs and the Security Council.
That is a practice that should be institutionalized,
along with regular consultations with troop- and
police-contributing countries.

The United Nations sanctions regime must be
transparent and fair in its application. The appointment
of an Ombudsperson to the sanctions regime of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities has
contributed to that objective. Costa Rica believes that
this practice should be institutionalized and replicated
in the other sanctions regimes in order to guarantee
due process, while always ensuring the functional and
operational independence of the Ombudsperson.

Finally, we reiterate the need to move towards
defining limitations on the use of the veto, such as those
put forward in the code of conduct of the ACT group and
in the French-Mexican initiative. That is imperative in
fulfilling the prevention work that the Security Council

must carry out, as well as in its mandate to maintain
international peace and security.

We urge all members of the Security Council
to engage constructively in the ongoing process of
formalizing and improving its working methods. We
reiterate to the delegation of Kuwait our support for
its commendable work and leadership in the relevant
working group.

