Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): I too would like to
join my colleagues in thanking the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, for his comprehensive briefing.

We want to begin with a confession. I think that
this is the eighth time we have discussed the situation
in Kosovo since Singapore joined the Council, and it is
very difficult for us to find something new to say. But,
for the record, we want to reiterate the points we have
made in the past on this issue.

There is, however, one new dimension as we meet
today. As several speakers have pointed out, that
dimension is the developments in Macedonia.
Everyone, I think, has said that developments in
Macedonia are linked to developments in Kosovo. This
is clearly a variable of uncertainty that we have. We
thought it would be useful to raise some questions in
this area that, we hope, someone may be able to
answer- although I will confess to Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno that these may be difficult questions for him
to answer.

I have taken note of the fact that the Council
issued a presidential statement on 13 August, two
weeks ago, welcoming the signing of the Framework
Agreement in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia by President Trajkovski and the leaders of
the four political parties. But my understanding is -
that is, to the best of my knowledge even though I was
not here at the time - that there was no substantive
discussion of that issue. It may be useful to have a
substantive discussion of it. I will illustrate this by
reading a few paragraphs from a recent op-ed piece
written by Gareth Evans on that agreement.

But before doing so, I would just like to raise a
small, procedural matter. I was reading the Framework
Agreement and noticed that the first sentence says that

"The following points comprise an agreed
framework for securing the future of Macedonia's
democracy and permitting the development of
closer and more integrated relations between the
Republic of Macedonia and the Euro-Atlantic
community".

I am somewhat intrigued by the phrase "Euro-Atlantic
community". Is this a new organization? Does it have
an address? Does it have a legal structure? Or is it a
general political body? I am just sort of curious as to
the origin of that phrase.

But, turning to the agreement, let me just read
what was said by Mr. Gareth Evans, the President of
the International Crisis Group.

"Macedonia's peace agreement is signed
and within a few days, barring further hitches,
3,500 North Atlantic Treaty Organization
[NATO] troops will be on the ground to collect
the ethnic Albanian rebels' weapons. But no one
who cares about the future of the Balkans is
breaking out the champagne. Too many on both
sides of the divide are only too keen to continue
the struggle, and the NATO mission, as presently
constructed, has neither the mandate nor the
capacity to create sustainable peace. This is
Macedonia 2001, but it looks unnervingly like
Bosnia 1992.

"More is at stake here than the breakup of a
small, impoverished country, and all the human
misery that could go with it. Collapse in
Macedonia would likely delay achievement of a
stable, multi-ethnic Bosnia; damage prospects for
peacefully negotiating Kosovo's final status;
jeopardize Serbia's democratic transition; and
significantly damage NATO's credibility in
Europe and beyond." (The Wall Street Journal, 22 August 200], p. A16)

Clearly, we therefore have some fairly hard
questions to raise about the Agreement and the impact
it is going to have on the situation in Kosovo. Four
questions came to my mind while reading it.

The first question is, having participated in at
least eight discussions on Kosovo, could we in the
Council in any way have anticipated this dimension of
the problem? As that dimension has clearly had a
significant impact on the situation in Kosovo in all our
discussions, why did we not anticipate it? It is an
interesting question for the Council to ask because,
from time to time, we issue statements and calls and
declarations saying that we should engage in
prevention of armed conflict. Why did we not succeed
in this case?

Of course, the second, related, question is, what
form of preventive action could the Council have taken
if it had indeed paid attention to all the signals coming
through indicating that trouble was brewing on the
border and that it would spill over into Kosovo?

The third question - and here I note of course
that the Council has welcomed NATO involvement in
Macedonia, which I frankly believe we should all
welcome- may perhaps be a theoretical, legal
question. Does the Council in any way need to
legitimize such action? Or is it our role just to take
note of it and welcome it without in any way either
endorsing it or rejecting it? What is the technical role
of the Council when regional organizations take a
leadership role on such difficult issues?

I also have a fourth question, which is perhaps the
most difficult. I think that, if all goes well and the
Agreement works and operation Essential Harvest
succeeds, we should commend NATO and welcome the
fact that a very dangerous situation has been prevented.
But if it does not work, who will pick up the pieces?
Will it be the Council that will have to pick up the
pieces and say, "Okay, it is now our responsibility to
look at the situation and see what we can do about it"?
If that is the case, how do we arrange for the passing of
the baton, and for who does it and when?

I realize that these are not easy questions. I am
not so sure whether it is fair to ask the Under-
Secretary-General to answer them. But we think that
these are the sorts of questions that the Council
certainly should have been considering during the past
few months, perhaps in an attempt to prevent from
happening the situation that we see today on the border
between Kosovo and Macedonia.

