Mr. Emvula (Namibia): It is a pleasure, Madam
President, to see you presiding over the Council for the
month of October. I wish to thank you for organizing
this very important debate at this crucial moment,
which affords the wider United Nations membership an
opportunity to address the challenges facing the Middle
East, particularly the people of Palestine.

My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and by the
representative of Zimbabwe on behalf of the Southern
African Development Community.

This debate is taking place following the
indiscriminate massacre of over 2,000 Palestinian
civilians - including innocent women and
children - with more than 100,000 Palestinian
people left without a place to call home during the
more than 50-day criminal Israeli military aggression
against Gaza. That genocidal aggression by the Israeli
occupation forces took place under the watchful eye of
the international community, including the Security
Council. No one stopped the aggression. We reiterate
our call on the Human Rights Council to take immediate
action to investigate the genocide against the people of
Palestine.

Furthermore, the international community is
bearing witness to Israel's fixation on its illegal
settlement enterprise, which includes the destruction,
theft and confiscation of Palestinian lands and property,
the construction and expansion of both the settlements
and the wall, and the forced displacement of Palestinian
families. We applaud the decision of Sweden and the
United Kingdom to recognize the State of Palestine and
call upon the rest of us to do so as well.

My delegation has repeatedly cautioned that the
illegal Israeli settlement campaign is undermining and
fragmenting the contiguity and territorial integrity of
the State of Palestine and threatens the viability of and
prospects for the physical realization of a two-State
solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders. As the
Security Council debates the situation in the Middle
East, the turmoil and the deterioration of the situation
in the occupied State of Palestine, including East
Jerusalem, persist due to the illegal and provocative
policies that Israel, the occupying Power, continues to
pursue. Those illegal policies have a negative impact on
and prejudice the situation on the ground and enflame
already heightened tensions between the two sides. We
thank the Secretary-General for his efforts, including
his participation in the Cairo donors" conference and
his visit to the affected areas in the Gaza Strip.

Namibia will continue to draw the international
community's attention to the ongoing plight of the
more than 1.8 million Palestinians living in the Gaza
Strip who have dramatically suffered from the massive
human devastation and physical destruction resulting
from the more than 50-day criminal Israeli military
aggression. They must not be forgotten, and all efforts
must be made to alleviate the suffering and hardship.

Thousands of families rendered homeless by the
Israeli destruction of their homes in Gaza are sheltered
in schools operated by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East or with host families. Thousands of civilians
continue to require medical care due to Israeli attacks.
Clean water for human consumption remains scarce.
Electricity cuts last up to 18 hours a day due to power
plants' lack of fuel, which affects every aspect of life.
Thousands of pieces of unexploded ordnance launched
by Israel at Gaza continue to threaten civilian lives and
require removal before any effective reconstruction can
take place. But how much longer will the international
community continue to step in to reconstruct just for
Israel to destroy again?

A clear demand must be made that Israel, the
occupying Power, cease all its illegal actions and
commit to the path of peace. It is the responsibility of
the international community, especially the Security
Council, not to tolerate the occupying Power's empty
pretexts and utter violation of international law.
Collective action is necessary if Israel, the occupying
Power, is to be held accountable for its violations. In that
regard, Namibia calls upon all members of the Security
Council to fully support the Palestinian initiative to
seek for a Security Council resolution that would, inter
alia, delineate a time frame for an end to the Israeli
occupation that began in 1967. That resolution would
naturally be based on the long-standing parameters
enshrined in United Nations resolutions.

While supporting the steadfast resolve of the
Palestinian leadership in the face of the unprovoked
aggression against its land and people, we reiterate
our total condemnation of all of the illegal actions and
crimes perpetrated by Israel, the occupying Power, in
the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. In
that context, we reiterate our call for the immediate
establishment of a committee to investigate those
horrendous crimes. We further urge the international
community to continue to provide the necessary
humanitarian assistance to ease the suffering of the
affected Palestinian communities, in particular the
most vulnerable members of society such as women
and children. We welcome the ongoing efforts to keep
negotiations going and appeal to both parties to commit
themselves to success, embrace the opportunity
presented and abide by the obligations under their
previous agreements, in order to achieve lasting peace
between Israel and Palestine.

I would conclude by reiterating Namibia's support
for the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General, our
unwavering friendship and solidarity with the people of
Palestine in theirjust cause for freedom, independence
and socialjustice, and our backing for the establishment
of an independent Palestinian State on the basis of the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and its
unconditional admission as a full member of the United
Nations and its agencies, so that it can take its rightful
place among the community of nations.

