At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of November, and to wish you and your delegation every success. We also welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and have taken note of his report on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, covering the period from 16 April through 15 October 2020 (S/2020/1052, annex). We welcome the Security Council's unanimous adoption of the resolution extending the mandate of the European Union-led military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, EUFOR Althea, which has been present in Bosnia and Herzegovina for many years. It is important to emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina as a host country has enjoyed respectable and fruitful cooperation with EUFOR Althea, particularly in the areas of capacity-building and the training of its armed forces. The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been peaceful and calm for a long period of time, which has been regularly reflected in the reports of EUFOR Althea as well as in the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. The EUFOR Althea mission is mandated to support the implementation of military aspects of Peace Agreement and to ensure compliance with annexes 1-A and 2 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace. Over recent years, in order to correspond to the situation on the ground, EUFOR Althea has been reconfigured, while the primary focus of the mission has shifted from deterrence and activities for providing a safe and secure environment, to capacity-building and training. Let me address the most urgent issues concerning the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities have responded very swiftly to the outbreak and various urgent and necessary measures have been put in place to contain spread of virus. All resources at our disposal have been mobilized. Our hospitals, medical and other relevant institutions have done a tremendous job to fight an unseen enemy. During the COVID-19 outbreak, health services have been provided to all persons in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including migrants and asylum seekers, irrespective of citizenship or health insurance status. Doctors, nurses, first responders and many others have been risking their lives in fighting this ferocious and highly contagious disease. We take this opportunity to thank all of them for their indispensable efforts and dedication. We would also like to thank our international partners for the valuable assistance and support they have rendered in these difficult times for humankind. In addition to its impact on our health system, this pandemic hits our vulnerable economy very hard. According to an estimate by the International Monetary Fund, the gross domestic product of Bosnia and Herzegovina will decrease by 5 per cent in 2020. Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities have introduced some necessary measures to mitigate those negative effects. Some urgent financial packages have been created in order to help those suffering most. These efforts will take time and significant resources to recover from the unforeseen situation caused by the virus, which has claimed so many human lives worldwide. We would like to thank the European Union for rendering the immediate support to our health-care sector in tackling the coronavirus, as well as the assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina to address long-term social and economic recovery needs. Also, the assistance of the international financial institutions would be welcome, especially from the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, to overcome the negative economic and social effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. In that regard, the role of the United Nations will be indispensable through the United Nations country team and, of course, the United Nations Development Programme, the World Health Organization, UNICEF and others. Let me now turn to some points relating to other aspects of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Local elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina are scheduled to take place on 15 November. Also, overcoming the 12-year stalemate, the Central Election Commission has adopted a decision whereby local elections in the town of Mostar will be held on 20 December. The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have finalized all necessary measures in order to enable that the elections be held smoothly, and in a democratic and credible manner. Citizens throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina will be able to exercise their rights and cast their votes to elect members of municipal councils, members of city assemblies and mayors. The Council of Ministers has continued the cooperation with the entity Governments on issues concerning the European integration and reform processes, targeting the stabilization of the economy, increased effectiveness of public administration, and attraction of domestic and foreign investments enabling job creation. The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina are fully committed to overcoming the challenges facing them and to implementing the reforms required for the country's full-fledged integration into the European Union. In that regard, we are grateful to the EU for its active support for Bosnia and Herzegovina's European path and would like to urge both the EU and its member States to continue to intensify that support. For our part, we have made increased efforts in a number of areas relevant to achieving that goal, including the implementation of the reform agenda and socioeconomic reforms as a matter of priority, as well as our continuing determination to strengthen the rule of law and good governance in order to fulfil the requirements of the European Union to obtain candidacy status in 2021. Most important, the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have taken resolute steps towards candidacy status and prospective negotiations with the European Union with regard to the plan for implementation of the recommendations contained in the opinion of the European Commission. The Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina has adopted the rules of procedure of the Stabilization and Association Parliamentary Committee between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European Union as an important step forward in European integration. Bosnia and Herzegovina has continued to participate actively in regional cooperation and to maintain good-neighbourly relations. The fostering of friendly and constructive cooperation among the countries of the region on issues of mutual interest remains a top priority of Bosnia and Herzegovina's foreign policy. The cooperation of the Western Balkan States within the framework of the Berlin process remains a key driver of their integration into the European Union and of stability in the region. Bosnia and Herzegovina plays an active role in regional initiatives through the South-East European Cooperation Process, the Western Balkans Fund and the Central European Initiative, inter alia. Let me mention as a good example of regional cooperation the Sarajevo-Belgrade highway construction project, in the framework of cooperation among three partner countries, namely, Serbia, Turkey and Bosnia and Herzegovina. During the reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina continued to fulfil its international obligations with regard to countering terrorism and violent extremism. Bosnia and Herzegovina, with extensive support from the EU, has taken significant steps forward in strengthening the rule of law and the fight against organized crime. EU experts have been working together with the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the implementation of the 2018-2022 action plan for the prevention of money-laundering and financing of terrorist activities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The judicial institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to process individuals involved in fighting on behalf of terrorist organizations, as well as those who facilitate the recruitment of terrorist fighters. With regard to processing war crimes in domestic courts, we would like to reiterate that fighting impunity is vital for Bosnia and Herzegovina as a complex, multinational State. Bosnia and Herzegovina is continuing with a very important planning, monitoring and evaluation process in the field of social and economic development that is fully in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In that regard, let me express our gratitude to the United Nations country team in Bosnia and Herzegovina for its outstanding contribution to, and tireless efforts in, assisting our institutions on the development agenda. I would like to draw your attention, Madam President, to one of the main concerns of Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities, namely, the issue of illegal migrants. The international migrant crisis continues to pose a substantial challenge to the States of the region and their economies. During the reporting period Bosnia and Herzegovina experienced a significant increase in refugees and migrants on its territory, most of whom crossed the border illegally. It is important to emphasize that the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina do not have enough capacity to implement and undertake all the measures necessary to curb the migrant crisis. Bearing in mind the lack of capacity and the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina is not a final destination for migrants, our Government is in need of stronger international support. We are grateful to the European Commission's financial support for Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities in handling migration and strengthening its capacity for border management. However, for a comprehensive response, the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina need much more support from the European Union as well as from United Nations agencies. Bosnia and Herzegovina continues in these challenging times to contribute actively to international peace and security by deploying its military and police personnel to United Nations peacekeeping missions. Currently, we have approximately 45 personnel serving in United Nations peacekeeping missions worldwide. I would like to reiterate that Bosnia and Herzegovina has fully endorsed the call of the Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, for a global ceasefire in all conflicts worldwide in order to silence the guns, stop the violence and raise voices for peace. There is nothing more important than an immediate ceasefire in all corners of the globe to reinforce diplomatic action, help create conditions for the delivery of life-saving aid and bring hope to places that are among the most vulnerable to the coronavirus disease pandemic. Bosnia and Herzegovina stands ready to cooperate with the States Members of the United Nations and the United Nations broader family on this critical and most pressing issue that the world is facing today. Finally, we would like to express the readiness of Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities to continue their work in securing a better and prosperous future for its citizens, as well as our gratitude to our international partners for supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina on that path.
