Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - the associated
countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey and the countries
of the European Free Trade Association belonging to
the European Economic Area Iceland and Liechtenstein
align themselves with this statement.

I should like first of all to thank the High
Representative, Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, for their
detailed statements on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and to reaffirm that they have the support
of the European Union in their efforts to implement the
Dayton and Paris Agreements.

The European Union warmly welcomed the 23
August adoption of an electoral law by the Parliament
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This marks the beginning
of a new phase in redefining Bosnia and Herzegovina
as an independent, multi-ethnic State. Moreover, its
adoption constitutes a step towards Bosnia and
Herzegovina's accession to membership of the Council
of Europe as well as towards other European
institutions, in the spirit of the road map drawn up at
the European Union summit held at Zagreb in
November 2000.

The European Union likewise welcomes the
progress towards regional economic integration
represented by the signing of a memorandum of
understanding on trade liberalization by the ministers
for international trade of seven countries of the region.
We hope that implementation and further development
of that agreement will make for a considerable
improvement in the economic situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which, as Mr. Petritsch indicated,
remains very difficult. We are particularly alarmed by
the 40 per cent unemployment rate, which is a cause
for more than mere disquiet.

I reiterate forcefully that we remain convinced
that the economic situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
can be improved by pursuing the aims set out in the
European Union road map; we urge the authorities to
take the necessary legislative measures to that end. We
regret that only seven of the 18 points set out in the
road map have been implemented to date.

We are deeply disappointed by the recent changes
to the draft civil service law. In the view of the
European Union, it no longer addresses the original
objective, which was to set up an efficient, merit-based
civil service. We consider that, as the legislation stands
at present, all the international community's hopes for
an efficient and depoliticized civil service in Bosnia
and Herzegovina have come to naught.

On the refugee question, we welcome the fact that
the number of people from minority groups who are
returning to the country is up compared with last year,
and we urge the High Representative to continue his
campaign to raise awareness among international,
national and local institutions with a view to stepping
up their cooperation in that regard.

The European Union has often stated how much
importance it attaches to cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. Here, we welcome draft legislation of the
Republika Srpska on cooperation with the Court,
because it will genuinely facilitate such cooperation
and will send a clear message to the public that the
Serb authorities will meet their obligations.

Concerning the future of the international
community's presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
European Union appreciates and supports the
comprehensive approach taken by the High
Representative to recalibrating the current civilian
implementation structure in the field. We now expect
the High Representative to present a more detailed
action plan in collaboration with the Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the United Nations and the
international community.

On the question of the police, we welcome the
remarkable efforts of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to reform and restructure the
police and to prepare it to face the many challenges
described by Mr. Klein.

The recent developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina provide an incentive to press ahead.
Accordingly, the European Union strongly urges the
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to continue the
implementation of the European Union road map. We
should like to stress once again that responsible
political management and a total and immediate
commitment to carrying out institutional, legal and
economic reforms in full are essential prerequisites for
speedy integration into European Union structures.

