Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I would first like to join my
colleagues in expressing my condolences to the people
and the Government of Egypt and firmly condemning
the recent terrorist attacks there, as well as to our
brothers and sisters in Somalia in the wake of the
attacks there a few days ago.

I would like to thank the presidency for convening
today's debate on the situation in the Republic of Haiti.
We welcome Ms. Sandra Honore, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
We acknowledge the tireless work that she and all the
men and women of the Mission - civilian, military
and police - are doing for the Haitian people through
their efforts to help the country safeguard its people's
security and achieve long-term stability.

Bolivia welcomes the new governmental structure
and elected officials, the result of the excellent conduct
of the electoral process and a clear sign of the progress
being made towards achieving lasting political stability
and consolidating democracy in Haiti. We would like
to reaffirm our commitment to our brother country's
present and future. We are part of the cooperative
efforts of the region and the international community
to help Haiti overcome the socioeconomic problems
that have afflicted it for decades. We encourage all
the efforts being made to consolidate the country's
stability and promote its development through stable
mechanisms designed to assist and cooperate with the
Haitian authorities.

In that regard, we would like to stress the importance
of the new United Nations justice and support mission
that will succeed MINUSTAH and that should
continue the work of supporting and consolidating the
national security forces. In our View, therefore, it will
be important for the Security Council to continue to
evaluate the situation on the ground in Haiti, which
is why we should work with our Haitian brothers and
sisters to plan a visit by the Council so that it can get
first-hand information on the situation.

We urge the international community to continue
and strengthen its solidarity with Haiti. It is everyone's
responsibility to combat the poverty and injustice
that are products of a series of circumstances that
have affected the country not just in terms of political
instability and natural disasters but in some cases even
through the presence of the United Nations itself.

We commend the progress that both the State
and MINUSTAH have made in the past 14 years and
the extraordinary capacity for resilience shown by
the people of Haiti. The continued improvement and
professionalization of the Haitian National Police,
which will improve the State's presence and authority,
are also especially important. It is crucial to ensure
that resources continue to be allocated to quick-impact
projects aimed at promoting citizens' security and an
effective legal framework that will protect them and
enable them to fully exercise their rights.

However, despite this progress, we are concerned
about the endemic cholera situation, which has infected
approximately 788,000 people since its outbreak in 2010
and has killed around 9,000. This highlights the Vital
need to strengthen Haiti's national health institutions
and water and sanitation systems and their ability to
respond to the problem. While we have taken note of the
United Nations efforts to mitigate the cholera problem
by acknowledging its responsibility for the original
outbreak in 2010, in our View such recognition is not
enough. The international community must consider
ways of making reparation for the damage as soon as
possible. In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-
General's initiative to launch an emergency response
to the cholera epidemic and the new United Nations
approach in campaigning against its spread.

We would like to emphasize that negotiations
on a new mandate for a mission in Haiti should be
consistently conducted in consultation and coordination
with the country's Government and new authorities,
and should always take their priorities into account,
with Haiti seen as the sole and principal author of its
own destiny, without any interference.

Finally, I would like to reiterate what was said at
a recent meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of La Alianza Bolivariana para los Pueblos de Nuestra
America, which is that we believe we owe a historic
debt of gratitude to the Haitian nation, and that we are
committed to continuing to promote cooperation with
it, in accordance with its Government's priorities and
in full respect for its sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.

