Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere thanks to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his comprehensive briefing to the
Security Council on the report (S/2017/95/Rev.l) of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). I also welcome Mr. Tomislav Nikolie,
President of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Citaku, and thank
them both for their briefings.

Egypt welcomes the progress achieved Kosovo
in the economic and security spheres, as well as
with regard to the rule of law, which will necessarily
have a positive impact on peace and security in the
region. However, we would also express our concern
in connection with what is stated in the report about
the increased tensions between Pristina and Belgrade
and the diminished commitment to dialogue between
the two.

We call on both sides to exercise self-restraint and
avoid incitement and unilateral solutions that may lead
to escalation. We reiterate that there is no alternative to
dialogue as a means of resolving disputes, and therefore
urge the leadership in Belgrade and Pristina to revive
and reinvigorate the high-level dialogue between them
under the auspices of the European Union without
delay. That is how we can achieve consensual, fair and
sustainable solutions that are acceptable to both sides
and that lay the foundations for peace and stability in
the region.

Accordingly, Egypt welcomes the efforts aimed at
implementing the agreements reached between the two
sides in August 2015 under the auspices of the European
Union. In that context, we refer to the Secretary-
General's report on the progress achieved in some areas,
particularly in terms of the integration of the judiciary,
freedom of movement, and telecommunications. But
we would also like to express our disappointment at
the lack of progress in a number of other areas related
to those agreements, particularly in relation to the
establishment of an association/community of Serbian-
majority municipalities in Kosovo, which was one of
the critical provisions of the agreements. We would
therefore like to reiterate the importance of establishing
such a community in order to guarantee institutional
protection for the Serbian community in Kosovo.

Egypt's foreign policy is a pillar upholding security
and stability in different regions. In that context, we
underscore the importance of the Kosovo Parliament
adopting the agreement on the border with Montenegro.

In conclusion, we reiterate Egypt's support for the
efforts by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, particularly in relation to supporting the
authorities in Kosovo in counter-terrorism and allowing
them to better address the existing and emerging
challenges that threaten security and stability in
the region.

