Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation)(spoke in Russian): We welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, His
Excellency Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, and we are
grateful to him for the statement he made containing a
profound analysis of the situation in his country. I
would also like to express gratitude for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ngongi,
for having introduced the comprehensive report
containing the concept of the step-by-step deployment
of phase III of the United Nations Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

We support the recommendations contained in the
report that this stage of the operation would be carried
out within the current mandate of the Mission and the
size of the troop strength authorized by the Security
Council. In view of what has been planned for phase III
- the expansion of MONUC activities to areas where
fighting continues - we attach particular importance
to compliance by the parties of the conflict with their
obligations to provide adequate security conditions to
United Nations peacekeepers. The thrust of the concept
of phase III of the MONUC deployment to create
conditions for voluntary disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration (DDRRR)
of members of armed groups is in keeping with our
approach regarding the impossibility of using force to
try to resolve this problem. We believe that the success
or failure of all efforts in this areas will depend
ultimately on the extent to which people who were in
the ranks of armed groups active in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo feel protected upon returning to
their home countries.

Despite the tragic nature of the events preceding
the move to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the need to have just punishment for those guilty of
genocide, we cannot fail to see that peace and security
in the region will depend on the attainment of national
reconciliation, the settlement of inter-ethnic conflicts
and the democratization of political life, not only in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but in all States of
the region.

An important condition for the phase III
deployment of MONUC must remain strict compliance
by the parties to the Lusaka Agreement with the
commitments they undertook, as well as with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. This applies
primarily to the non-deployment of reinforcements and
the speedy withdrawal from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo of foreign armed troops. The provision of
any support whatsoever to armed groups must be
ended.

Once again - here we repeat a point that has
been made repeatedly - our delegation wishes to state
decisively that there is a need for the speedy
demilitarization by the Security Council of the city of
Kisangani. The failure of the leadership of the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie (RCD) to
comply with this demand of the Security Council, with
the connivance of the Rwandan authorities, has become
flagrant, and this merits the most severe condemnation.

A sine qua non for the future deployment of
MONUC is cooperation by the parties with Mission
personnel in resolving tasks covered by their mandate.
We also call upon the Congolese parties to set aside
their differences and cooperate with each other and the
international facilitator, within the framework of the
inter-Congolese national dialogue, during which the
major parameters will have to be defined for the future
political system in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Progress in these areas will determine our
delegation's judgement about the presence among the
parties of the political will to move the peace
settlement forward, and will define our position
regarding the recommendations for future steps to be
taken within the deployment of phase III of MONUC.

