Mr. Dauth (Australia): I have not had an
opportunity yet this month to congratulate you, Mr.
President, on the efficient way in which you are running
the Council. I aim to help by taking rather less than the
four minutes that you have allocated to us. I promise.

Australia regards the draft non-proliferation
resolution as an appropriate and timely initiative to
help strengthen international efforts to combat weapons
of mass destruction (WMD) proliferation, including the
risk of non-State actor acquisition of WMD.
As a clear threat to international peace and
security, WMD proliferation falls squarely within the
Security Council's mandate. We recall the Security
Council's presidential statement of 31 January 1992
(S/23500), which sets out emphatically the threat posed
by the proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction.
It has been too long since the Council last dealt
substantively with the issue of nuclear non-
proliferation. It is entirely appropriate that the Council
should do so now, consistent with its mandate to
maintain international peace and security.

Recent proliferation cases have demonstrated the
critical importance of effective domestic measures,
including in particular export controls, in preventing
the misuse of sensitive materials and technology at the
State or sub-State level. The draft resolution responds to a
clear need for Member States to strengthen their domestic
controls and legislation and ensure that proliferators do
not exploit legislative and enforcement loopholes.

The nuclear black market, coupled with the known
terrorist interest in acquiring WMD, underscores the need
for quick action from the international community in
response to proliferation threats. Unless the
international community acts with conviction and
unity, terrorist groups could one day acquire WMD,
with consequences none of us wishes to contemplate.

The obligations on Member States imposed by
the draft resolution in no way conflict with rights and
obligations under existing WMD-related treaties. Nor
does the draft resolution impose treaty obligations on
States not parties to such treaties. The draft resolution,
however, does support the effective implementation of
those treaties and related instruments and is entirely
consistent with the aims of the established, treaty-based
multilateral disarmament framework. Of course, the draft
resolution does not preclude the future development of
new international instruments in those areas.

Australia commends the resolution to all Council
members and calls for its early and unanimous adoption.

