Mr. Akram (Pakistan): It is a pleasure to
participate in this debate, especially at this propitious
time on Friday evening.

The Pakistan delegation welcomes your presence
in New York, Madam, to preside over this important
meeting. We congratulate Ambassador Mahiga and the
Tanzanian delegation on their skilful guidance of the
Council's work this month and on their initiative in
holding this debate. Let me also express our
appreciation to Ambassador Emyr Jones Parry for the
United Kingdom's successful presidency last month
and wish Tanzania's successor, Ambassador John
Bolton of the United States, an equally successful
presidency next month.

The relevance of this debate has been illustrated
by the recent casualties suffered by Guatemala's
United Nations peacekeepers in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We offer Guatemala our deep
condolences. Yet, that incident cannot mask the
considerable progress that has been made towards
peace and development in the Great Lakes region,
including the completion of the peace process leading
to the democratically elected Government in Burundi,
and the encouraging democratic transition in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Pakistan has
contributed and is contributing to the international
effort in both countries through our peacekeeping
contingents in the United Nations Operation in Burundi
and the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

Earlier speakers, including African ministers
from the region, offered a clear perspective and
important proposals that deserve the Council's close
consideration. Let me, on behalf of Pakistan, mention
five points which appear essential to building peace
and security and advancing development in that region.

First, it is important to consolidate the gains
made so far. That requires the sustained engagement of
the United Nations and the continued cooperation of
the countries of the region. This debate has affirmed
that the regional States and the United Nations are
committed to that course. In that context, the vital
importance of promoting good-neighbourly relations
based on mutual respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of all States of
the region cannot be overemphasized.

Your country, Madam, has played a leading role
in promoting such regional relations, especially at the
first International Conference on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes
Region, held in Dar es-Salaam in November 2004, and
in the implementation of the Dar es-Salaam
Declaration and preparations for a second summit. An
effective regional mechanism for the peaceful
settlement and resolution of disputes could constitute
an important component in fostering a peaceful and
cooperative neighbourhood.

Secondly, the urgent challenges need to be
frontally addressed. Foremost among those challenges
is the effective and complete disarmament and
demobilization of armed groups and militias. They
pose a pervasive threat to peace and can sabotage the
achievements of the peace processes.

The tragic incident of 23 January, in which eight
Guatemalan peacekeepers were killed, and the incident
last February, in which nine Bangladeshi peacekeepers
were ambushed by outlawed militias in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, indicate the need
to fully evaluate the strategies that must be employed
to promote sustainable security in that and other parts
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region. We urge the Secretary-General to investigate
the circumstances of those incidents and identify any
possible shortcomings in the conception of the mandate
vis-a-vis force generation and deployment, intelligence
gathering, forced disarmament and other kinds of
robust action. We hope that after such an investigation,
the Secretary-General will be able to recommend steps
to address such shortcomings. MONUC has been
provided with a robust mandate, but robust operations
must be undertaken with adequate strength and
resources. Otherwise, the lives of peacekeepers are in
danger. Is MONUC adequately staffed, equipped and
resourced to carry out that mandate while operating in
what are called particularly hazardous conditions?

Thirdly, the United Nations should support the
endeavour of the African States to assume ownership
for securing solutions to African problems. Security
Council resolutions 1625 (2005) and 1631 (2005)
represent steps in the Organization's evolving
relationship with the African Union, as will the
resolution that will be adopted following this debate.
The role of the United Nations remains central in the
maintenance of international peace and security, but it
should actively support capacity-building in the
African Union in various fields and should secure the
latter's services where possible to complement the
work of the Organization.

Fourthly, sustainable peace in the Great Lakes
region cannot be realized without a sustained and
sufficient international commitment to support the
region's economic and social development. In that
regard, we hope that the Peacebuilding Commission
will be a valuable mechanism to marshal the necessary
resources and cooperation to consolidate peace and
prevent the recurrence of conflict in the Great Lakes
region. We highly appreciate the role that Tanzania and
Ambassador Mahiga played in the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Fifthly, sustainable peace and successful
economic growth in the region cannot be achieved
without addressing the complex root causes of the
threats to security. Foremost among them is the illegal
exploitation of the region's natural resources. That
must be addressed from both the supply and the
demand sides. We must follow up and not forget the
Kassem report. Those involved in illegal exploitation
of natural resources, and the financiers and profiteers
of that illegal trade, must be equally held accountable.

