Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese Government has all along shown
great interest in developments in the Great Lakes region.
We feel a deep sense of relief that after conflict and war
Rwanda is moving gradually towards peace and stability.

Peace in Rwanda has been difficult to attain and is the
result of both the active promotion of the international
community, including the United Nations and, even more
so, of the aspirations and efforts of the people of Rwanda
in their search for peaceful lives. It is sincerely hoped that
Rwanda will smoothly embark on the path of reconstruction
and development in an environment of peace and stability.

We have also taken note of the fact that Rwanda is
still confronted with some difficulties in achieving stability
for the State and peace for its people. In our View, the core
issue facing Rwanda remains a genuine realization of
national reconciliation. We therefore hope for and support
the efforts of the international community to help the
Rwandan people and Government to achieve these
objectives.

It is precisely out of our sincere interest in peace and
tranquillity for the Rwandan people that we express our
deep concern over some of the problems reflected in the
final report of the International Commission of Inquiry. We
believe that the illegal flow of arms to the Great Lakes
region constitutes a potential threat to peace and stability in
the region and that it will impede the cause of
reconstruction and development in the countries concerned,
particularly Rwanda.

We therefore favour the adoption by the Council of
appropriate measures to reduce or even stem the illegal
flow of arms into the region and to work to increase mutual
confidence between the countries of the Great Lakes region.
We believe that in adopting actions in this area the Council
should heed and respect the views of the country concerned
and of the other countries concerned in the region. We
have also noted that those measures have already received
wide support among African countries, including Rwanda.

On the basis of these considerations, the Chinese
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before the Council.

