Mr. Yamamoto: When I previously addressed
the Security Council (see S/PV.8613), the people of
Afghanistan were preparing to vote in the country's
fourth presidential election since 2001. The election
took place as scheduled on 28 September. Turnout on
the day was modest, dampened by security threats and
low voter mobilization in many areas. The preliminary
results were to be announced on 19 October. However,
they are yet to be announced. The primary reason for
the delay is to ensure that the electoral process is as
transparent and credible as possible, even at the expense
of time.

From a technical perspective, the presidential
electionthisyearimprovedconsiderablyonpastelections
in Afghanistan, with much greater transparency. The
use of biometric voter verification devices seemed
largely effective in detecting and deterring fraud, and
several new monitoring mechanisms throughout the
process have enabled the electoral management bodies
to detect and eliminate multiple and fraudulent votes.
Candidates and other political stakeholders have had far
greater access to information than in previous elections.

After election day, the Independent Election
Commission (IEC) retrieved electoral materials and
tallied results forms in the presence of candidate agents
and observers. Results forms and data, which were
electronically transmitted, were matched and processed
at the newly established Digital Audit Verification
Support System. Deduplication of biometric data to
identify multiple voters and data comparison between
the tallied results and Digital Audit Verification Support
System were completed. Their primary objective was
to detect potential fraud and exclude fraudulent votes
from the count. The Electoral Complaints Commission
(ECC) also adjudicated more than 4,000 election day-
related complaints.

Nevertheless, the electoral process has not been
without problems. Some candidates and their supporters
have expressed concerns concerning the technical
aspects ofthe process and the lack ofpublic information.
There have been numerous exchanges between the
electoral management bodies and candidates, both
orally and in writing. That process entailed the blockage
of audit and recount in seven provinces by supporters
of some candidates. It also added to the delay in the
announcement of the preliminary results. However, the
process finally resulted in the resumption of audit and
recount in the remaining seven provinces yesterday, on
15 December. We now expect to hear the preliminary
results in the near future.

In the process, the United Nations technical experts
and international commissioners have had extensive
consultations and worked closely with the IEC and the
ECC at both the commissioner and Secretariat levels. I
acknowledge and commend the leadership exhibited by
both the IEC and the ECC. I felt a strong sense among
all stakeholders that Afghan ownership has to be
maintained throughout the electoral process, and that
the Afghan leadership and ownership of the process
would need to take root in the Afghan political scene.

I call on all stakeholders to enable the electoral
institutions to exercise their responsibilities in full,
including by addressing all complaints through
the appropriate legal and institutional channels.
Once electoral complaints have been adjudicated in
accordance with the law, I urge the candidates and their
supporters to accept the outcome. When the election is
completed with credibility, it will become a milestone
in the history of establishing a representative political
system of the country.

The war continues to take an appalling toll on
civilians living in Afghanistan. The third quarter of
2019 saw the highest number of civilian casualties since
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
began systematic recording 10 years ago. Over the
months of October and November, we saw a slight
decrease in overall numbers, but that is not enough. I
am particularly concerned about the ongoing deliberate
attacks on civilians and an increase in civilian casualties
from non-suicide improvised explosive devices and
aerial operations. Escalating violence in order to attain
a position of strength in peace negotiations - causing
many civilian casualties - is unacceptable. Many
more concrete efforts to reduce Civilian casualties are
required by all parties.

I am also alarmed by the increased threat to aid
workers in Afghanistan, which has affected the United
Nations family in the past month. It is with profound
sadness that I note the death of United Nations staff
member Anil Raj, who was killed while travelling
in a United Nations vehicle in Kabul. Mr. Raj was a
highly capable professional and a well-liked colleague.
His death has been deeply felt by the United Nations
family in Afghanistan. I also note with indignation
the death of Dr. Tetsu Nakamura, whose assassination
was a profound shock to the Afghan people and the
humanitarian community in Afghanistan. Sadly, those
were not the only violent attacks on aid workers since my
previous briefing. There is no conceivable justification
for attacks on humanitarian workers, whether they be
Afghan or international.

I am similarly concerned about the rise in
threats and attacks against human rights defenders in
Afghanistan and those with different political views. To
name a few, a member of the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission was killed by the Taliban
earlier this year, and two human rights defenders
became incommunicado and were arbitrarily detained
by the National Directorate of Security as they were
courageously investigating allegations of sexual abuse
of children in Logar province.

Targeting and attacking such representatives of
civil society is totally unacceptable. We will continue
to work closely with a range of interlocutors to
strengthen human rights protection for those striving
to create a more just and equitable society. In that
context, I would like to welcome the recent "A" status
re-accreditation of the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission.

Whatever the outcome of the presidential election
might be, peace will be the issue of paramount
importance to the new Administration. Even while we
await the outcome of the elections, efforts to achieve
peace have not ceased. Talks between the United States
and the Taliban have resumed. Efforts are under way
to continue the intra-Afghan dialogue. President Ghani
outlined his thoughts on peace at the Heart of Asia-
Istanbul Process Ministerial Conference. Those efforts
reflect the strong yearning for peace by all, particularly
the people of Afghanistan.

Through past efforts in the peace process, some
key issues have emerged that need addressing to make
substantive progress. They include the reduction of
violence and achieving a ceasefire, as well as finding
agreeable ways to build on gains made in the areas of
human rights, justice and governance. Those issues
are fundamental to the life and well-being of the
Afghan people. Therefore, the peace process must by
necessity be Afghan-owned. It is imperative that the
new Government establish inclusive mechanisms
through which the views and interests of the entire
spectrum of the Afghan society, including women and
youth, are justly reflected.

But we all know that peace in Afghanistan has
wide-ranging implications for the region and beyond.
It is a key issue that affects the stability of the region.
It is also an issue fundamental to international efforts
to counter terrorist groups, including the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province. Peace in
Afghanistan would create opportunities for accelerated
development and enhanced connectivity of the region
and provide common benefits to the people and countries
in the region. The strategy for peace therefore needs to
have a broad base of support. All peace efforts made by
the Afghans and other various stakeholders, including
regional countries, should be closely coordinated in a
way that creates synergy.

I would like to emphasize the importance ofwomen's
participation in all the activities of Afghan society. In
this context, I welcome and thank Afghanistan and the
United Kingdom for creating the Group of Friends of
Women in Afghanistan. I also note that the Parliament
of Afghanistan passed a resolution on 25 November,

calling for the protection and promotion of women's
rights and for the inclusion of women in the peace
process. Those are strong expressions of commitment
to supporting Afghan women, particularly in
promoting their participation in the peace process and
in addressing the continuing pervasiveness of violence
against women and girls.

Incorporating the voices of the next generation will
also be crucial. On this note, I would like to warmly
welcome Aisha Khurram, the newly appointed Youth
Representative for Afghanistan. I know that she has
engaged seriously with a broad spectrum of youth in
Afghanistan, and I look forward to hearing her remarks
later in this meeting.

Afghanistan will need to continue its reliance on
the support of external donors, both for its immediate
humanitarian needs and to support longer-term
economic development. We expect to have an important
ministerial conference next year. It will be the first
ministerial-level conference on the development
of Afghanistan for the new administration. It will
also likely be the last pledging conference for the
remainder of the transformation decade ending in
2024. I should like to point out that in order to make
meaningful progress in the field of development and
reforms, Afghanistan must take positive and tangible
steps on the fundamental issues of anti-corruption and
accountability, including the issue of impunity. On the
humanitarian front, the United Nations, working with
the Government and non-governmental organizations,
expects to reach 7.1 million people by the end of 2019 in
371 out of 401 districts of Afghanistan, exceeding the
annual target due to a massive drought response. Next
year, we hope to reach at least 7.1 million people and,
to achieve this, we hope to raise $733 million. We look
forward to and appreciate the Council's support.

As Afghanistan awaits a new Government,
the country and its international partners together
have an opportunity to address key challenges and
promote rightful causes in shaping a better future for
the country. The key issues are peace, development,
poverty reduction, human rights and accountability.
If the country is to succeed in addressing these issues
in the next years, the immediate goal is to deliver a
credible election whose results reflect the genuine will
of the Afghan people and are accepted by the broad
range of stakeholders, particularly the candidates. The
United Nations will continue to work with all those
concerned, both Afghans and international partners, to
achieve peace, stability and prosperity in Afghanistan.

