Mr. Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the efforts of the Government of Austria over the
past year to reach agreement on how to improve the
situation of civilian populations affected by armed
conflict.

I would also like to welcome the presentation of
the independent study on the protection of civilians in
the context of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
This document was brought about through exhaustive
efforts that we commend. The fact that it is an
independent study allows us to consider it without
preconceived notions and draw from it valid lessons on
the basis of which all stakeholders involved in this
issue can build, in a coordinated fashion, the broadest
consensus possible on the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations.

After 10 years of discussion on this subject and
after the approval of mandates for the protection of
civilians by the Security Council, two facts are quite
evident. First, there is a clear evolution in the
awareness of the international community on the need
for the United Nations to play an important support
role in the protection of the lives of innocent persons
affected by conflict. Accordingly, peacekeeping
operations are probably the most tangible tool that the
Organization possesses to make this protection
effective. It is also true that a large part of the
credibility of the United Nations depends on this tool.

Secondly, while we are aware of the fact that the
protection of civilians is a task that is fundamentally
carried out on the ground, its effective implementation
is not easy if the actors do not have the necessary and
suitable planning, guidelines, coordination, training,
resources and political commitment. That is why it is
one thing to incorporate protection language in a
Security Council resolution and quite another to
implement this intention effectively on the ground. The
distance between the two extremes is very large and, as
the independent study has pointed out, the link that
should bind them together is completely broken.

Thus, to move forward in a sustainable fashion,
all the actors involved should have more or less the
same idea of what is expected when the protection of
civilians is mandated. What can we effectively do on
the ground, given the circumstances in which the
United Nations operates? What can we do to improve
this situation?
By way of example, it is very clear that we must
provide missions with some type of concept or
guidelines which would interpret in a fairly standard
way the mandates which are approved by the Security
Council. In order to take advantage of the experience
acquired and to bolster the legitimacy and the
commitment to their implementation, these guidelines
must be developed with the participation of the actors
involved, especially the police and troop-contributing
countries which are responsible for the most sensitive
tasks involved in implementation.

It is also clear that we have to find a balance
between intentions and capabilities, between mandates
and resources. The complexity of the situations and the
lack of human and material resources, even if they do
not justify inaction, are real conditions that must be
borne in mind in order not to exaggerate expectations
and so that we do not fix parameters that we are not in
a position to fulfil.

All stakeholders - the Security Council, the
Secretariat, the police- and troop-contributing
countries - need to make a great deal of improvement
in this area so that this balance will get closer to what
innocent civilians expect of the United Nations.
Likewise, even though we do agree that protection -
in the light of evidence of physical violence - is an
essential matter in the protection of civilians, it should
be looked at from a comprehensive point of view,
including humanitarian assistance, police work and the
promotion of the rule of law, political stability,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
reconstruction and economic and social development.

No one questions the fact that the State has the
primary responsibility to assist victims in emergency
situations that could take place on their own territory.
However, when the scope and duration of these
emergencies exceed the response capacity of States,
international cooperation in terms of humanitarian
assistance is crucial. Accordingly, the involvement of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
in the protection of civilians, in coordination with the
work of the peacekeeping missions, is of vital
importance.

In this regard, it is urgent to maintain and
strengthen the norms of international humanitarian law
with a view to fighting impunity, ensuring access for
humanitarian personnel and providing proper safety
and security conditions so that they may carry out their
tasks with the ultimate objective of avoiding and/or
alleviating the suffering of the civilian population in
emergency situations.

Uruguay reiterates its desire to continue working
proactively and constructively to move forward in this
matter in an inclusive and coordinated fashion, relying
on lessons learned, particularly in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the
representative body for all Member States. In this
respect, I would like to take this opportunity to invite
participants to a new workshop which we will
organize, together with the permanent representative of
Australia, in the morning of 8 December. There, we
hope to repeat the open discussion and to start to seek a
common understanding with a view to the upcoming
session of the Special Committee.

