Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, may I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and wish you
every success.

On behalf of my delegation, I should like briefly
to thank others for their kind words addressed to us in
connection with our presidency.

I should like to extend to the Russian delegation
our most sincere condolences over the attack that took
place in Moscow and to ask it to convey them to the
authorities of their country and to the people affected.

It is always a pleasure to have Mr. Holkeri here
with us and to hear him speak. I thank him very much
for his statement this morning, in which he told us of
the situation on the ground in Kosovo in recent months.
He knows, from our many statements in the past, that
our delegation supports him and the staff of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) as they carry out their mandate under
resolution 1244 (1999). The success of the "standards
before status" policy requires concrete progress with
respect to standards. We therefore believe it to be
extremely helpful to have a work plan that allows us to
measure the extent to which those standards are being
met. It is also useful that UNMIK and the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government are currently meeting
in working groups on those standards. We trust that the
Serb representatives will soon join those working
groups.

We also endorse the focus on undertaking future
assessments and agree with Mr. Holkeri on the need for
the Provisional Institutions, within their sphere of
competency, to be held accountable for progress made
towards attaining the standards. Similarly, we eagerly
await the results of the periodic reviews and,
ultimately, the full assessment of progress made by the
Provisional Institutions as they proceed to implement
the standards. That will have a crucial impact on
progress towards determining the moment to launch the
statutory process and the future status of Kosovo, in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).

It is essential that the Provisional Institutions
become truly multi-ethnic and that the leaders of
Kosovo not be distracted by symbolic issues from their
fundamental task of improving the day-to-day lives of
the inhabitants. We also think it necessary that the
Kosovo Assembly keep within its competencies
established in the Constitutional Framework. We
reiterate that unless there is a significant, sustainable
return of internally displaced persons and refugees,
unless there is adequate freedom of movement, unless
the parallel institutions vanish, it will not be possible to
build a multi-ethnic, democratic society that will be
able to bring together all of the inhabitants of Kosovo
without any kind of exclusiveness.

There must be no further intimidation or violence,
particularly against minorities. We thus deplore the
violence against the Serbian community in Kosovo. We
trust that the parties will reach a satisfactory and timely
agreement on transparent modalities for privatization
and that this will have a positive impact on economic
growth and development in the region. The complete
transfer of non-reserved responsibilities to the
Provisional Institutions under Chapter 5 of the
Constitutional Framework has been encouraging.

Lastly, the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina and the greater communication between
UNMIK and the Kosovo Assembly will undoubtedly
help secure a better situation for the people of Kosovo.

