The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more speakers on my list, but I should like to take this
opportunity to make a further statement.

Some participants today have not enjoyed being
addressed as brother or sister, but I wish to tell them
that we come from the Earth and shall return to the
Earth. We are all children of Mother Earth, and as such
we are all siblings. No human being comes from the sun
or the moon; we all come from the Earth. That is why
I use the terms "brother" and "sister". I apologize ifI
have upset anyone.

I would also like to say that I have been surprised
by various statements concerning cooperation and
collaboration. I come from a very humble background.
Sometimes, when we hear certain statements from
certain countries, we do not feel secure, but having
heard so much talk of cooperation and collaboration,
I feel that the Security Council is genuinely concerned
about maintaining peace, social justice and security in
the world.

Whenever a coup d'etat takes place, mistrust
arises. As an international Organization, we have
the responsibility to defend democratically elected
Governments and Presidents. The largest number
of coup d'etats in Latin America have taken place in
Bolivia. When armed troops took control in my country,
three Generals became President in one year. I did not
wish to discuss the political situation in my country, but
I feel that it is a good way to close.

I have been surprised by the various statements
on the issue of water, with respect to which we must
cooperate and work together in joint projects and
investment, which will be of great help to our peoples.
I therefore thank all speakers for their important
statements. We are very diverse. Listening to speakers
experess their opinions in the Security Council, I
sense our physical, economic, geographic, ideological
and pragmatic diversity. It is our right to be diverse,
but whatever differences we may have, I feel that it is
important to work together to the benefit of the most
neglected peoples of the world.

That is my experience as a person of very humble
origins who knows what it means to live in poverty.
That is why I believe we must maintain our plurinational
States, a plurinational America and a plurinational
planet. We are diverse, and we must understand each
other in our diversity. For me and many others, the
synonym of diversity is plurinationality in which we all
enjoy the same rights and duties for the good of society.

The meeting rose at 5.20p.m.
