Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for South Sudan, Mr. Shearer, for
his briefing.

Thanks to the concerted efforts of all South
Sudanese parties and the international community, the
political reconciliation process in South Sudan has made
some progress recently. President Kiir announced the
formal launching of national dialogue and implemented
a unilateral ceasefire, actions that China welcomes. The
overall situation in South Sudan remains as complex as
it is austere, and it still faces serious challenges in the
areas of political security, economic development and
the need to address famine. Meeting those challenges
will require the consistent efforts of all South Sudanese
parties and the international community.

First, it is central to actively promote a political
solution in South Sudan. Attaining peace and stability
is the common aspiration shared by all South Sudanese
parties. A political settlement is the only possible
solution to the question of South Sudan, and the key
is to realize reconciliation in its true sense. We hope
that all South Sudanese parties will take advantage
of the opportunity offered by the national dialogue,
abandon the mindset of a military solution, revert to the
political settlement track, promote inclusive national
dialogue, attract the extensive and active participation
of all parties, resolve differences, enhance mutual
trust and achieve peace, stability and development in
South Sudan.

Secondly, it is essential to facilitate the mediation
role of regional and subregional organizations.
China appreciates the active mediation efforts by
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the African Union. The international community
should vigorously support Mr. Mogae, Chair of the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, and
Mr. Konare, High Representative of the African Union.
The international community should strengthen its
leadership, send a consistent message to the world,
create synergies and resolve the question of South
Sudan.

Thirdly, we must focus on the fundamental questions
that relate to the conflict. Development is an important
factor for ensuring peace, and underdevelopment is
the underlying cause of the situation in South Sudan.
The international community should actively help
South Sudan through increasing development and
input relating to agriculture, infrastructure and natural
resources; providing support for South Sudan in
developing its economy; and improving livelihoods so
that the South Sudanese people can benefit from the
peace dividend.

Fourthly, it is essential to strengthen the capacity-
building of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS). We hope that the Secretariat and UNMISS
will strengthen their communication with the South
Sudanese Government, improve the capability of
UNMISS to perform its duties and the effectiveness of
its operations, and strengthen its ability to deal with
complex situations, while taking effective measures
to strengthen the security and safety of peacekeeping
personnel. The Government of South Sudan should
continue to actively implement the joint communique
with the Security Council and its relevant resolutions,
support UNMISS in carrying out its duties and properly
address and resolve problems related to cooperation.

The Chinese Government has always supported
the peace process in South Sudan and provided
assistance to its ability to South Sudan for its country-
building efforts. To date, we have sent more than 1,000
peacekeepers to UNMISS. Not long ago, in response
to the United Nations appeal, the Chinese Government
provided assistance in the amount of $5 million through
the World Food Programme and also provided, through
bilateral channels, 8,750 tons of food to assist South
Sudan respond to famine. China remains willing to
continue to play a constructive role in helping South
Sudan achieve lasting peace, stability and sustainable
development.

