Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Let me first express our
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for having convened this
briefing in the form of an open meeting and for having
given us the opportunity to listen to the very important
and penetrating analysis provided by Mrs. Ogata. I would
like to thank Mrs. Ogata for her excellent briefing and for
the wealth of information she provided us. Moreover, I
would like to commend her and her colleagues for the
work they have done in difficult circumstances in many
parts of the world, in a situation that she described in her
briefing as one in which decisive international
involvement in conflict resolution is not the norm. I
 

would like to add that the tendency to substitute
humanitarian work - or humanitarian discussions - for
political action is still a serious problem.

Mrs. Ogata has provided us not only with a wealth of
information but also with a wealth of ideas. I think that one
central message of her briefing is particularly important for
the Security Council. She said that cooperation by
Governments with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is of particular
importance, along with cooperation among Governments in
the efforts to solve humanitarian problems and the problems
of refugees.

Our Government is very well aware of the central
importance of the cooperation of Governments in these
efforts. A specific expression of that is Slovenia's activity
in demining in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We see tasks in
the field of demining as central to creating the conditions
for the return of refugees in Bosnia. This is a priority to
which we would like to devote our energies, and we hope
that the effort will be successful.

Certainly, the idea of cooperation by States has many
applications. At the preventive stage, the role of the
Security Council is indispensable. During times of outflows
of refugees, guarantees of security in refugee camps are of
primary importance; we note with particular interest the
points made by Mrs. Ogata concerning the so-called
medium alternatives: the provision of police and other
personnel for guaranteeing security in refugee camps. Then,
at the stage of post-conflict peace-building, there is a
variety of complex tasks.

I would like to add one thought to this central idea of
international cooperation, which is essential for the success
of assistance to refugees and for the return of refugees.
There are situations - and we have seen one very
recently - where resolute political action is the most
important part of cooperation: resolute political action to
ensure respect for Security Council resolutions, to stop
attacks against civilian populations, to remove the fear
existing in the affected areas, and thus to create conditions
for the return of refugees and displaced persons. This may
be the central, and the most important, form of cooperation
needed in some circumstances. As the case of Kosovo has
shown, this can happen; and when it happens, it can happen
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

Those were general comments I wanted to make. I
would like to conclude by asking a specific question. In her
briefing, Mrs. Ogata referred to the situation in the Great
Lakes region, and especially to the Burundian refugees in
Tanzania. She mentioned the figure of 260,000 Burundian
refugees in Tanzania, and said that there was a growing
mixture of refugee flows, internal displacement and
repatriation movements. We learned from previous
briefings by Mrs. Ogata that the tripartite cooperation
among Rwanda, Burundi and Tanzania has been a
moderately successful experience. We would like to learn
more about it; maybe Mrs. Ogata could share her views
on this matter as it stands today. This would certainly
help the Security Council as it tries to deal with the
situation in the Great Lakes region: a situation that is
fraught with danger.

