Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The delegation of the Russian Federation,
Sir, is pleased to see you assume your new functions as
Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. We wish you every possible success. We
note with satisfaction the presence at today's meeting
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of South
Africa, Ms. Dlamini Zuma, and the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union,
Mr. Lamamra.

We are grateful to Mr. Prodi and the team that he
leads for the comprehensive report on modalities for
support to African Union peacekeeping operations
(S/2008/813). We note the timeliness of that document.
In our view, the report significantly contributes to the
international community's efforts towards settling
conflicts throughout the African continent. It contains
an in-depth analysis of African Union peacekeeping
efforts and of ways to strengthen the peacekeeping
capacities of that regional organization. It proposes a
broad range of short- and long-term practical steps to
bolster cooperation between the African Union and the
United Nations.

Clearly, the capacities and resources of the
African Union need international support. In that
regard, priority attention should be paid to developing
a continental peace and security architecture and to
establishing and operationalizing an African Standby
Force. Here, it is necessary to look at coordinating the
international community's efforts to assist the African
Union in increasing its own peacekeeping capacities.

With regard to increasing the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union,
which today the Secretary-General rightly referred to
as a strategic relationship, substantial positive
experience has been accumulated. A joint peacekeeping
force has been set up in Darfur under the aegis of the
United Nations and the African Union and vigorous
efforts are being made to advance the Darfur political
process. African Union member States are playing an
important role in stabilizing the situation in Somalia.

Political and diplomatic means to avert threats
and conflicts are ever more topical. Here, a key role
should lie with the Africans themselves. The
peacekeeping efforts of the African Union and of
subregional organizations such as the Economic
Community of West African States, the Southern
African Development Community and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, as well
as mediation missions by prominent African political
actors, have on a number of occasions contributed to
achieving significant advances in regional stability.

Experience has shown the effectiveness of the
model of the preventive deployment of regional
peacekeeping operations in hot spots throughout the
continent with subsequent transfer of those missions to
the United Nations. We share the assessment of
Mr. Prodi's report that the crux of today's
peacekeeping operations lies in the fact that no single
organization can alone resolve these issues. Furthering
collective approaches are necessary to effectively
overcome today's threats and challenges and demand
the consistent stepping up of cooperation among the
United Nations, the Security Council and its regional
partners. Such cooperation should be based on the
2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) and the United Nations Charter, in
particular Chapter VIII. The provisions of Chapter VIII
of the Charter provide a sound legal basis for
conducting African peacekeeping operations
sanctioned by the Security Council, helping set up an
African security architecture. African mechanisms
aimed at preventing and settling conflicts must become
fully operational.

In the past few years, the Council has repeatedly
considered the issue of stepping up practical
cooperation with regional organizations. Today's
debate, which is focused on practical cooperation with
the African Union, is further confirmation of the
serious attention the Security Council is paying to
developing effective strategies to preserve peace and
security in Africa. The report's recommendations
deserve close attention and substantive further
development. Many of those recommendations touch
upon the interests of all States Member of our global

09-2716]
Organization. The recommendations on providing
temporary logistical and financial support to African
Union peacekeeping operations from Member States'
assessed contributions should be carefully analysed
both by the United Nations Secretariat and by the
General Assembly.

The Russian Federation is actively participating
in drawing up and implementing an international
programme of strategic support for Africa, including
strengthening the peacekeeping capacities of the
African Union. Russian peacekeepers are active in
almost all United Nations peacekeeping operations
throughout the African continent. A Russian helicopter
unit is deployed as part of the United Nations mission
in the Sudan. Another helicopter unit is deployed as
part of the European Union-led peacekeeping force in
Chad and the Central African Republic and will soon
start discharging its duties as part of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad. Russia's specialized training institutions are
implementing a training programme for African
peacekeeping personnel.

In conclusion, I would like to state the readiness
of the Russian delegation to endorse the draft
presidential statement that is being prepared by Libya.
We hope that today's discussion will serve to lend new
impetus to the practical cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union.

