Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Luxembourg, Minister Asselbourn and you,
Madam, for convening this open debate and for your
country's leadership of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict.

My country welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2143 (2014), proposed by Luxembourg and
sponsored by Chile at a critical time, as highlighted
by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. We value and
welcome the statements delivered by the Secretary-
General; his Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui; the Executive
Director ofUNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake' and especially
by Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, whose testimony has urged
the Council to take decisive action on the issue before
it.

My delegation endorses the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of Greece on behalf
of the Human Security Network, of which my country
is a member.

On the international scene today, the vulnerability
of children in situations of armed conflict contributes an
element of urgency, dedication and strong commitment
to global efforts to protect children - efforts that
should certainly not be selective. The situations in the
Syrian Arab Republic, the Central African Republic
and South Sudan, among others, remind us of our
responsibilities. In that regard, Chile would like to
emphasize the challenge implicit in the mandate of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict.

Our reflections here will be based on some issues
raised in the President's concept note (S/2014/144, annex). As a State party to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its Optional Protocols, to Convention
No.182 of the International Labour Organization and
to the Paris Principles on children associated with
armed forces or groups, Chile welcomes the campaign
"Children, not soldiers", launched yesterday by the
Special Representative and UNICEF and aimed at
preventing and eradicating the recruitment and use
of children by armed Government forces by 2016.
We would like to stress how important it is that the
campaign not divert attention from action designed to
eradicate this practice by armed groups. We believe
the campaign could benefit from forming coalitions
and holding regional meetings, as was done in the
framework of the conferences on the use of children as
soldiers held in Maputo and Montevideo in 1999.

States bear the primary responsibility both for
ending impunity and for trying and punishing those
responsible for atrocities committed against children.
In cases where States are unable or unwilling to
bring the suspects to justice, responsibility lies
with the International Criminal Court to prosecute
crimes covered under the Rome Statute. International
commissions of inquiry must tackle this issue and
redouble efforts to preserve the evidence of such highly
serious crimes.

The registration of births, including delayed
registration, not only makes it possible to verify the age
of child recruits and ensure that they are demobilized,
it also constitutes evidence that can be used to punish
those responsible for their recruitment, thus helping
to end impunity. We welcome the fact that today's
resolution 2143 (2014) covers this issue. The Council
should consider taking more forceful action against
those who commit serious and persistent violations
against children and imposing sanctions on persistent
perpetrators. We would welcome recommendations
on the subject from the groups of experts on the
Sanctions Committees and hope that resolutions on
new committees and mandate renewals will take due
account of the situation of children in armed conflict.

In connection with the implementation of
resolution 1998 (2011), of which Chile was a sponsor,
we emphasize the importance of respecting the civilian
nature of schools and condemn attacks and threats of
attacks contravening international humanitarian law on
schools and hospitals and on those protected through
their connection to them. We are also concerned about
closings of schools and hospitals in situations of armed
conflict, undermining the right to education. We urge
parties to armed conflicts to refrain from such actions
and hope that the Secretary-General will continue to
monitor and report on military uses of schools and
hospitals. We are in favour of drafting and implementing
guidelines to reduce the use of schools and universities
by parties to armed conflicts in support of their military
actions and thus minimize the adverse effect of armed
conflicts on the safety of students and education. In that
connection, we note with interest guidelines formulated
by civil society that could be a basis for Government
action in this area. We believe that this issue should
be covered in ceasefire agreements and in post-conflict
agendas.
It is essential that mandates for peacekeeping
operations and important United Nations political
missions make specific provisions for the protection of
children, the ongoing deployment of child protection
advisers and training in the area for contingents and staff,
and ensure that we be kept informed on these issues in
the Council's consultations on those mandates. In that
context, we appreciate the efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations regarding the matter. Based
on my country's experience in peacekeeping missions,
we have incorporated into the police sections of such
missions policewomen from Chile's Carabineros and
Policia de Investigaciones, whose experience in the area
can contribute concretely to implementing mandates as
they relate to the protection of children.

We stress that more decisive and systemic efforts
are needed to end impunity and find a lasting solution
to the issue of eradicating and preventing illegal
violations of children's rights. Two years before the
twentieth anniversary of Graca Machel's report on
children and armed conflict (A/51/306), Chile reiterates
its commitment to making an active contribution to
preventing and eliminating all forms of violence that
affect the children of the world, from armed conflicts
to urban violence.

I will conclude with the watchwords of Chile's
Nobel Prize laureate Gabriela Mistral: the future of
children is always today. Tomorrow will be too late.

