Mr. Valle (Brazil): My delegation welcomes the
presence of the Foreign Minister of Georgia at this
meeting.

My country is increasingly concerned over the
situation in Georgia since the resumption of hostilities
two months ago. It is with disquieting frequency that
deplorable facts regarding the security of the peacekeepers
and observers in that country have been brought to our
attention. Expressions of regret, condolence and sympathy
to families and Governments have been continuously
conveyed.

Assuring the security of the military members and
civilian staff of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia and the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) peacekeeping force is the responsibility of both
parties to the conflict. Those who suffer the most,
however - the main victims of the continuation of the
conflict - are the people of the Republic of Georgia,
both of Georgian and Abkhazian ethnicity.

Brazil cannot accept practices of ethnic content or
the eviction of people by force. Also condemnable is the
use of the press for the promotion of antagonism. Along
with the role of the Security Council in helping to
maintain the unity and integrity of the Republic of
Georgia, it is essential that Georgians of different ethnic
and religious backgrounds develop democratic ways of
coexistence.

My delegation supports the draft resolution and
wishes to underline the need for both parties, especially
the Abkhaz forces, to respect human rights, and

 

particularly those of displaced persons, who have the right
to return to their homes. We hope that the Geneva process
proves capable of contributing to sustainable dialogue and
reconciliation. The continuous efforts undertaken by
Mr. Liviu Bota, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, the group of Friends of the Secretary-General, and
the Russian Federation as facilitator are to be highly
commended.

The Georgian and Abkhazian authorities have to live
up to their previous commitments and cooperate so as to
neutralize radical and criminal factions.

The extension of UNOMIG's mandate for another six
months is an expression of the belief that a durable peace
can be attained. Nevertheless, the Security Council will
closely monitor the safety of the United Nations personnel
and the willingness of the parties to negotiate.

