Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Osorio, Permanent Representative of
Colombia, for his briefing, and I appreciate his efforts
to advance the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). China also welcomes
the extension of the mandate of the Committee's Panel
of Experts pursuant to resolution 2049 (2012) and hopes
that the Panel will strictly adhere to the principles and
mandates of the Council's resolutions and continue to
work under the leadership of the Committee on the
basis of the principles of neutrality, objectivity and
independence.

Iran's nuclear issue rests on the authority of the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime and is
critical to peace and stability in the Middle East. China
has consistently believed that the relevant Council
resolutions should be implemented fully, but sanctions
are not the fundamental objective of those resolutions.
We are not in favour of excessive pressure on or new
sanctions against Iran. We are firmly against the use or
threat of force.

China consistently supports the international
community in seeking a peaceful resolution to the
nuclear issue of Iran through dialogue and cooperation.
Over the past few months, the five plus one group (PS-H)
have held three rounds of dialogue and one expert
meeting with Iran. The parties concerned have also
maintained close contact and communication at various
levels and in different forms. All those efforts have
played an essential role in continuing to move forward
the pragmatic negotiations and gradually bringing the
dialogue and cooperation back on track.

China believes that the parties should continue
to work on the basis of the principle of progressive
development and mutual respect, take a pragmatic
approach in firmly advancing dialogue, and try by all
means possible to seek common ground and gradually
find a solution to the nuclear issue of Iran. That is not
only in the common interests of the parties but is also
the broadly shared expectation of the international
community.

A few days ago the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) Board of Governors adopted a resolution
on the nuclear issue of Iran, which supports the proposal
of the P5+l for a comprehensive and lasting negotiated
solution based on dialogue. That is a positive step
towards promoting dialogue and cooperation between
the IAEA and Iran and maintaining and advancing that
dialogue.

Against the current backdrop, it is of the utmost
importance for the parties to stay in touch and safeguard
the hard-won momentum in the dialogue. China is ready
to join the international community in continuing to
expand diplomatic efforts and committing to dialogue
and cooperation in order to play a constructive role in
seeking a comprehensive and appropriate solution to
the nuclear issue of Iran.

