Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation would like to thank
Ms. Fang Liu, Secretary General of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), and Mr. Amr
Aboulatta, Chai of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), for their assessments and their informative
contributions to our discussion.

Our delegation played an active part in the dialogue
on the issue of threats to civil aviation security held
in July in the forum of the CTC. In the course of that
meeting, the Deputy Minister of Transport of the
Russian Federation made a presentation on my country's
best practices for implementing international civil
aviation security standards. In our view, the CTC's July
special meeting gave us food for thought, in particular
regarding the remaining gaps in States' fulfilment
of the requirements for preventing terrorist acts and
strengthening cooperation between States in that area.
The fact is that all of these elements are reflected in the
Council's counter-terrorism resolutions, starting with
the foundational resolution 1373 (2001).

Among the new challenges in this area we are
again seeing the issue of foreign terrorist fighters,
incidents at airports caused by the actions of insiders
and airport staff, the use of increasingly sophisticated
improvised explosive devices, and the danger posed by
cyberattacks. The previous arrangement affirmed that
when formulating and implementing in practice rules
and methods for ensuring aviation security, States
should rely first and foremost on work carried out within
the framework of ICAO, the international organization
competent in these matters. In that context, it will be
helpful to be able to rely on ICAO's Global Aviation
Security Plan, currently being considered, along a
road map for its implementation and accompanying
programmes and projects.

As we see it, ourjob, in discussing this topic in the
Council, and that of the relevant work in the CTC, is,
without duplicating any efforts, to ensure that States
are helped to comprehensively implement the relevant
standards and recommendations, while taking into
account the gaps thathave been identifiedin theirnational
counter-terrorism arrangements. We look forward to
continued fruitful cooperation between the Security
Council's counter-terrorism bodies and ICAO. We will
also be interacting on the issue with the Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning
ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities. This process
will undoubtedly also involve the newly established
United Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism, which is
mandated to strengthen the coordination of technical
assistance both within and beyond the United Nations.
Our ultimate goal should be to create a sustainable
system for protecting international civil aviation from
acts of illicit interference, and the most effective means
to that end is the coordinated action of States and
international bodies within their respective mandates.

