The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Belgium,
Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Czech
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, Germany, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Jordan, Kenya,
Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Malta, Namibia, New
Zealand, Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines, Portugal,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Switzerland, Ukraine, Uruguay
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/ 165, containing a letter dated
1 April 2010 from the Permanent Representative of
Japan addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
a concept paper for this debate.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all
2

speakers, Council and non-Council members, to limit
their statements to no more than five minutes in order
to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously and to allow the many delegations to
speak within the allocated time. Delegations with
lengthy statements are requested to deliver a condensed
version and to circulate the full text.

I shall now give the floor to the Council
members.


