Mr. Henze (Germany): First of all, I want to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the

 

presidency of the Security Council. My delegation is fully
confident that your wise counsel and long political
experience will guide us through the work of the Security
Council during the month of July, and I wish to assure you
of our cooperation. I should like also to thank the preceding
speakers for their words of appreciation for the work of
Ambassador Graf Rantzau as President of the Council
during the month of June. We will not fail to transmit them
to him.

The draft resolution that we will adopt today is a
follow-up to Security Council resolutions 943 (1994), 970
(1995) and, lastly, 988 (1995) of 21 April 1995. These
resolutions have suspended certain sanctions against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) at
more or less regular intervals. Therefore, some may believe
that the draft resolution before the Council today is a matter
of routine.

For obvious reasons, it is not. We all continue to be
well aware of the painful events that led to the imposition
of sanctions on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in 1992.
We are also well aware of the continued human suffering
in Bosnia, in particular in Sarajevo and Bihac and in the
eastern enclaves, on which we have just received additional
information. It is against this background that the Council
will be taking its decision.

The issue we are discussing today continues to be a
crucial element in the ongoing international efforts to de-
escalate the crisis in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as in the other States in the former
Yugoslavia. We believe that without an effective border
closure by the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, there will be no de-escalation in Bosnia.

Keeping these facts in mind, we have analysed
carefully the situation on the ground and the draft resolution
before the Council. According to the report of the
Secretary-General before us, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia continues to maintain the border closure
between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the areas
of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina now under the
control of Bosnian Serb forces. The report of the Secretary-
General also states that the cooperation of the Mission of
the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia
(ICFY) with Yugoslav authorities continues to be good. We
pay tribute to the dedicated efforts of the members of the
ICFY Mission.

However, having studied the report carefully, we could
not ignore the clear indications of serious shortcomings in
the border closure. In particular, the report refers to 688
incidents of border crossings by military personnel. It is
disturbing that we do not know how many persons were
involved in these incidents, where they went, and how
they were armed and equipped.

Even more serious are recently incoming reports on
the increasing number of draft-age young men forcibly
transferred by Federal Republic of Yugoslavia authorities
into the Serb-held territories of the Republic of Croatia
and into the territories under the control of the Bosnian
Serbs.

My delegation therefore finds it appropriate and fully
justified that the draft resolution before us should send a
clear signal to the authorities in Belgrade not to engage in
military assistance. There must be no transport of military
personnel across the border, no support with military
equipment, no financial assistance, no coordination of air
defences. To do otherwise would not only jeopardize the
international peace effort, but would also undermine the
credibility of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
authorities in the ongoing negotiations.

A key to the future stability of the region and to a
peaceful settlement of the continuing crisis remains the
mutual recognition of all States of the former Yugoslavia.
The international community and the Security Council
should, accordingly, be ready to consider further
substantial sanctions-relief measures if and when the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has agreed to and
implemented the necessary steps for the mutual
recognition of the States of the former Yugoslavia within
their internationally recognized borders and has agreed to
and implemented the strengthening of the border closure
regime and its international monitoring. This is the clear
and positive message that the Security Council wants to
send to the leadership and to the people of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

Like ordinary Bosnian citizens in Sarajevo or
ordinary Croat citizens in Zagreb, the overwhelming
majority of the people in Belgrade and in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) are
yearning for an end to war and conflict. Germany is very
much looking forward to a time when a responsible
policy striving in words and deeds for peace in the
Balkans is pursued and implemented by the Belgrade
authorities. We look forward to a time when the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) can
again find a respected place in the international

 

community. Germany would be the first to welcome and
support such a development.

It is in this spirit that the German delegation will vote
for the draft resolution before us.

