Mr. Guilherme de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in French): We thank the delegation of France
for organizing this open debate.

(spoke in English)

I thank the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their important
presentations.

The widespread and systematic persecution of
individuals on ethnic and religious grounds is one
of the ugliest aspects of the recent surge of violent
extremism in the Middle East and elsewhere. Innocent
civilians are always the first victims ofintolerance. The
reports of barbaric acts, including targeted killings,
forced conversions, kidnapping, slavery, sexual abuses
and torture committed by the so-called Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its associated groups are
deeply shocking. The international community cannot
remain indifferent in the face of such acts of savagery.

Brazil strongly condemns the persecution of
individuals on the basis of their ethnicity or belief. We
reject any act of intolerance or incitement to religious
or ethnic hatred. We also repudiate the unjustifiable
destruction of religious and cultural heritage. As a
pluricultural, multi-ethnic nation that assumes diversity
as a defining trait of its identity, Brazil is committed
to full equality of the rights of people, regardless of
religion or faith. Our identity is the product of the
contributions of various cultures and civilizations
that were brought to bear on our history, starting
with indigenous populations, Europeans, the decisive
African heritage and significant waves of immigration.
We have learned the lessons of history and above all the
value of diversity and the extent to which it represents
an asset.

The indication that crimes against humanity, war
crimes and genocide may have been committed by the
ISIL in Iraq, as pointed out by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights in his report, is particularly outrageous.
The Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic, led by Mr. Paulo Sergio
Pinheiro, has also documented the savagery perpetrated
by ISIL against the Syrian people. Because of their
religion or ethnicity, hundreds of thousands of people
had to flee their homes and their countries to escape
from the cruelty imposed by ISIL and are in desperate
need of humanitarian assistance.

This violence and destruction must end. All efforts
should be undertaken to stop and ensure accountability
for the human rights Violations and Violations of
international law and humanitarian law committed
by extremists. Fighting impunity is crucial to prevent
the recurrence of abuses and violations. Brazil
co-sponsored the interregional declaration recently
delivered in the Human Rights Council on supporting
the human rights of Christians and other communities
in the Middle East. Brazil's support reflects its concern
with the severe Violations of human rights of Christians
and other minorities, religious groups and several
individuals who have been victims of intolerance,
discrimination and violence in the region.

Violent extremism is a multidimensional threat.
It will only be efficiently countered if we take into
consideration its underlying causes, in particular those
associated with protracted social, political, economic
and cultural strife. Where political instability, poverty
and exclusion reign, there will be fertile ground for the
spread and growth of violent extremism.

Overcoming this threat necessarily involves
diplomatic efforts founded on justice to bring peace
to conflicts that directly or indirectly fuel terrorist
agendas. The Middle East and the whole world can no
longer bear the burden of unresolved conflicts, such as
the one between Israel and Palestine. It is time for a
political solution, not weapons, to prevail in Syria. In
Libya and Yemen, the international community should
be united in condemning Violence and working with
the parties to engage in dialogue and reach a peaceful
solution to their differences.

As in many items on our agenda, we are convinced
that we will succeed only if we join efforts on the
basis of shared values and enhanced multilateral
cooperation. Fighting extremism and protecting ethnic
and religious groups must be done in full compliance
with international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and international refugee law.
Bending the rules and invoking exceptional rights
weaken the multilateral system and have brought much
misery to civilians. One cannot escape the fact that the
current situation was partially fuelled by the social,
political and institutional disarray resulting from a
history of foreign interventions and misconceived
strategies for the Middle East.

The importance of dialogue among different
religions and cultures cannot be overstated. Initiatives
such as the Alliance of Civilizations, which promotes
tolerance and mutual respect, can contribute to
dispelling stereotypes that tend to associate terrorism
with specific cultures, religions or ethnic groups. We
must all be wary of dangerous rhetoric and narratives
that fuel xenophobia and prejudice. Brazil joins those
Governments around the world that have risen against
such distortions.

