Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank the
Jordanian presidency for convening today's open debate.
Kazakhstan is very much alarmed with the overall
situation in the Middle East, including in Palestine and
its occupied territories. Well-coordinated international
efforts are needed to stop the senseless bloodshed and
to find an inclusive political solution. Developments in
Palestine, such as the continuing settlement process in
the occupied territories, do not allow one to speak of
any improvement or mitigation of the situation, which
continues to threaten regional and international peace
and security.

Kazakhstan recognizes the legitimate right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination, the creation of
an independent State of Palestine peacefully coexisting
with Israel within the 1967 borders, and the achievement

of full-fledged membership in the United Nations.
The two-State solution is the only viable option for a
durable peace reached through direct and meaningful
negotiations in full conformity with the Charter of the
United Nations, relevant Security Council resolutions
and other mechanisms, first of all the road map for
peace and the Arab Peace initiative. We call therefore
on Israeli and Palestinian leaders to show wisdom,
responsibility and political will to reach a historic peace
agreement that would meet the legitimate aspirations of
their peoples.

My country believes that the determined and
concerted efforts of all Member States and other
relevant stakeholders, together with the United Nations
in the leading role, is the only way to combat the violent
extremism so widely spread throughout the Middle East.
This needs the long-term, comprehensive approach of
the entire international community, built on greater
regional and global cooperation, in accordance with the
Charter and international law.

My country expresses concern over the humanitarian
crisis in Syria. The international community must give
its utmost attention to this crisis. Kazakhstan believes
that resolving the Syrian conflict is possible only
through peaceful means, and supports national and
international efforts to establish peace and stability
in the country. Kazakhstan is also gravely concerned
about the developments with regard to the Palestinian
refugees in Syria. This crisis reconfirms the extreme
vulnerability of the Palestinian refugees and calls for
its urgent solution in the context of reaching lasting
peace in the region.

We strongly believe that all peaceful means are
appropriate for conflict resolution. Besides politicians
and diplomats, spiritual leaders should be involved in
the process of the quest for peace. At this very moment,
the high-level event on tolerance and reconciliation
is being held at Headquarters. We commend the
tireless efforts and the active stance of the Secretary-
General, the President of the General Assembly and the
High Representative of the Alliance of Civilizations
in promoting the ideals and values of tolerance,
understanding and mutual respect for attaining durable
long-lasting peace and stability.

Kazakhstan regularly convenes the Congress of the
Leaders of World and Traditional Religions, at which
leaders of Islam, Christianity, Judaism, Buddhism,
Hinduism, Taoism and many other faiths seek together
ways to promote peace based on spiritual values. This
June we will host the fifth Congress, aimed at enhancing
dialogue among religious and political leaders for peace
and development. In addition, I would like to inform
the Council that the capital of Kazakhstan, Astana, is
going to host the next Middle East media seminar in
May.
In conclusion, we again urgently call on all parties,
especially those with real political power and influence,
to draw on their political will to ensure lasting peace
and security in the Middle East, and freedom and
justice for all people.

