Mrs. D'Achon (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, for
introducing the Secretary-General's report.

The report is encouraging. It takes note of
progress achieved by the Timor-Leste authorities in
their gradual assumption of police and military
competencies. It also emphasizes the positive
developments in Timor-Leste's political institutions
and context, as well as the noticeable improvement in
its relations with Indonesia. This is clearly to be
welcomed. My delegation hopes that the United
Nations will continue to support the efforts of those
two countries to stabilize their relationship, inter alia,
in cooperating on investigations into the crimes
perpetrated in 1999.

The remaining challenges, however, are
numerous. The strengthening of the capacities of the
police, as emphasized by Ambassador Sharma, is a
priority for the future, as it will determine the enduring
stability of Timor-Leste. The training of security
groups in villages seems in this respect to be an
interesting initiative. The police and the army will,
inter alia, have to learn to work together. Finally, the
judicial sector remains insufficiently developed, thus
hampering the administration of justice.

Regarding the Secretary-General's recommendations,
my delegation supports the military strategy and the
schedule for a reasonable downsizing of troops
presented in the report, as well as an extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) for a further year.

The report provides clarifications regarding the
geographical deployment of police and military
personnel. I should like to ask the Special
Representative, however, for further clarifications with
respect to the specific division of competencies in
internal security. I would ask him in particular to
define the conditions for the Government of
Timor-Leste's conscription for its peacekeeping force
in the maintenance of order.

In conclusion, I wish to look to the future. The
agreed timetable provides for a withdrawal of
UNMISET in May 2004. As we approach that date, the
issue of the modalities of the international
community's involvement beyond the Mission's
mandate will impose itself with increasing urgency. If
we wish to ensure Timor-Leste's development, it is
obvious that bilateral and multilateral donors, as well
as the actors of the United Nations system, will have to
remain present in some form or another and work
together. As the Secretary-General says in his report,
reflection on this subject is already under way. That
seems to us to be both useful and necessary in better
coordinating the efforts of all those playing a role in
the field.

