Mr. Patriota (Brazil): Ithank you, Sir, for convening
this meeting and for the invitation to brief the Security
Council in my capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
I also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, for his briefing and his
outstanding leadership and Vision. His assessment and
proposals deserve our attentive consideration.

As Guinea-Bissau enters what we hope will be
the last stages of its transition back to constitutional
order, the Council's active engagement remains
critical. In September, the Council was encouraged by
developments such as the creation of a more inclusive
transitional Government, and called for the holding of
free and credible presidential and legislative elections
as soon as possible and for an inclusive dialogue
towards key reforms.

Today, a new date has been set for the elections;
donors, especially those from the region, have made
substantive pledges; and key preparations for elections,
such as voter registration, are to begin soon. Still, recent
episodes of violence and intimidation are a matter of
deep concern and a reminder of the fragility of the
security situation and of the long way to go towards the
goal of stability.

The Guinea-Bissau configuration ofthe PBC stands
ready to work closely with all partners, particularly the
Security Council and Special Representative Ramos-
Horta, not only to help sustain the necessary support
for the electoral process, but most importantly to
help articulate a comprehensive strategy for the post-
electoral phase. Considering the importance of early
planning in this regard, I intend to accept an invitation
from Mr. Ramos-Horta to visit Guinea-Bissau, in my
capacity as Chair of the configuration, in mid-January
with a view to identifying the areas in which the Guinea-
Bissau configuration of the PBC can make a difference.

If the elections are to be successful, adequate
preparation, including voter registration, must take
place in a credible manner. I am encouraged by and
grateful for the generosity of countries providing
technical and financial support, the bulk of which is
coming from the region, as well as for the contributions
of the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States, and the European Union. I firmly
believe that regional and subregional support, as well
as South-South cooperation, are key elements of an
effective peacebuilding strategy for Guinea-Bissau. I
am committed, as a priority, to working closely with
regional and subregional partners as we reinstate the
PBC's engagement with Guinea-Bissau.

We all know that elections in themselves, while
an essential prerequisite for sustained stability, will
not provide a comprehensive answer to the numerous
challenges that Guinea-Bissau faces. Much more
needs to be done to secure a constructive post-
electoral environment. It will be necessary to ensure
that inclusive, broad-based participation in political
understandings is maintained following the elections.

Efforts towards the reform and modernization of the
defence, security and justice sectors - a key dimension
for stability and the consolidation ofcivilian rule - must
be decisively enhanced. The PBC can play a central role
in generating international support for reforms under a
democratically elected national leadership, with strong
emphasis on capacity-building for State institutions.
At the same time, comprehensive steps will need to be
taken to help the country's economy, including through
improvements in infrastructure, the generation of
revenue, civilian institutions and job creation, which
are important elements in the effort to break the cycle
of political instability in Guinea-Bissau.

The PBC will continue to support efforts by the
future democratically elected Government of Guinea-
Bissau to articulate national peacebuilding priorities
with international assistance. Guinea-Bissau's diverse
economic potential, from agricultural production to
fisheries and mining, holds one of the keys for the
country's peaceful and stable future.

Despite the daunting challenges that the country
is still facing and the dire social and economic
situation, aggravated by the suspension of international
assistance, Guinea-Bissau has the potential to become
an African success story. A fertile country with a
resilient, peaceful people, abundant water and mineral
resources and beautiful beaches, Guinea-Bissau
deserves our long-term and sustained attention. As
Special Representative Ramos-Horta has pointed out
before, the silent political emergency of Guinea-Bissau,
as serious and dangerous as it may be, has not drawn
the attention ofinternational mass media.

On the other hand, the scale of the problems in
Guinea-Bissau is relatively small, if compared to much
bigger challenges that the Security Council and the
international community have successfully tackled in
the recent years, and need to deal with in Africa and
other parts of the world. There is no reason that our
concerted actions should not achieve positive results.

With strong engagement by the PBC and sustained
support from the Security Council, as well as from its
regional and international partners, and with dedicated
transcontinental solidarity from Portuguese-speaking

countries, which can provide critical support in
capacity-building, I am confident that we will be able
to assist the people of Guinea-Bissau to devise a better
future for themselves.

It is my strong expectation that Guinea-Bissau can
become a successful exercise in the display of steadfast
solidarity and collective responsibility to achieve the
interlinked goals of sustainable development and
lasting peace.

