Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I sincerely thank
our Bolivian colleague for his briefing on the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). We welcome the new
Coordinators. At the outset, I would like to state that we
were very pleased to have been paired with Equatorial
Guinea in terms of capacity-building.

Resolution 1540 (2004) was the first subject on
which I worked when I came to the Security Council,

10 years ago 4 my first time here. I am therefore very
pleased to have this opportunity to talk about it today
and to be able to say that for the United Kingdom the
1540 Committee is avital component ofthe international
order. We need to empower it to fulfil its mandate, and
we need to support it to the hilt.

As many of us have already said this week, we
risk seeing a situation that the Security Council
should dread - chemical and biological weapons
becoming a routine part of fighting. Regrettably, we
have been confronted in very recent times by multiple
incidents of the use of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) by non-State actors. The Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism found that Da'esh used
mustard gas on at least two occasions in Syria. There
are multiple instances of mustard gas use by Da'esh in
Iraq. A planned chemical terrorism attack was thwarted
in Australia in July last year. Those incidents clearly
exemplify why the 1540 Committee and its work to
prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons by non-State actors is so important.

Those events are awful enough. Yet, in acts of
unbelievable irresponsibility, those risks have been
exacerbated by the use of weapons of mass destruction
by State actors. The chemical-weapons attacks in
Douma and the attempted murders in Salisbury are the
most recent examples, but there is also the assassination
of Kim Jong-nam in Malaysia and the horror of Khan
Shaykhun a little more than a year ago. I take this
opportunity to state that, with regard the invitation from
the Council for us to update members on the incident in
Salisbury, we have requested a meeting next week to
deliver a briefing on the findings of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.

The use of WMD by States is a worrisome pattern
that clearly undermines our collective efforts to deter
and eradicate the use of such weapons by State and
non-State actors alike. We very strongly support the work
to increase the capacity of States and are encouraged by
the fact that there are now only 13 non-reporting States.
Any non-reporting is troubling, but it is good that the
number is decreasing. As I said, we were delighted to
be paired with Equatorial Guinea and provide support.

Nonetheless, it is clear that we stand on the cusp ofa
nightmare where weapons of mass destruction are used
with impunity, where our citizens live in real fear of an
indiscriminate attack at any time and without warning.
It is not enoughjust to condemn that, we need to find a
way to take meaningful action and ensure that there are
meaningful consequences for perpetrators. We have all
benefited from the international order that has kept us
safe since the end of the Second World War. It behooves
us all to make every effort to uphold that international
architecture. It is clear that not all countries share that
View, and we have talked about that several times this
week. With respect to the 1540 Committee, there is one
Council member that has sought, at every opportunity,
to slow progress and dilute the substance of every
proposal, whether that be the programme of work,
deadlines, calls to action or efforts to take progress
forward. All of those have, sadly, been consistently
watered down, and the Group of Experts has even been
prevented from travelling.

If we are serious about dealing with the threats
that the Committee was set up to counter, then this
state of affairs cannot continue. Since last February
the 1540 Committee has met formally only once, and
barely any progress has been made with respect to the
actions agreed in the 2017 programme of work. That
means also that the commitments made in the relatively
modest resolution 2325 (2016) have not been fulfilled.
The new programme of work has only just been agreed,
two months later than legally mandated. In those two
months, the Committee was left without clear objectives
or activities to pursue. I cannot think of any legitimate
reason that any country would want to affect the work
of the 1540 Committee in such an adverse way. I appeal
to everybody around the table to redouble efforts so
that we have an ambitious programme of work for the
Committee. We must stand up for the universal norms
and standards we have spent decades building to create
an effective and powerful non-proliferation regime,
whether that deals with State actors or non-State actors.

