Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to welcome Minister Zebari to this
important meeting of the Security Council. I thank him
for responding to the Council's invitation to engage in
a dialogue with us today and to share his views and
vision regarding the future of Iraq and what, on the eve
of the restoration of its sovereignty and independence,
that sisterly country expects from the international
community and, more specifically, from this Council in
terms of assistance in building its national institutions
and reconstructing its national economy.

Of course, we are very eager to see Iraq regain its

full sovereignty and for its Government to exercise all
its competencies and responsibilities and to manage all
the country's internal and external affairs, including its
security aspects, resources and wealth, especially in
relation to the management of the Iraqi Development
Fund. The statement made by Minister Zebari was on
the right track in that respect and I thank him for the
ideas, views and visions he outlined for us. We will
spare no effort in addressing them constructively
because, in the final analysis, the heart of the issue is
Iraq's future. Iraq itself must be comfortable with and
accept the draft resolution that our deliberations will
lead to.

Thus, I should like to put several questions to
Minister Zebari, which I hope will not prove too
awkward for him.
First, does Minister Zebari feel that the present
wording of paragraph 1 of the draft resolution
guarantees the Government of Iraq all the authority
necessary to exercising its sovereignty and functions
and to conducting the internal and external affairs of
the country, including security?

Secondly, does Minister Zebari believe that the
wording of paragraph 6 of the draft resolution, relative
to the exercise by the Iraqi Government of its authority
over the Iraqi national security forces, is sufficiently
strong? Does it really guarantee the full authority of
Iraq over its forces? Is there a need to be more explicit
in the wording of that paragraph?

Thirdly, how does the Minister view the
relationship between the Iraqi Government and the
multinational force? Does he believe that a letter to the
Council is enough, or is there a need to refer to some of
the general principles and specifically to note that the
final say regarding the military operations of the
multinational force falls to the Iraqi Government?

Fourthly and lastly, as the Minister has just come
from Iraq and is more aware of conditions there, does
the text of the draft resolution provide for the role that
Iraq wants for the United Nations, or does Iraq have a
different vision of that role?

