Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation thanks the delegation of Malaysia, in its
roles of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month and Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, for having convened this debate.

Iraq thanks and commends Japan for its presidency
last month. We also thank Ms. Leila Zerrougi and her
team for their tireless efforts in carrying out such an
important task. We thank and recognize those States
that are supporting Iraq. We welcomed the holding of a
conference to provide aid to Iraq in Washington, DC,
last week.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/360)
notes with great concern the consequences of violent
extremism throughout the world, and in particular
their effect on children, resulting in the displacement
of millions of innocent victims, the majority of
whom are children. We share the Secretary-General's
profound concern because we are among those States
that have suffered the most from foreign extremism
and its repercussions on our culture and our age-old
civilization. Such is the extremism that created the
Da'esh and other terrorist groups that operate under the
same premises and share the same goals. Da'esh has
committed atrocities against children, whom it uses as
a means to achieve its nefarious ends.

In his report, the Secretary-General notes the
kidnapping of more than 1,000 Iraqi children and
the recruitment of 19 children as soldiers and suicide
terrorists. Da'esh has transformed schools into training
camps, thereby depriving children of their right to
an education. Those schools have become centres for
the torture and murder of teachers who have refused
to teach the Da'esh curriculum. In the area of public
health, children are among the first to suffer from the
actions of Da'esh, which has executed dozens of doctors
who refused to carry out its orders.

Moreover, the planting of bombs in homes, streets,
schools and hospitals has made it very difficult to
provide humanitarian and medical assistance to
children under siege by Da'esh. The child victims who
have been exploited by the extremist terrorist groups,
in particular young girls who have been sexually
assaulted and subject to physical and psychological
violence, deserve our absolute protection. I call on the
international community to support Iraq in assuming
its responsibility to address terrorism and rehabilitate
child victims.

We attach great importance to the United Nations.
We support the United Nations and work with it in
Geneva, Baghdad and New York. At the same time, we
call upon the United Nations to be as specific as possible
in its reports. We demand that it verify the sources of
information cited in its reports. We categorically reject
the accusations that have been made in this report
with regard to the national mobilization forces and the
national security forces of Iraq.

We believe that the sources of information are not
reliable. We do not know what prompts them to provide
that information. Some of the sources are not even
present in the liberated areas or on the battlefield. The
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq has noted
that it is unable to ensure the accuracy of the numbers
contained in the report. We have, on more than one
occasion, insisted that imprecise information is a
burden on countries that seek to defend their territory
against the most merciless terrorist groups.

We therefore reject what is presented in the report,
to wit, that 12 children were drafted into the popular
mobilization forces, which are associated with Iraq's
general staff. As such they are subject to the same rules
as other armed forces, and therefore cannot conscript
children under the age of 18.

