Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for having so graciously
postponed this meeting until after my return from Africa. I
owe this special consideration to my chairmanship of the
sanctions Committee established by resolution 661 (1990),
but I will not speak in that capacity, for this is a time for
national positions to be taken. There is only one brief
observation I would like to make as Chairman of the
sanctions Committee, and that is that I am still waiting for
the green light from Baghdad for my visit to Iraq, in
compliance with the note by the President of the Security
Council of 29 January 1999. I thought it might be useful
if I stated this in public, for people keep asking me why
I have not been to Iraq yet. Such questions are hereby
referred to the representative of Iraq.

I join other speakers in thanking the Secretary-
General, both for his comprehensive report and for the
brief remarks he made at the beginning of this meeting.
It is not customary to make separate mention of the
Secretariat if one has already addressed the Secretary-
General, but in this case I would like to make an
exception by expressing my deep appreciation for all
the - often thankless - tasks accomplished by the
collaborators of the Office of the Iraq Programme and all
other United Nations staff engaged in the execution of the
humanitarian programme, both in New York and in Iraq.

There is a striking contrast between the Secretary-
General's report, which provides information on the
progress made in meeting the humanitarian needs of the
Iraqi people, and the alarming messages we receive from
various quarters calling for swift and decisive action to
halt and reverse the long-standing humanitarian
emergency in Iraq. The two observations, however, are
not incompatible. As is pointed out in the Secretary-
General's report, the humanitarian programme established
pursuant to resolution 986 (1995) is implemented within
the context of a sanctions regime and should not,
therefore, be confused with a development programme.
The sanctions regime will come to an end as soon as the
Government of Iraq meets its obligations under the
relevant Security Council resolutions, notably resolution
687 (1991).

That is the swiftest and most decisive action we can
envisage to halt and reverse the long-standing
humanitarian emergency in Iraq. None of the resolutions
I have just referred to was ever intended to continue to be
in force in the twenty-first century. We are dealing with
a programme which was essentially devised as an
emergency measure and, as the Secretary-General points
out in his report, was never intended to meet all the
humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people.

In the case of Iraq, it is, of course, futile to try to
present the Security Council's position as a unified stand.
True, we are all concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Iraq and we all want to prevent Iraq from
developing or acquiring weapons of mass destruction, but,
one step beyond that consensus, political divergences
immediately come into play. It is clear that some
 

delegations have an interest in playing down Iraq's appetite
for prohibited weaponry, whereas others may feel a need
not to be seen to be soft on Iraq at this time.

Below this checkered surface, however, there is a
remarkable degree of consensus, which the delegation of
Iraq may well fail to see if it continues to clutch at the fact
that resolution 1284 (1999) was adopted with four
abstentions. That consensus is that Iraq has yet to convince
the international community that it has really abandoned its
dream of developing weapons of mass destruction.

Iraq is the only country in modern history that has not
only attempted to develop all categories of weapons of
mass destruction - nuclear, biological and chemical - but
has actually used such weapons, both against a foreign
enemy and against its own citizens. In doing so, Iraq has
placed itself into a league of its own.

Another point of consensus is that, given the absence
of a democratic system of government, the Iraqi people
should not be made to suffer for the irresponsible behaviour
of its leaders. We therefore unanimously welcomed part C
of resolution 1284 (1999), which provides the Secretariat,
the Council and the sanctions Committee established by
resolution 661 (1990) with a legal basis for measures that
should significantly improve the humanitarian situation.

In implementation of these provisions, the oil ceiling
has been lifted; lists of foodstuffs and basic or standard
educational items not requiring sanctions Committee
approval any longer have been approved; other contracts are
being circulated under a two-day no-objection procedure;
while the sanctions Committee is in the process of
establishing a group of experts to approve speedily
contracts for parts and equipments for the Iraqi oil industry.
In this regard, it goes without saying that the Netherlands
supports the Secretary-General's recommendation to
increase the allocation for oil spare parts and equipment
from $300 million to $600 million in phases VI and VII.
We have repeatedly stated that it cannot be our aim to
make the Iraqi oil industry unsafe or environmentally
hazardous. Together with the imminent approval of lists of
other humanitarian items mentioned in operative paragraph
17 of resolution 1284 (1999) in the fields of health and
agriculture, the implementation of the provisions regarding
the establishment of a cash component and extended
monitoring arrangements, all these measures may be
expected to help alleviate the humanitarian situation in Iraq
before long.

These improvements will inevitably result in a
strongly increased focus on the remaining problem of the
holds. Credit is due to those delegations which possess
both the required resources and the political will to
scrutinize all contracts for dual-use potential. Delegations
that do not assume any responsibility in this regard are
not in the best of positions to criticize other delegations
which take these duties seriously. Nevertheless, we
consider the current amount of applications placed on
hold intolerably high. It is clear that a more sustained
effort to reduce this amount is urgently required. We do
not expect the delegations concerned to diminish their
dual-use alertness, but they should be equally aware of
the humanitarian impact - for instance, in the field of
water purification - of their decisions. If these decisions
are inevitable on account of dual-use concerns, everything
must be done to improve procedures and speed up
decisions. The holds problem can also be alleviated by
giving guidance to implementing agencies on how they
can better assist the Committee in their monitoring,
observation and reporting duties in order to provide the
necessary assurance on the end-use of items in Iraq.

Within the legal framework of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the humanitarian situation is currently
being improved and further improvements are on the way.
However, there is a recurring theme which has plagued
the humanitarian programme since its inception, and that
is Iraq's determination to prove to the world that the only
way to improve the humanitarian situation is to lift the
sanctions altogether. It is this determination that has
repeatedly led the Iraqi authorities to block improvements
held out by the United Nations within the parameters of
the existing sanctions regime, in utter disregard of the
interests of their own population. This phenomenon runs
like a thread through the history of the sanctions regime
under resolution 661 (1990), from Iraq's refusal for
almost two years to accept the oil-for-food programme to
its recent rejection of an arrangement for the Hajj, which
was based on a proposal of the Russian Federation and
supported by all 15 members of the Security Council.

Dealing as it is with a regime which has a high
tolerance for the hardship it inflicts on its own subjects,
the international community is almost defenceless against
this approach. It is therefore not surprising that, in
combination with all the negative reports on the
humanitarian situation in the country, this determination
on the part of the Iraqi Government does induce some
people to accept the conclusion that lifting the sanctions
is the only way out of the quandary. It is, however, not
likely to sway the Security Council.

 

Resolution 1284 (1999), including its part A on
disarmament, was adopted with four abstentions, three of
which were pronounced by permanent members that could
have blocked its adoption had they chosen to do so. Iraq is
deceiving itself if, on account of this result of the vote, it
considers the resolution less than binding. The Security
Council means business. The appointment of Mr. Blix as
Executive Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) was
approved unanimously. If Iraq continues to insist that the
humanitarian situation cannot be improved as long as the
sanctions are in place, it only needs to accept resolution
1284 (1999) and invite UNMOVIC to start its work in Iraq
under operative paragraph 7. In this manner, it is likely to
achieve the suspension of the sanctions before the end of
this year. My delegation urges the Government of Iraq to
opt for that course of action, not least for the sake of the
Iraqi people.

