Slovenia would like to commend the organizers for convening today's timely debate. It is my great pleasure to present Slovenia's observations. The increasingly complex, interconnected and protracted nature of today's conflicts calls for a better understanding of its drivers and for appropriate responses. As the most urgent challenge facing humankind today, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) not only threatens hard-won development and peacebuilding gains, but, despite the call for a global ceasefire call, also risks exacerbating conflicts or provoking new ones. The impacts of climate change and environmental degradation are clearer and more widespread than ever. They act as a risk multiplier. Climate change effects, such as rapidly changing weather patterns, more frequent and stronger droughts, floods and a higher sea level, can lead to humanitarian disasters, conflicts, food shortages, population movements and economic, social and demographic shocks. Every day we are crossing a human tipping point. The consequence is an increase in climate-related risks to human security, development, violent conflicts and peacebuilding efforts. Communities and countries affected by armed conflict tend to be especially vulnerable to the effect of climate change. Hence humanitarian emergencies increasingly face cumulative risks and impacts. Humanitarian needs are the highest in history. The gap between needs and available finances is still widening with each year and, on the top of that, COVID-19 has impacted developing countries and countries affected by humanitarian disasters more than we could imagine. For that reason, it is more important than ever to focus on preventive and anticipatory action, as well as resilience-building, which could help to lower humanitarian needs when disasters hit. Slovenia has pledged to earmark at least 10 per cent of its long-term humanitarian funding for those activities, which we successfully provide each year. In addition, we have reprogrammed entire portfolios of bilateral development assistance projects to ensure that at least 20 per cent of this year's development and humanitarian projects focus on assisting partner countries in confronting the COVID-19 pandemic. A special focus of the reprogramming has been on assistance to vulnerable groups. In the coming years, climate change will continue to amplify drivers of violence, displacement and inequality, with the risks becoming more prevalent and affecting a growing number of countries. It is a known fact that one of the most critical consequences of climate change is water scarcity. Forty per cent of the world's population is already affected by water scarcity, with the prediction that water demand will rise more than 50 per cent by 2030. In armed conflicts, water resources and installations are increasingly being attacked and used as weapons of war. That demands a comprehensive approach to water supply, sanitation, water management and cross-border cooperation. Inequality and exclusion feed frustration and marginalization. Respect for all human rights - not only civil and political, but also economic, social and cultural - is an essential element of prevention. Human security needs to be central to early action and the prioritization of the most vulnerable. We also know that gender equality is closely linked with resilience and that women's participation is crucial to success, from conflict prevention to peacemaking and sustaining peace. That needs to be underscored as we mark the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). The seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations brings an important opportunity for collective reflection on ways to adapt the operational nature of its entities to cope with the rapidly changing and increasingly complex world, breaking silos and introducing more holistic approaches, and increase the evidence base, incorporating risks into sustainable development, humanitarian and peacekeeping operations. We therefore call for an enhanced role of the Security Council in emerging situations, the expansion of its toolbox, increased resources for early warning and prevention and a more systematic approach to preventing conflict and sustaining peace. Action is urgent and needs an immediate response.
