Allow me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your presidency of the Security Council for this month and by expressing the appreciation of all the Arab States for the intensive efforts being made at this difficult time by the United Nations team and the Special Coordinator, Mr. Mladenov. I wish to thank him for his oral report relating to the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), which we were unable to attend owing to the social distancing policy in place to deal with the coronavirus pandemic. The League of Arab States has been following - and denounces with mounting concern - the recent serious developments in the occupied Palestinian territory, namely, the growing intensity of waves of settlement, the confiscation of land, the destruction of Palestinian crops and the demolition of Palestinian homes, with the aim of establishing Israeli settlement units, as well as the related violations of the human rights of Palestinians. Murder, imprisonment, forced detention and displacement are all part of the vicious expansionist settlement policy of Israel, the aim of which is to finally execute its plans to annex the entire occupied Palestinian territory, including all the Israeli settlements in the West Bank, and the Jordan Valley. This is a blatant challenge to the wishes of the international community, which are anchored in the well-established terms of reference of the peace process, notably, the Oslo, Madrid and Annapolis decisions, the Arab Peace Initiative, the decisions of the Middle East Quartet and the numerous resolutions of the Security Council, all of which themselves are based on the premise of the two-State solution and direct negotiations between the State of Palestine and Israel on the five final-status issues. There should be no dictating of terms by outsiders and no artificial peace plans put forward by parties that are not committed to those clearly defined terms under international law. Such initiatives are designed only to serve narrow interests that are not remotely connected with the peace that is yearned for in the Middle East. Arab leaders and peoples are also increasingly concerned about the increasing frequency recently of statements by Israeli ministers and senior officials on the pressing need to seize the opportunity provided by the United States peace plan announced on 28 January 2020. That plan was rejected not only by the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the African Union, but also in the strongest possible terms by 14 members of the Security Council on 11 February 2020. Addressing that historic meeting (see S/PV.8717), the President of Palestine, Mahmoud Abbas, and the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, Ahmed Aboul Gheit, stressed in no uncertain terms that the Arab States utterly rejected the United States peace plan, warned the international community against killing the Palestinian people's hope of reaching a just and comprehensive peace through free and direct negotiations without external mediation or dictates, and warned of expected moves by Israel in the occupied Palestinian territory to take advantage of the plan. Their calls have been echoed not only by many European leaders but also by various Parliaments, including prominent members, from both parties, of the United States Congress itself. The situation is made worse by the fact that some in Israel are pushing for the expansion of settlements, an accelerated timetable for annexation and even the ratcheting up of human rights abuses against Palestinians to gain leverage as they and their parties jockey for position in the electoral campaigns currently under way 69/99 70/99 in Israel, to escape criminal prosecution in Israel or to garner support for the idea that it is imperative to establish what is falsely and antagonistically touted as Greater Israel on the entire territory that historically belongs to Palestine. That would pave the way for subjecting the Palestinian people to a still more abject form of apartheid. The perpetrators will need to be held to account before the relevant international criminal courts. It is no secret that such developments not only pose a threat to international peace and security, but also to the credibility of the multilateral international system, as represented by the United Nations and its bodies, and in particular to the credibility of the Security Council. Israel aims to take all those illegal steps under the cover of one of the greatest and gravest of humanitarian crises to strike humankind, namely, the coronavirus that is sweeping the world, while making use of the fact that the international community is wholly preoccupied with, on the one hand, preventing its spread and, on the other, addressing its devastating health, human, economic and social impact. The seriousness of the situation is compounded by the impact of the pandemic on the Palestinian people. As of 15 April, the spread of the virus had left 369 Palestinians infected and two deceased. That impact should be added to the devastating humanitarian effect of the illegal operations conducted by Israel over the same period, with 267 Palestinians arrested, three killed and 52 wounded, and underscores the extent to which the suffering of the Palestinian people under occupation has been redoubled by the spread of the pandemic and the tight restrictions placed by Israel, the occupying Power, on the delivery of international aid that would enable the defenceless Palestinians to deal with the adverse effects of the virus. That stance shows a blatant disregard for the calls by the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States for a ceasefire to allow countries in conflict-affected regions, in particular the State of Palestine, to muster all their strength to combat the pandemic, for the joint statement issued by the Special Envoys of the Secretary-General to conflict areas in the Middle East, including Special Coordinator Mladenov, and for the latter's individual statement on the deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, all of which have the full support of the League of Arab States. It is regrettable, and indeed shameful, that all those shocking violations of the human rights of Palestinians, above all their rights to self-determination and to the establishment of an independent State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, within the borders of 4 June 1967, are being committed just as certain States are acting to shield Israel, the occupying Power, from being held accountable before the International Criminal Court. Israel must abide by the same international rules of accountability as are applied to all other States. There can be no preferential treatment, discrimination or double standards. The Council must send a clear message in that regard and warn Israel unequivocally against persisting in its violations of international law, international humanitarian law and international human rights law. Instead of just managing the Arab-Israeli conflict, the Council must formulate practical solutions and work to implement them in order to de-escalate the conflict and strengthen the frameworks for achieving a just and comprehensive peace. To that end, the Council must, first of all, affirm the following points. That it utterly rejects a one-State solution, which Israel and its allies aim to impose as a fait accompli, and that it categorically refuses to accept the annexation or subjugation to its sovereignty by Israel of any part or parts of the occupied Palestinian territory, which has abjectly exploited the humanitarian crisis that is afflicting the international community because of the worsening coronavirus pandemic and the temporary state of paralysis that has resulted from the application of social distancing policies in an attempt to limit its spread. That it continues to insist on implementing the principle of the two-State solution, which has long been held by the whole international community as the basis for a just and comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian question, and on the right of the Palestinian people to establish an independent State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, within the borders of 4 June 1967, through direct negotiations between the Israeli and Palestinian sides on final-status issues, under impartial international supervision and in full compliance with Security Council resolutions, in particular resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016), and other international terms of reference established since 1948. A guarantee should be given that the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including its right to self-determination and statehood, will be upheld. That guarantee should be part of a commitment to the comprehensive vision that the Palestinian President has twice personally put before the Security Council, which provides for the establishment of an independent Palestinian State, its international recognition and its admission as a full and effective Member of the United Nations. For that purpose, an international conference should be convened bringing together all parties for an immediate start to direct, serious and constructive negotiations between the Palestinian and Israeli sides that would culminate in the achievement of the two-State solution. That vision was endorsed at the thirtieth Arab Summit, which was held in Tunisia and dubbed by Arab leaders the Summit of Determination and Solidarity, thereby clearly underscoring how essential joint Arab action is, the prominence of the Palestinian question and the importance of reaching a just and comprehensive settlement, as the delegation of Qatar set out in its statement today on behalf of the Arab Group, which the League of Arab States supports. The Arab League looks forward to strengthening joint action with the Security Council with a view to achieving a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East; establishing an independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, within the 1967 borders; effectively addressing other conflicts in the Arab region, in Syria, Libya, Yemen and elsewhere; and to address the various threats to the region, including the current increase in external interference, in order to achieve international and regional peace and security. We trust that the Security Council will spare no effort in seeking solutions that are consistent with international law and strengthen the role of the United Nations and the multilateral international system.
