Mr. Thoms (Germany): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Yamamoto for his briefing. I wish him every
success in his important posting at the helm of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and would like to reassure him of our full
support.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

While Afghanistan has made considerable progress
in many areas over recent years, the security, and
consequently the economic, situation remain extremely
challenging. It is a matter of concern that the number
of civilian casualties is on the rise. As the Secretary-
General points out in his report (S/2016/768), the number
of armed clashes rose by approximately 15 per cent, and
the number of casualties among children increased by
18 per cent. The protection of civilians in situations
of armed conflict is paramount under international
humanitarian law. We welcome the Government's
national policy on civilian casualty mitigation, which
needs to be fully implemented.

It is important that the international community
continue to give its full attention to the situation in
Afghanistan. The Brussels Conference on Afghanistan
will be a chance for the international community to
once more underline its political and financial support
for Afghanistan, while at the same time allowing
the Afghan Government to present its achievements
and the remaining challenges in implementing its
reform agenda.

Afghanistan is Germany's single largest engagement
in a foreign country, both in civilian and military terms,
and we are conscious of the resulting responsibilities.
Germany is committed to maintaining its support for
Afghanistan. However, it is crucial that inclusive,
effective and reform-oriented governance remain a
priority beyond Brussels. This includes progress on
electoral reforms to pave the way to parliamentary and
district council elections. Also, economic reforms are
of the utmost importance to counter slaw economic
growth. The accession of Afghanistan to the World Trade
Organization is an encouraging sign in this respect.

We encourage the Afghan Government to maintain
its efforts to fight corruption and to implement the
existing strategies in a transparent manner. Visible
progress in fighting corruption is a strong argument
for justifying the exceptional level of donor support
to Afghanistan. Development and security go hand in
hand. In the long run, a peace and reconciliation process
is the only way to long-term stability in Afghanistan
and the region. Such a process can succeed only if it
enjoys the united backing of all key stakeholders in the
region and beyond.

Germany joins all of Afghanistan's friends and
partners in a sending the clear message that we
remain committed to supporting Afghanistan, in close
cooperation with the Afghan Government and our
international partners.

