Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I have to
admit to Madiba President Mandela that the Security
Council has been scratching its head on the issue of
Burundi. We did not seem to be getting very far last
year - last month. The Government of Burundi was,
frankly, not listening to the international community. It was
not putting the people of Burundi first.

I think that President Mandela's appointment is a very
important turning point in this particular crisis, and perhaps
for the hopes for regional peace in that part of Africa. His
willingness immediately to see all the groups involved in
this conflict and to encourage inter-party dialogue both
inside and outside the framework of the talks will, I think,
encourage a sense of ownership in the final agreement on
a political solution by all Burundi and increase the chance
of a successful implementation.

Let me comment briefly on two aspects: the
humanitarian and the political.

The Secretary-General has just said to us, in a very
important analysis of the situation, that we are now on the
verge of another humanitarian catastrophe. It may be, as the
Secretary-General has said, that we would blame the
Government of Burundi for such a catastrophe, but the
international community cannot afford that after Rwanda,
after Srebrenica and after other things that we have not got
right.

We have to insist with all the parties to the conflict
that the human rights of the people of Burundi have to be
respected, that humanitarian law has to be abided by and
that there has to be access for the humanitarian agencies
of the United Nations and non- governmental organizations
to the people of Burundi who are suffering.

The draft resolution that we are about to adopt, and
which the United Kingdom supports, does not, in the end,
mention the regroupement camps, but my Government,
like the Secretary-General, condemns those camps. They
are not the right process for the handling of the
humanitarian situation. We do hope that President
Mandela will use his influence to make sure that those
affected by the humanitarian crisis be allowed to return to
their homes and that there be unhindered access to them
as well for the humanitarian agencies.

On the political process, the Secretary-General
referred to the principal areas of disagreement between
the parties. We have not really discussed them this
morning, but they are bound to take up President
Mandela's attention: the composition of the army, the
electoral process and, perhaps most difficult, how to make
the transition work from the present situation to a
situation that is stable and acceptable to the international
community.

Madiba Mandela has confirmed that the process has
failed so far on reform of the security forces and on the
integration of armed groups into the regular security
forces' set-up. Mr. Mandela has indicated that these
difficulties can really be dealt with only by a change of
perception on the ground. I think this, above all, is what
we are looking to him for. He said that political leaders
need to do their groundwork at the grass-roots level and
look for compromises on the major political issues. How
are they going to be encouraged to do that?

I think that Mr. Mandela's appointment, and indeed
the public attention which this meeting of the Security
Council has brought to this issue, must above all create a
momentum for such a change of perceptions and for the
strengthening of the link between the Arusha political
process and the political facts of life in Burundi. Time is
not on Burundi's side and I think now is the opportunity
for all the people of Burundi to rise to the challenge of
resolving their differences.
Mr. Mandela said that regional peace needs all the
component parts to be stable. Well, we must get Burundi
right not just for the people of Burundi, but also for the

 

continuing search for stability and security in the region and
in the continent.

