Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to congratulate you, Madam President,
on your country's accession to the presidency of the
Security Council during the month of May. I would
also like to commend your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Peru, for his effective management
of the Council's business during the month of April.
And I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2018/389), and Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo
for his briefing.

As Council members are aware from the Secretary-
General's report on the situation in Darfur, and from the
various visits conducted by many members to the Sudan
over the past period, it is with great pleasure for me
to confirm the conclusions reached by those different
delegations and missions to the Sudan. The situation
in the country has seen huge progress and notable
normalization in all aspects, day after day. There is a
return to stability, a move towards reconstruction and
compensation for years of conflict, irrevocably gone
thanks to the efforts of the Sudanese Government with
the support of the international community, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), United Nations agencies and friendly and
brotherly countries, but above all thanks to the will
and the desire of our people in Darfur to reach peace
and stability.

What I said in the Council last March during its
discussion of the Secretary-General's previous report
on UNAMID (S/2018/154), is applicable to the current
state of affairs in Darfur (see S/PV.8202). I understand
that Council members are aware of the great progress
achieved in the security and humanitarian fields, the
return of internally displaced persons, the weapons-
collection campaign, the intercommunal conflict and
addressing the root causes of the conflict.

The current situation in Darfur speaks for itself. It
proves that the fact of peace has become tangible in all
respects, even in the small pockets under the control
of the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid rebel
faction. There is a popular sentiment that encourages
full reconciliation and sustained peace.

The Government of the Sudan is aware of the needs
in the upcoming period, including the various social
cohesion and development programmes, as well as
addressing the root causes ofthe conflict. In that regard,
it is important to underscore that the international
community must provide the necessary assistance
to implement such programmes by means of direct
support or through the various United Nations agencies
or its country team in the Sudan. We call on donor
countries to fulfil their pledges. We would like to thank
the Secretary-General for having agreed to provide the
necessary support through the Peacebuilding Fund.
We also thank friendly and brotherly countries, in
particular the State of Qatar, Japan and Turkey, as well
as the African Union (AU) and the League of Arab
States, among others, for their ongoing support to the
people of Darfur.

Turning to the implementation of resolution
2363 (2017), which provides for the beginning of the
drawdown and the reconfiguration of UNAMID, that
decision has proved to be appropriate given the phase of
peacebuilding and strengthening security and stability
throughout the states of Darfur. We look forward to
the outcome of the strategic review conducted by the
African Union Commission and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations with regard to implementing
an exit strategy for UNAMID from Darfur in the
near future. That would allow for the necessary
peacebuilding and strengthening of stability. It is high
time for such steps.

The Government of the Sudan has already started to
implement such projects, such as launching a campaign
to collect weapons from civilians. Reports indicate
that, to date, the campaign has been successful despite
limited resources. We are determined to continue
the campaign. As we have affirmed previously, it is
necessary to collect weapons in order to achieve peace
and stability. Everyone, in particular the Secretary-
General and the international officials who recently
visited Darfur, have seen the positive impact of the
weapons-collection campaign on the security situation
in Darfur. The Government of the Sudan will therefore
spare no effort to implement the campaign. In that
regard, we emphasize the importance of our partnership
with UNAMID and the ongoing consultations and
meetings with the Joint Special Representative for
Darfur and Head of the AU-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur.

The political settlement of the situation in Darfur
is the main objective of the Government of the Sudan.
We are striving to achieve that goal in accordance
with the provisions of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur, which is the main reference document for
peace in Darfur. That was affirmed by the international
committee for the Doha Document.

I would like to respond to some questions raised
by representatives. By the end of last year, 85 per cent
of the Doha agreement had been implemented. As
the Security Council knows, the Doha agreement is
recognized by the United Nations and the international
community. It remains to compel the parties that refuse
to be party to the agreement to sign the Document.
In view of the broad recognition it has received and
the pace of its implementation, we cannot abandon
the agreement owing to the leverage of a few people
who know that peace, the subsequent elections and
democratic representation will exclude them from
the arrangement. We must not forget what the former
Nigerian President, Mr. Obasanjo, said in 2004 when
he launched the Abuja negotiations, namely, that what
was of real concern to the armed groups was that they
would be dissolved, like salt in water, at the final
stage of the negotiations. It is therefore normal that
those groups would spare no effort to undermine the
peace process and the UNAMID exit strategy, as the
Force Commander said yesterday (see S/PV.8251). We
therefore call on all countries with influence on the
armed groups to pressure them to engage in negotiations
without preconditions and to seriously participate
without delay so that we can reach a political agreement
that would improve the situation and, inter alia, help to
achieve a stable and secure Sudan.

In that regard, it would be remiss of me not to
mention the significant efforts of the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel to narrow the
differences and to conduct a series of talks. However,
the intransigence of some armed groups that are not part
of the military in Darfur and thrive on conflict in the
neighbouring countries, in particular Libya and South
Sudan, has thwarted efforts to reach a political solution
with them or to engage them in the political process
on the basis of the Doha agreement. That includes the
meetings held recently in Berlin to persuade the leaders
of those movements to resume negotiations. That only
proves what we have said before, namely, that the Sudan
Liberation Army/Minni Minawi faction and the Justice
and Equality Movement (Jebril) are not part of the
solution in Darfur. We reaffirm that those movements
represent a threat to international and regional peace
and security. The Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid
faction is empowered only by its media spokespersons
and political proxies in some camps for internally
displaced persons.
(spoke in English)

On the issue of access, I would like to mention that
as long ago as 2017, we circulated an aide-memoire
on access to the areas targeted in Darfur. Principally,
mutatis mutandis, the contents are valid as far as our
commitment to access is concerned. We therefore
thought the circulation could be useful. We will send
copies of it to all Security Council members.

(spoke in Arabic)

We call once again for unity on the mechanisms
set up by the Council to help the Sudan to bring
about lasting peace in Darfur. The follow-up on the
implementation of resolution 1591 (2005) on imposing
targeted sanctions must be consistent with the Security
Council resolve to bring about normality, as provided
for in resolution 2363 (2017). In that regard, we propose
a reduction in the number of experts and lifting the
military ban in Darfur. There are two options with
regard to the listed individuals, namely, either to delist
them from the sanctions list or to list Abdul Wahid
Mohamed al-Nour in implementation of the resolution
1591 (2005), which warned about his designation on the
sanctions list.

(spoke in English)

I beg the Council's kind indulgence to carefully
consider the fact that Abdul Wahid Mohamed al-Nour,
known as Mr. No, and his small number of followers
are obstructing the peace process in Jebel Marra - the
only place the Security Council agreed to exclude
from the greater Darfur area and in which it maintains
a peacekeeping force. Jebel Marra accounts for less
than 5 per cent of Darfur's total surface area. I believe
there is no other option but to demonstrate the resolve
of the international community here in the Security
Council by declaring that the ongoing normalization
of the situation in Darfur shall not be held hostage to
the misjudgments, bad faith and whims of Mr. Abdul
Wahid. All that is required for peace to prevail at last
in that part of my country is to strip him of all political
support and send him a stern and unequivocal message
of zero tolerance, as he is the obstacle to peace.

(spoke in Arabic)

In conclusion, we commend the comprehensive and
concerted efforts made to conclude the peace process.
Once again we welcome peacebuilding, which will
bring about development and, therefore, an end to the
conflict. My delegation would like to thank UNAMID
for its efforts in all areas, and peacekeepers for their
sacrifices throughout the years. We would also like
to thank troop- and police-contributing countries. We
reiterate our Government's readiness to cooperate with
all regional and international partners on UNAMID»

related matters until the very last of its components
leave the country.

