Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I thank the Japanese
presidency for organizing this open debate on a subject
that has particular resonance in a year during which
we have committed to a resurgence in diplomacy to
bring about peace. We thank the Secretary-General for
his overview on the magnitude and implications of the
challenges facing the international community.

Bangladesh subscribes to the View set forth in the
concept note (S/2017/ 1016, annex) that the comprehensive
goal and processes of sustaining peace are aimed at
dealing with the complex contemporary challenges to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We emphasize that emerging new challenges have the
potential to further exacerbate protracted conflicts and
create multiplier effects across national borders. We
are encouraged to see the Security Council's increasing
interest in pursuing peace in a holistic, cross-sectoral
manner. From our national perspective, we wish to
underline the five following points.

First, we consider conflict prevention to be, first
and foremost, a national responsibility that can be
supported by responsive and functioning institutions,
the promotion of human rights and the rule of law, and,
most importantly, sustainable development. The active
participation of all segments of society, including
women and youth, is fundamental to mitigating the
potential drivers of conflict, as well as elements having
a propensity to act as spoilers.

Secondly, the United Nations has a critical role to
play in facilitating and monitoring the implementation
of internationally agreed commitments to support
Member States in establishing the necessary conditions

in response to their needs and requests. The United
Nations analytical capacity should help identify any
structural or systemic drivers of conflicts, including
the growing challenges posed by terrorist and violent
extremism, climate change, irregular migration and
transnational organized crimes, among others. The
United Nations norm-setting procedures need to be
responsive to rapidly evolving challenges, such as
climate change, security and cybersecurity, among
others, and find ways to build consensus for the greater
public good rather than for the satisfaction of short-
term political or financial considerations.

Thirdly, the ability to objectively decipher the
early-warning signs of conflict, which usually manifest
themselves in hatred or intolerance, socioeconomic
exclusion, systematic discrimination and persecution
on ethnic or religious grounds, should give the
United Nations an edge in devising context-specific
engagement strategies. The range oftools at its disposal
for the pacific settlement of disputes needs to be
deployed with sensitivity to the realities on the ground
and in consultation with the relevant national, civil
society and humanitarian actors. The repeated failure
or limitation to do just that was perhaps most evident
once again in the textbook case of ethnic cleansing that
we have been witnessing in Myanmar's Rakhine state
in August and September.

Fourthly, as highlighted by the 2015 reviews of
the United Nations peace and security architecture,
the Organization's conflict-response strategies need
to be situated within the broader framework of finding
political solutions to conflicts. As a contributor to the
increasingly complex United Nations peacekeeping
operations, Bangladesh recognizes the need to
manage expectations on all sides, including through a
comprehensive, nationally owned and internationally
backed approach to building and sustaining peace. We
hope that the organizational reform envisaged under
the United Nations peace and security pillar will help
further reinforce the primacy of politics in the context
of peace operations.

Fifthly, the currently fragmented United
Nations response strategies need to be remedied
through incremental work in clarifying the various
conceptual and mandate-related issues, fostering
regular consultations across the principal organs, and
mobilizing enhanced and adequate resources, while
avoiding unnecessary competition and duplication.
While the Security Council need not remain confined
to a strict definition of its mandate, it should also find
ways to enhance its interface with the other principal
organs so as to leverage their respective strengths and
mandates. Meaningful cooperation with the relevant
regional and subregional organizations needs to be
pursued in a shared, strategic direction.

It is worth reminding ourselves that the most
effective bulwark against conflict, hostility, war and
the illegitimate use of force should be constructed
within the minds of men, women, boys and girls by
promoting an enduring culture of peace. Imbued by
the maiden pronouncement by the father of our nation,
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, at the United
Nations in 1974 - "friendship to all, malice to none"
(see A/PV.2243) - we are pursuing our foreign policy
imperatives. During and beyond this International Year
of Peace, Bangladesh will continue to work towards
realizing our Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina's vision
for regional and international peace. We look forward
to the successful holding of the high-level event on
sustaining peace to be convened by the President of the
General Assembly in April 2018.

