Mr. Misic (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Let me begin by
expressing, on behalf of the Government of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, our most sincere condolences to
the Government of Japan and to the families of the victims
of the earthquake that struck Kobe. We are confident,
though, that with resolve and perseverance the people of
Japan will overcome the tragedy that has befallen them.

It is indeed reassuring to see Ambassador Cardenas at
the helm of this ship, and we are confident that he will
guide it with skill and diligence.

Allow me at the outset to express our appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his ongoing efforts and study
concerning the ways to strengthen international peace and
security, as expressed in his "Agenda for Peace" and its
supplement. The original "Agenda for Peace" was one of
several appropriate channels through which this
Organization began to address the post-cold-war challenges.
It offered some enlightening analyses and many ideas that
can benefit the pursuits of the United Nations. The
"Supplement to An Agenda for Peace" is no less valuable
a document in its acknowledgment that the international
community continues to be in transition, and that at this
moment there can be no absolute theories or methods.
The situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
was one of the first challenges encountered by the
international community and this Organization, and it
remains a challenge. Barely three months after the
aggression against the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina had started, the Secretary-General delivered
"An Agenda for Peace", emphasizing the objective of
achieving

"a United Nations capable of maintaining
international peace and security, of securing justice
and human rights and of promoting, in the words of
the Charter, 'social progress and better standards of
life in larger freedom'." (S/24II], para. 3)

Since then, the United Nations has been through both
success and failure, and has been given numerous lessons
which, as the Secretary-General rightly states in paragraph
6 of the Supplement, we must learn if we are to attain the
objectives of the Charter. It is in this context of first hand
experience that we will make our statement today.

First and foremost, we would like to fully associate
ourselves with paragraph 16 of the Supplement. We are
indeed of the view that the personnel of the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), particularly
those outside the top command circles, have performed
with great courage, commitment and bravery under
incredibly harsh and frustrating circumstances.

As for chapter II of the Supplement, "Quantitative
and Qualitative Changes," we concur with the finding that
most post-cold-war conflicts are of an intra-State nature,

"though some of them, especially in the former
Yugoslavia, have some inter-State dimensions also".
(S/Z995/J, para. 11)

The Bosnian experience has provided one of the most
clear-cut examples of the Supplement's finding that
"civilians are the main victims and often the main targets"
(ibid., para. 12) of such conflicts. The Supplement also
rightly points out - and our situation offers an example
- that humanitarian endeavours are hampered.

"because the relief of a particular population is
contrary to the war aims of one or other of the
parties". (ibid., para. 18)

That is why today the Karadzic Serbs continue to block
Sarajevo's blue route, and why they do not allow wood

 

shipments to the city. As was confirmed Tuesday by United
Nations spokesman Chris Janowski, "They just want to
keep people cold and miserable". The temperature in
Sarajevo yesterday was minus 20 degrees Celsius; today it
is even lower.

The creation of the Department of Political Affairs and
its ability to "follow political developments worldwide"
(ibid., para. 26) are most welcome and, if it does this with
diligence, it can greatly reduce the number of conflicts and
the burden of the Department of Peace-Keeping. Regional
organizations like the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), and others, can contribute to the
success of the Department by regularly providing it with
information, while the Organization as a whole must
improve its credibility so that individual Member States will
be more forthcoming in providing as well as asking for
necessary assistance.

We would concur with the assessment of the
Supplement that the resolution of conflicts

"requires patient diplomacy and the establishment of
a political process that permits, over a period of time,
the building of confidence and negotiated solutions to
long-standing differences". (S/1995/1, para. 36)

But it would be careless to accept such an assessment on
absolute terms. Our case has demonstrated that political
processes can be used as a cover for prolonging aggression.

As for the time required, it must not be indefinite, and
those involved in negotiations must, if necessary, be ready
to swallow their pride, admit failure and pursue action that
may be dramatically different to the failed process.
Furthermore, those who are mediating must have an
understanding of the background; they must understand
exactly who the parties to a conflict are and their motives
for fighting. Are their motives consistent with the Charter?
What policies have they pursued? To what extent are they
legitimate or illegitimate? These and other questions must
be answered before one can decide whether or not
impartiality should be applied.

The finding in chapter III, section A, "Preventive
diplomacy and peacemaking", that impartiality is essential
to peace-keeping operations, is at least deserving of scrutiny
and in no way deserves to be treated as an absolute. The
United Nations must be careful as to what it judges to be
a peace-keeping operation and the assumptions under which
it will decide to work. It is widely agreed that all conflicts
have their peculiar characteristics, which the United
Nations has often found itself to be ignorant of, thus
pursuing an approach that has little impact on the conflict
- or even a negative impact.

As for the application of impartiality in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, it has very often served to undermine
Security Council mandates, especially with respect to the
protection of safe areas and the delivery of humanitarian
aid. In a situation such as that in Bosnia, where mandates
have been pronounced in reaction to "ethnic cleansing"
and siege, impartiality is incompatible with the fulfilment
of the safe area and aid delivery mandates, especially
when, as pronounced by the Special Rapporteur on
Human Rights Abuses in the Former Yugoslavia, "ethnic
cleansing" and siege are practised as policy by the
Serbian forces.

This has led to a gross inconsistency in the
pursuance of agreed policies and measures necessary for
the implementation of Council mandates. In total
disregard of the situation on the ground, a zealousness in
diminishing the range and spirit of mandates has come to
characterize the policy of some involved in
UNPROFOR's chain of command.

Impartiality cannot lead to progress if it means
accepting the blocking of humanitarian convoys and of
the delivery of fuel and other aid, in order to benefit the
aims of conquest and siege, being resigned to entire units
of UNPROFOR being taken hostage and informing those
who have shelled hospitals in safe areas when and where
the "cosmetic" or "proportionate" airstrike against an
offending tank will take place. It is absolutely
unacceptable that Security Council mandates are perverted
to benefit those whose only international persona is that
of international pariah and who reject peace in favour of
a war inspired by an appetite for the territory and
resources of a sovereign Member State as well as by
xenophobic hatred.

The Secretary-General's assessment that none of the
instruments available to maintain international peace and
security can be used unless adequate resources are made
available is one which I believe every Member State can
agree with. But there is also the question of how finances
made available are being spent. It is widely
acknowledged, for example, that UNPROFOR in Zagreb
has an excess of Land Rovers, regularly seen on the
streets of the city. This money could have gone to a
better end, such as defensive equipment for Bangladeshi

 

peace-keepers in Bihac. As with any administrative organ,
spending errors do take place and need to be corrected.

There have been too many instances in Bosnia alone,
not to mention other peace-keeping or peacemaking
missions, that necessitate an in-depth study as to how to
ensure that individuals entrusted with mandates by this
Organization do not deviate from them or from the
principles of the Charter, standard ethical behaviour and
common sense. For examples of such poor behaviour, we
could go back as far as mid-summer 1992, yet we need
only go back to this past Monday, when it was reported and
confirmed that the Commander of UNPROFOR in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina was ready to hand
over flight plans of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) to the Karadzic Serbs. This action would directly
threaten NATO pilots, reduce the NATO alliance to a
bargaining chip and further set back what security
mechanisms there are for the populations of the safe areas
and the peace-keepers. The folly of this action is even more
glaring when one considers the following excerpt from "An
Agenda for Peace":

"The fault [for unresolved conflicts] lies first in the
lack of political will to seek a solution and
second, in the lack of leverage at the disposal of a
third party". (S/24111, para. 34)

Despite the fact that in Bosnia only the Karadzic Serbs, in
their rejection of the Contact Group peace plan, can be
associated with the first fault, it was considered to
neutralize further what little leverage - namely, NATO -
was at the disposal of the UNPROFOR Commander in
Bosnia.

Bosnia has seen numerous cases of abuse by what is
most probably only a small group of individuals. These
cases include:

Neglect for fact in an effort to equate legal
Governments and criminal gangs, as evidenced by a
76-page report entitled "Who's Who of Former
Yugoslavia", put out in June 1994 by the Department
of United Nations Military Information in Zagreb,
which was later admitted by United Nations officials
to be factually marred.
Suppression of fact in order to exonerate and protect
those who have violated a safe area, as was the case
in Gorazde, and to exonerate and protect those who
have violated both safe area and international border,

the so-called Knin Serbs.

Disregard for the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of a Member State and a Security Council mandate,
as was done by the Co-Chairmen of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia in their
approval of illicit fuel shipments to the so-called
Croatian Serbs, in violation of resolution 820 (1993).

Failure to report and act on crimes against humanity,
as was the case in mid-summer 1992, when
UNPROFOR reports confirming the existence of
concentration camps, where tens of thousands of
men, women and children had been starved, tortured,
raped and murdered, had been kept confidential.

All of these actions in and of themselves warrant a
serious inquiry into the individuals responsible for them.
As they are only examples of a greater pattern, it is high
time to create and develop mechanisms for accountability.
This issue of accountability is as critical to the
functioning of the United Nations as the issue of finances,
because without accountability there is no credibility,
without which the United Nations cannot function.

My last point is that important bases for the
development of policy and the formulation of important
decisions and their successful implementation include a
proper understanding of events, calling things by their
proper names and ensuring the speedy provision of timely
and exact information. This has been rightly emphasized
by many speakers, particularly eloquently by the
Ambassador of Ireland and, yesterday, by the
representative of the United Kingdom.

Regrettably, however, we have far too often
witnessed the manipulation of information in various
ways, including the suppression of accurate information,
while unverified - or very difficult to verify -
information is supplied.

In this fashion, dealing with such individuals, who
are certainly easily recognizable, it will be impossible
rationally to resolve international crises or to enhance the
credibility of the United Nations. It will also be difficult
to pursue the new world order, which should promote
peace and prosperity for all countries.

It is certainly a success that this planet Earth has
remained in its orbit, despite all that has been done to it
in
 

this century. and we recognize that this Organization
deserves a great deal of credit for this success. But we must
be courageous, face the truth and acknowledge that this
world could be in a healthier and more fortunate phase had
greater responsibility been exercised, had principles been
abided by, and had there been greater respect for the
existing norms and principles upon which this Organization
is based. which should be defended rather than arbitrarily
interpreted by various bodies or individuals.

It is our sincere hope and belief that this debate and
the many contributions made to it by Member States will
revitalize the Organization's approach to strengthening
intemational peace and security in the future.

