Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank the Peruvian
presidency for having convened this meeting to
discuss, for the second time this year, the important
issue of children and armed conflict. We would also
like to thank those who briefed the Council at the
beginning of the debate. We would like to express our
gratitude, in particular, for the work done by UNICEF
to protect boys, girls and adolescents caught up in
armed conflict. We would also like to acknowledge the
work done by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, for
her tireless work to put an end to the recruitment of
children.

A little over four months have gone by since we
last met together in this forum to assess the situation of
children and armed conflict in the world; indeed, there
are no easy solutions to the problem of the use of
children as soldiers. On that occasion, my delegation
referred to the importance of establishing a monitoring
and reporting mechanism, as well as to the important
work carried out by the Working Group set up by the
Council in July 2005 and chaired by the Permanent
Representative of France. I would like to make a few
brief comments in this connection.
Even though we are aware of the various
positions on this issue, we are pleased to see the

determination shown by the Working Group and by the
Council in categorically condemning the recruitment of
children as soldiers, as well as the rigorous
condemnation of those who continue to commit these
crimes against humanity. We also supported the
adoption of resolution 1698 (2006), which set the
standard for the imposition of sanctions as a response
to the abuse of children in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We trust that henceforth the
recommendations of the Working Group will be
implemented, since they are an effective way of
combating and preventing that horrendous practice.

We understand the limitations that the Working
Group and the Security Council face, not only with
respect to the mandate to consider situations in
countries that are not on the agenda of the Security
Council, but also in terms of the amount of resources
and time required to produce specific results regarding
the actors involved in using children in armed conflict.
Furthermore, we are concerned that a heavier workload
for the Working Group could be detrimental to its
efficiency and effectiveness.

Despite that, we agree with the Secretary-
General's recommendation that we should expand the
criteria that we currently use - which is limited for
the time being to the recruitment and use of child
soldiers- to include other violations and serious
crimes, such as the killing and maiming of children,
rape, abduction and the denial of humanitarian access.

Despite all of the efforts that we have made, we
continue to hear horrendous stories about children who
have suffered as a result of being recruited in situations
of armed conflict, and we reaffirm the need to impose
measures with specific and gradual objectives through
which we can identify the parties to a conflict that have
committed grave violations against children. Any
decision taken by the Council in this regard must take
advantage of what we have already accomplished,
consolidating the achievements made and moving
decisively forward in protecting children and
supporting national efforts to enact legislation that
expressly prohibits the recruitment of minors by armed
forces and armed groups and the direct participation of
children in hostilities.

There are many concrete and effective actions
that we must take against those parties to armed
conflict who continue to systematically commit grave
violations against children. That is why we must step
up our joint efforts, because it is clear that no one can
resolve this sad situation alone; it must be done with
the full and comprehensive support of the international
community.

Lastly, we would urge that the reports of
peacekeeping operations include follow-up to Security
Council resolutions such as 1612 (2005) dealing with
children and armed conflict.

