Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Executive
Director Coninsx for their briefings today.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/612) on the threat posed by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) demonstrates the hard-won
progress that we have made over the past several years,
culminating in the territorial defeat of ISIS in Iraq and
Syria in March. This accomplishment is a testament to
the work of the global coalition to defeat ISIS, which
now has 81 members. Coalition military efforts removed
scores of ISIS leaders from the battlefield, including
ISIS so-called ministers of war, information, finance,
oil, gas and its chief external operations strategist
and propagandist.

Beyond its military successes, the global coalition
takes on ISIS in four main non-military lines of effort
through counter-financing, counter-messaging and
public affairs, the detention and repatriation of foreign
terrorist fighters and the stabilization of areas liberated
from ISIS. The United States recognizes that the
international community's work to defeat ISIS is far
from complete, even after the territorial defeat of ISIS
in Iraq and Syria, and the coalition remains committed
to continuing the fight against ISIS.

The Secretary-General's report highlights the large
number of ISIS fighters and dependents in displacement
camps and detention facilities in northern Syria and
Iraq. The United States remains concerned about the
concentration of those fighters in what are otherwise
civilian displacement camps, and the potential for
radicalization to violence where they are present. The
United States encourages Member States to repatriate
and prosecute their citizens as appropriate in order to
bring those responsible for ISIS crimes to justice. We
also support efforts to protect displaced persons and
help them return to their communities.

The coalition is committed to preserving the
successes that we have achieved. To date, coalition
partners have pledged more than $1 billion in
stabilization programming in Iraq, which is key to
securing military gains and stabilizing liberated terrain,
in part by addressing drivers of violent extremism.
Beyond Iraq and Syria, ISIS affiliates continue
to threaten other regions of the globe. The Secretary-
General's report makes it clear that ISIS affiliates
pose a serious threat from West Africa to South-East
Asia and that, in some cases, those affiliates can serve
as a hub for the further regional expansion of ISIS.
For that reason, we are pleased with the decision of
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team in May to designate ISIS-Khorasan. Beyond
highlighting the threat that ISIS regional affiliates
pose, that designation allows the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
to target regional facilitators who otherwise have no
link to the ISIS core. The United States looks forward to
working with members of the Committee to designate
more affiliates.

In addition to designations, there have been other
important advances in recent months. In March, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2462 (2109), which
reinforced in advance the framework for countering the
financing of terrorism. We express our appreciation
to France for spearheading that important effort. The
designations of ISIS affiliates and the adoption of
resolution 2462 (2019) are significant developments, but
Member States must act on them in order to make them
meaningful. The United States urges all Member States
to fully implement their 1267 sanctions obligations,
resolution 2462 (2019) and all of the relevant Security
Council counter-terrorism resolutions in support of the
ultimate defeat of ISIS.

Finally, while today's briefing focuses on ISIS,
we must not overlook the ongoing threat of Al-Qaida.
As we approach the eighteenth anniversary of the
11 September attacks, Al-Qaida-linked groups continue
to threaten stability in Syria, the Sahel and elsewhere.
We must work together and employ all of our available
tools to ensure that Al-Qaida does not consolidate
power and once again threaten the United States, our
allies and our partners. We have achieved substantial
success against ISIS in Iraq and Syria. We cannot
relent. The United States will continue to work with its
partners to pursue, degrade and ultimately defeat ISIS
and Al-Qaida.

