Ms. Stener (Norway): Today I will focus on three
themes: the situation in Syria, the protection ofreligious
minorities and the Middle east peace process.

In Syria, only a political solution can provide lasting
peace. The Council must fulfil its role in promoting
a peaceful solution to the conflict. In the upcoming
rounds in Geneva, we will underscore the importance of
involving civil society and women's representatives. At
the Syria conference in Brussels, which we co-hosted,
donors committed to sustaining their support to the
Syria crisis response. We encourage donors to deliver
on their promises. Norway will deliver on our four-year
pledge of $1.16 billion.

Secondly, Norway is deeply concerned about
the deteriorating situation for religious minorities in
the Middle East. The unacceptable atrocities against
Christians, Yazidis and other religious minorities in
Egypt, Iraq and other parts of the region are creating
deep divisions within local communities. We, the
international society, must do our part in protecting the
minority populations. The concerned countries must
also do theirs.

There is a strong international consensus on how
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict should be resolved. A
negotiated two-State solution is the only way to achieve
a durable peace. Therefore, Palestinian State-building
and strengthening of the Palestinian economy must
continue. It is critical to the viability of the two-
State solution.
Norway chairs the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance
to Palestinians (AHLC). This is the only existing
international mechanism in which both parties meet
regularly and engage in a serious dialogue to resolve
outstanding issues, with the assistance of the major
donor countries. As a State-building project, the AHLC
is actively underpinning the two-State solution.

The next AHLC meeting will be held in Brussels
on 4 May, with the European Union as host. There
has been a significant drop in budget support from
donors, which has led to a serious financial gap for the
Palestinian Authority. Norway calls on the donors to
reconsider their aid commitments and to disburse the
pledges made at the Cairo conference in 2014. With
respect to the meeting, Norway calls on the parties
to progress on resolving outstanding fiscal issues and
implementing the electricity agreement from last fall.
Norway encourages the parties and the donors to move
faster on key infrastructure projects on water and
energy, especially in Gaza.

We also call on the parties to demonstrate
commitment to the two-State solution and to take
credible steps to reverse the current negative trends on
the ground, including settlement activity and acts of
violence. Only the parties can resolve this conflict, but
the international community must remain engaged and
contribute actively to the peace efforts.

