Ms. Sison (United States of America): In recent
weeks, barbaric terrorist attacks have startled the
world's conscience. From Europe to Africa to the
Middle East, innocent men and women have been
slaughtered. Families have been destroyed in Beirut,
concert-goers slain in Paris, air passengers bombed in
the sky and tourists killed on the beach in Tunisia. The
United States stands with the victims of terrorism of all
faiths and nationalities.

Yet, even as we mourn those lost in the recent
attacks, we remember the wholesale violence that
continues in Iraq and Syria, where men, women and
children struggle every day to survive and to flee the
bloodshed. Behind those outrages lies a violent ideology
of hate. Groups like the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and the Al-Nusra Front know what
they are doing. They perpetrate atrocities to advance
a hateful world view. We, the States Members of the
United Nations, must therefore intensify and accelerate
their efforts to degrade and defeat those groups once
and for all. We need a truly global initiative to counter
ISIL, prevent more attacks in our homelands and
stabilize the Middle East.

For that reason, we welcome and applaud resolution
2249 (2015) for its resolute call on States to take all
necessary measures in compliance with international
law to counter ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front. We must
also choke off funding, arms, recruitment and other
kinds of support to ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front. As
the resolution recognizes, Iraq has made clear that it
is facing a serious threat of continuing attacks from
ISIL, in particular coming from safe havens in Syria.
The Al-Assad regime in Syria has shown that it cannot
and will not suppress that threat, even as it undertakes
actions that benefit recruitment by extremists.

In that regard, working with Iraq, the United
States has been leading international efforts to provide
assistance to combat the threat that ISIL poses to
the security of that country's people and territory. In
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and its recognition of the inherent right to individual
and collective self-defence, we are taking necessary
and proportionate military action to deny ISIL safe
haven. The United States, along with 64 other nations
and international organizations, has formed Global
Coalition to Counter ISIL whose central aim is to
degrade ISIL's capabilities and achieve its lasting
defeat. Militarily, the Coalition is working to deny ISIL
safe havens and to disrupt its ability to project power
and build partner capacity. It is also actively working
to disrupt ISIL's financing and economic sustainment
and the flow of foreign terrorist fighters to and from
territories it has seized, as well as to counter its message
ofhatred and violence. To stabilize areas liberated from
ISIL's control, the Coalition further supports the efforts
of the United Nations Development Programme and of
the Iraqi Government.

Today's resolution recalls the Security Council's
well-established framework for responding to terrorist
threats generally, and in particular to ISIL, the Al-Nusra
Front and others associated with Al-Qaida. Multiple
resolutions - including resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001), 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015) - lay
out specific obligations and actions that States must
take to respond to those threats. In the Security Council,
we look forward to continuing cooperation, including
in the relevant sanctions committees and counter-
terrorism entities, to enhance our will and capacities
to implement those tools in order to counter ISIL and
related groups.

To vanquish those groups, we must also tackle
the violent extremism that drives them. Their violent
ideologies capture and motivate individuals worldwide,
including those likely responsible for today's tragic
hotel attack in Bamako. We therefore look forward to
the Secretary-General's plan for preventing violent
extremism.

Finally, we must urgently work together to support
a political transition process in Syria, in accordance
with the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex) and
the statement of the International Syria Support Group,
in order to reduce the operating space for those groups
and establish a political process leading to credible,
inclusive and non-sectarian governance, followed by a
new constitution and elections.

Our task is great, but we know what needs to be
done. We draw our strength from the resiliency of the
people affected by those tragedies. Their unity and
resolve show why ISIL will fail in its goal of creating
fear and polarizing communities. Through global
solidarity and cooperation, ISIL and its ideology will
be defeated.

