Mr. Morales Lopez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Chinese presidency of the
Council for its initiative in holding today's open debate
and for the concept note accompanying it (S/2016/306, annex).

Effective and comprehensive action in the face of
threats such as terrorism, violent extremism and foreign
terrorist fighters is becoming increasingly urgent.
Every day we see people from various countries and
regions around the world fighting in conflicts that are
totally alien to them or for violent causes in situations
far from their native lands. The ways in which terrorism,
violent extremism and hate speech have recently spread
affects our ability, and that of future generations, to
live together.

We have an ongoing duty to build social and
cultural environments that do not glorify violence.
Terrorism cannot and should not be associated with
any religion, ethnic group, community or nationality,
and we must therefore join forces to combat terrorism
comprehensively and objectively. All our actions should
be based firmly on respect for international standards
and the rule of law. That is the only way we can make
progress and thereby prevent this threat from continuing
and growing stronger in future. As the Secretary-General
said earlier, it is only when we respect the standards of
human rights and international humanitarian law that
we can ensure that the strategies we use to fight this
scourge do not become counterproductive and worsen
the effect on the communities we want to protect.

Colombia is part of the Global Counterterrorism
Forum and promotes the adoption, implementation and
application of the various international conventions and
protocols relating to terrorism, as well as the relevant
Security Council resolutions, as an effective way of
preventing, sanctioning and eliminating terrrorism
through close cooperation. The strong links between
terrorism and the various forms and manifestations of
transnational organized crime have enabled terrorist
organizations to expand both their size and scope. The
international community must deal effectively with the
economy of terrorism, with particular emphasis on its
finances and the laundering of the proceeds from its
illicit activities.

The shared challenge to us all that terrorism
represents is evolving daily, and we can fight it only
through the concerted efforts of Member States and our
Organization. As the concept note indicates, the gravity
and importance of a phenomenon such as this make it
vital that the Security Council shoulder its principal
responsibility for addressing international peace and
security and promote cooperation with the General
Assembly and the Secretariat, with a view to joining
forces for efforts that can lead to terrorism's definitive
neutralization and to the climate of international
peace and security that the world needs if it is to make
progress on development.

The fight against terrorism cannot succeed in
the continued absence of a general convention on
international terrorism. Years of discussion have
already been expended on efforts to formulate such
a convention, and the seriousness of the problem of
international terrorism demands that act urgently to
make the necessary decisions, however difficult they
may be. A convention would enable us to complement
existing instruments, bridge gaps that remain and
strengthen the internationally binding legal mechanisms
for tackling this crime. Columbia emphasizes
how important it is to promote open and inclusive
consultations in this multilateral forum in order to
achieve a speedy agreement on a general convention,
and we believe that a consensus text would be a sign
of the commitment of all Member States to the shared
benefit that the elimination of terrorism represents.
