Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this afternoon's meeting
and the important briefing by Special Representative
Ghassan Salame. We would also like to pay tribute
to the personal efforts of Ambassador Olof Skoog
of Sweden and his recent trip to Libya, which we
hope will result in a greater degree of cooperation
by the Libyan authorities with the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya.

Peru notes with concern the deterioration of
security in the country and the stalemate in the dialogue
process, which prevent Libya from overcoming the
current political crisis and meeting the urgent needs
of the civilian population - in a country affected by
terrorism and with a high number of displaced persons,
where atrocious crimes continue to be committed and
which is also crippled by a serious economic crisis.

We condemn the most recent attacks in Tripoli,
which show the fragility of peace and exacerbate the
degree to which population is vulnerable to violence.
We welcome the initiative of Prime Minister Serraj
to establish the greater Tripoli security plan and the
assistance provided by the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) with a view to providing
the Government of National Accord with a professional
security force.

We reiterate our concern about the lack of
progress in the implementation of the amendments
proposed by the Libyan Political Agreement due to
the stalemate in the negotiations between the High
Council of State and the House of Representatives. On
the plus side, we note the progress in the negotiations
on a new Presidency Council mechanism that
would establish a unified structure recognized by
both parties, which shows that the status quo can be
overcome with political will and good faith, on the basis
of what was agreed at the Paris conference. To that end,
we stress the urgency for the House of Representatives,
as agreed at Paris, to adopt the electoral legislation
required to hold the parliamentary and presidential
elections scheduled for December. We hope that the
international conference on Libya to be held this
month in Palermo will lead to progress towards an
understanding among the Libyan parties under the
auspices of the United Nations.

The state of the Libyan economy and its potential
impact on stability requires urgent action to set the
country back on the path to sustainable peace. As
Mr. Salame' mentioned here in the Chamber a few
months ago (see S/PV.8341), for many in Libya every
day is a personal emergency.

Along those lines, we want to emphasize the
importance of the work that UNSMIL is carrying out
through the so-called national conference, in which
over 7,000 citizens from more than 40 cities were able
to participate, channelling their concerns about, and
hopes for, an open and inclusive dialogue process. We
eagerly await the final report of the conference.

We also stress the need for the Libyan authorities
to comply with the economic reforms agreed in the
economic dialogue. We consider it essential to reach
a compromise on the oversight and transparent and
efficient management of the hydrocarbon resources,
which are the country's main resources. The political
process must be accompanied by a fair and equitable
distribution of wealth to promote the well-being of
citizens, while preventing the country's wealth from
being used for financing militias and warlords.

Finally, we express our concern at the violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
that continue to be reported in Libya. We wish to
recognize and support the work of UNSMIL to promote
accountability and combat impunity, among its other
important functions, in accordance with its mandate.

