Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important open
debate on the rule of law. We believe that this debate
is a perfect continuation of the debate organized last
month by the Jordanian presidency on war, its lessons
and the search for a permanent peace (see S/PV.7105).
Indeed, there can be no permanent peace in countries
emerging from conflict without strong decisions, good
governance and the rule of law. I also thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing and for his
tireless efforts in promoting the rule of law around the
world.

As the concept note for this debate (S/2014/75, annex) highlights, many countries that have experienced
conflict face many challenges, including the potential
for a relapse into conflict. Once a country experiences
civil strife, it is prone to additional episodes of violence.
While there are many causes of that trend, the simple
understanding is that either the arrangement in the
conflict settlement did not address the root causes of
the conflict or that post-conflict political institutions
are not able to meet the challenges of rebuilding the
society, including the establishment of effective
and functioning institutions and reconciliation and
accountability mechanisms.

Rwanda recognizes the importance of the rule
of law as a significant tool for conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. We believe that
fighting impunity while strengthening national justice
mechanisms for the fair and full protection of all
promotes good governance, which mitigates conflict,
helps reduce the risk relapsing into further conflict and
creates the conditions conducive to development and
peace.

From our own experience since 1994, we can
testify that impunity is one of the factors that led to the
genocide and that, indeed, impunity breeds criminality.
As we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the
1994 genocide against the Tutsis in Rwanda, I take
this opportunity to commend the countries that have
arrested and prosecuted perpetrators of that genocide.
We urge all States harbouring genocide suspects,
including leaders of the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda, to arrest, extradite or try such
suspects in their competent courts.

In Rwanda, the prevailing lawlessness, the collapse
of State institutions and anguish were among our
immediate challenges after the genocide. Mastering
those challenges was a good foundation for our
nation-building. We acted fast to put in place law and
order and provided venues for recourse, where both
the perpetrators and the victims felt safe and that were
credible for all to trust. Indeed, transitional justice
should be one of the key focuses in post-conflict
situations, in order both to confront and address the
culture of violence and impunity following mass
human rights violations and to begin a healing process
within the community through truth, reconciliation,
accountability and reparation.

When planning transitional justice institutions,
greater efforts should also be made to build the capacity
of a country's justice system, which plays a crucial role
in post-conflict transitional justice. Governments that
function within a constitutional framework and that
allow the rule of law to flourish are much less likely
to face renewed violence in any form. A fair legal
framework that is backed by impartial enforcement
and promotes the equality of all before the law offers
combatants an alternative way out of war.
In post-conflict situations, rule-of-law reforms
have been characterized by a multiplicity of actors and
largely uncoordinated projects. While such multiplicity
is itselfan advantage, we believe that better coordination
is needed if one is to achieve tangible results. For
Rwanda, as one of the "Delivering as one" pilot
countries, we can confirm that the coordination of all
activities of United Nations agencies and programmes
related to the rule of law generate more results with less
recources. We urge the United Nations Secretariat to go
beyond the pilot stage and to apply the One UN system
in all States Members of the United Nations.

Furthermore, as former Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), Rwanda also appreciates the
potential of the Commission to support peacebuilding
activities in the countries on its agenda. Given its
unique composition, its experience and its advisory role
to the Security Council, we believe that the United Nations
system should better coordinate with the PBC in order to
strengthen the rule of law in countries emerging from
conflict.

We support the strengthened leadership and the new
institutional arrangements in place for addressing the
challenges faced in strengthening the rule of law. We
note with satisfaction the designation of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Programme as a joint global focus point
for the police, justice and corrections areas in the rule of
law in post-conflict and other crisis situations. Rwanda
looks forward to strengthened collaboration with the
global focal point, not only as one of the leading troop-
and police-contributing countries but also as the current
Chair of the group of friends of corrections.

We commend the ongoing efforts to strengthen
national data collection and the country-level rule-of-
law assessments conducted jointly by United Nations
entities using an inter-disciplinary approach. However,
we are of the View that greater inclusion of concerned
Government institutions would add value, given that
such bodies better understand the local realities and
possess data that are inaccessible to development
partners.

In Rwanda, joint governance assessments
spearheaded by the Rwanda Government Board, the
United Nations Development Programme, the European
Union and many other development partners have been
conducted every two years since 2006. Their results are
credited with being accurate and objective. We think
that that is a best practice that can be applied by other
United Nations States Members.
Rwanda believes that the rule of law flourishes
or collapses at the national level. Let us all support
national institution-building, if we are to strengthen
the rule of law in Member States. In that respect, we do
not believe, as we have stated on many occasions in the
Council, that the International Criminal Court (ICC),
which is a politicized court that has so far exclusively
targeted Africans, could in any way contribute to the
rule of law in our countries. In any case, it is difficult
to argue that the ICC has strengthened the fight against
impunity for the most serious crimes, given that the
Court has issued only a single judgment in 12 years.

To conclude, let me stress the importance of
ensuring that international justice mechanisms are
not politicized, but are conducted in a business-
like, professional, impartial and fair manner, while
complementing national jurisdictions. That would
strengthen their credibility while at the same time
ensuring that the rule-of-law criterion is applied
equally to all States, as highlighted in the Declaration
of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly of
24 September 2012 (General Assembly resolution 67/1).

