Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I, too, wish to thank Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his most informative briefing this
morning. I also wish to thank the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its
efforts, in particular in rebuilding the country.

We also welcome Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Eide, whom we congratulate on his
appointment as Head of UNAMA.

I further welcome the Ambassador of
Afghanistan.

Unfortunately, the Secretary-General's report
(S/2008/159) paints a bleak picture of the situation in
Afghanistan. The principal causes it cites in that
respect are renewed insurgent activities, the fragility of
State institutions and their incapacity to promote socio-
economic development to meet the basic needs of the
people of Afghanistan.

The report also stresses the link between security
and reconstruction. It notes in paragraph 31 that
"[c]ultivation remains concentrated in the
insurgency-affected provinces", which leads us simply
to reiterate that the situation requires a comprehensive
solution, and not an exclusively military one. I believe
that we are all mindful of that.

The international community's fundamental goal
in Afghanistan is to help the Afghan people to establish
a stable democratic State, and not to wage war against
the Taliban or other armed groups. The fight against
those entities is not an objective, and the use of force
alone can never ensure the State's control over its
territory or assist it in reaching its development goals.
Moreover, stability requires a parallel effort of
dialogue to reconcile the country with all actors of
Afghan society. The Afghanistan legislature has called
on President Karzai to consider reconciliation with the
anti-Government rebels and to strengthen the army and
the police, in parallel with the adoption of measures for
development.

Security is a precondition for development, but
maintaining peace also requires socio-economic
conditions that will meet the minimum basic needs of
the people of Afghanistan. The solution lies in fighting
not only the insurgents, but also the climate that fosters
fundamentalism and extremism. In other words, we
must build schools, provide medical care, and
strengthen infrastructure. The Secretary-General
stresses that connection when he writes in his report
that

"[p]rovinces not affected by anti-Government
violence have demonstrated an increasing
capacity for delivering governance and economic
development" (ibid., para. 11).

The report also notes in paragraph 29 that
"counter-narcotics efforts have gained significant
momentum", although in paragraph 31 it says that
"opium-poppy cultivation is not expected to change
significantly" in 2008 and that it is "likely to
increase in the insurgency-affected provinces".
While we appreciate those counter-narcotics efforts, we
would emphasize once again that their success will be
ensured only with the improved capacity to provide
decent and legitimate employment to all Afghans.

I shall be brief. We appreciate the progress made
in the dismantling of illegal armed groups and in the
Government's efforts to ensure good governance at the
national level through the establishment of the
Independent Directorate for Local Governance, as well
as the measures taken to combat endemic corruption in
the country. We especially welcome the Government's
efforts to develop the National Development Strategy
and to make progress in that regard, as mentioned in
paragraph 53 of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/159). My country supports the observations of
the Secretary-General as regards the importance of the
Strategy. Development is a vital part of the Mission's
work and is crucial to ensuring the success of the
efforts currently being made in Afghanistan.

Finally, my country also supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation to extend the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and to strengthen its role in the coordination of
international efforts to ensure that the necessary funds
are secured for the Mission to open regional offices
and carry out good-governance efforts.

