Mr. Costa: Let me start by congratulating the
Council, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Djinnit, because,
during the past three years, I have brought to the
Council's attention - in this very Chamber - the
threat posed by drug trafficking to the security of West
Africa. All concerned have responded pro-actively.
Today, I am pleased to report, on the basis of the
evidence that was disclosed in the World Drug Report a
few weeks ago, that the volume of drug trafficking
through the region of West Africa seems to be
diminishing, and significantly so. It is evident from the
lower volume of seizures in West Africa - there have
been none, zero, in 2009 so far - and from the sharp
decline in the number of air couriers coming from West
Africa to Europe. That decline has been major - about
a 35 per cent drop over a few months.

Again, I congratulate Member States in the
region, the Security Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the Special
Representative for responding so effectively to the
crisis.

Of course, the situation remains very volatile.
Around 20 tons of cocaine are still transiting through
the region every year, valued at about $1 billion at its
destination, mostly the European market. There is no
guarantee, therefore, that the downward trend will
continue.

Recent upheavals in Guinea-Bissau and in Guinea
show that there are powerful forces with a stake in
illicit activity. Until the underlying conditions of
vulnerability in the region - poverty,
underdevelopment and inadequate governance - are
addressed, the region will remain attractive to those
who operate outside the law and abuse authority for
personal gain.

There are also other risks. First, we know that
drug trafficking is being displaced from West Africa to
the Sahel in North Africa, and especially down the
south-west coast, towards Southern Africa. Traffickers
are simply diversifying the routes, having met
opposition in West Africa.

Secondly and more important, drugs are not the
only illicit flows or the only illicit activity. Today, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
is releasing a threat assessment on transnational
trafficking in West Africa. I think it has been
distributed to Council members. It is a brand-new
document, not yet released to the press. It contains a
great deal of data and many graphs, showing that West
Africa is still under attack by smugglers of arms,
people, counterfeit medicines, toxic waste, cigarettes
and oil and other natural resources. In short, organized
crime makes West Africa much more prone to political
instability and, of course, much less able to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals.

As Ambassador Djinnit has already mentioned, in
order to tackle the threat posed by organized crime,
UNODC has teamed up with the Department for
Political Affairs, Ambassador Djinnit's United Nations
Office for West Africa, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the International
Criminal Police Organization to support the action plan
of the Economic Community of West African States
against drugs and crime, the implementation of which
is to be monitored by the Security Council. We are
establishing transnational crime units in Guinea-
Bissau, Sierra Leone, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire to
complement peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts. I
believe that to be innovative and promising as well.

My Office is also providing technical assistance
to strengthen criminal justice and crime-fighting
capacity, for example in Cape Verde and Guinea-
Bissau, and soon in Mali and Sierra Leone. Our
support for the judicial police in Guinea-Bissau has
been instrumental in assisting the commission
investigating the killings of the President and the chief
of army.

Working together with DPKO - and this is
something that is new for us - we have put police
advisors on the ground. But much more is needed
throughout the region to support the process of
security-sector reform. Too often, the monopoly that a
State has on the use of force is abused for the
enrichment of a select few. Indeed, the recent military
and other coups underline the need for civilian
oversight of armed forces and for the restoration of the
constitutional order, as we are now seeing in
Mauritania.

Affected States also need the hardware to
confront criminal groups, which are often better
equipped than the police itself, or even the army. A
number of West African presidents and senior ministers
have appealed to have their countries provided with the
means to protect their borders, their coasts and their
airspace. I urge all members of the Council to answer
that call and to provide the hardware, patrol boats,
helicopters and radar that are desperately needed to
defend the sovereignty of those countries against the
onslaught of organized crime. The bottom line is to
strengthen the rule of law in West Africa. That is vital
for efforts to reduce vulnerability to organized crime
and the corruption that enables it. I urge the
Governments of the region to implement United
Nations conventions against corruption and organized
crime.

In conclusion, I invite all the members of the
Council to put the situation in West Africa in a global
6

perspective. We must not overlook the fact that most
illicit activity is only transiting via West Africa. It is
not originating there and it is not ending there. Rich
countries, particularly in Europe, should assume their
responsibilities by curbing their appetite for drugs -
as indeed drugs transiting through West Africa are
bound for Europe ~ cheap labour and the human
beings who are modern-day slaves being smuggled
through the region. In particular, my Office is asking
rich countries to stop using West Africa as a dumping
ground for weapons, waste and fake medicines.

The report to which I just referred includes some
terrible statistics pertaining to oil bunkering, which
derives from the theft of 10 per cent of the region's oil
output, as well as to sources of pollution, corruption
and revenues for insurgents. Eighty per cent of the
cigarettes marketed in North and West Africa is of
illicit origin. Fifty to 60 per cent of all medications
used in West Africa is counterfeit or substandard.
Africa is a major destination for electronic waste,
including old computers and telephones. A good
percentage of European e-waste, in fact 8.7 million
tons, goes to Africa. All of that must come to an end.

I began by thanking and congratulating all the
members of the Council, for our experience has shown
that joint action can indeed contain crime. In addition
to the statistics I have just reported, we have seen that
success with the Kimberly Process against blood
diamonds and the Bamako Convention on hazardous
wastes. We hope to see the same results with the Praia
process against drug trafficking. Let us therefore unite
to disrupt other forms of illicit activity, which are
causing so much pain in Africa. I thank the Council for
its support.

