Ms. Rice (United States of America): I want to
thank the Secretary-General for his presence and
remarks. I also welcome the Ministers present here, as
well as Commissioner Lamamra. At the outset, I want
especially to thank President Zuma for convening this
important and timely debate.

The relationship between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU) is important to both bodies. As
the AU approaches its tenth anniversary, the time is
ripe for considering what we have learned, where we
are going and what needs to be improved. Collective
African efforts at advancing peace and security on the
continent have indeed come a long way since the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) was founded, in
1963. Since 2002 in particular, when the African Union
succeeded the OAU, African Governments have shown
that, acting together, they can prevent conflict. The AU
marked a new beginning with its doctrine of non-
indifference. The AU charter recognizes that it might
be necessary to intervene in the affairs of a member
State "in respect of grave circumstances, namely: war
crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity". Those
are brave and worthy words.

The African Union's first major mission was in
Burundi, with initial deployment in April 2003. The
African Union then acted responsibly in Darfur, when
other international actors were still hesitant. The AU
Mission in the Sudan was operational in August 2004,
before any other force. The AU was also active early
on in pressing for peace between the Sudan and South
Sudan. President Mbeki's efforts continue to be
valuable, and South Africa deserves praise for its
leadership and dedication to peace in both the Sudan
and Burundi. Above all, the African Union has taken
on a very tough mission in Somalia, where it has
deployed troops to advance peace since 2007. The
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia have come
a long way in developing their relationship and in
improving coordination. All of those missions were
undertaken with the collaboration of the international
community, notably the Security Council, and
sometimes with that of subregional organizations such
as the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD).

Recognizing the importance of the international
community's engagement with the AU, the United
States Mission to the African Union was established in
2006; it has been significantly strengthened since 2009.
That is consistent with the Obama Administration's
overall policy of intensified engagement with regional
organizations, including the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations and the Organization of
American States. The United Nations has likewise
strengthened its ties to regional organizations, notably
after the General Assembly established the United
Nations Office to the African Union, in 2010.

It is precisely because the relationship between
the United Nations and the AU, and between the
Security Council and the African Union's Peace and
Security Council, is so important that we must confront
the challenges facing that relationship forthrightly and
honestly if we are to make progress. The United
Nations needs a strong African Union, and the African
Union needs a strong United Nations. Yet, African
Union member States have sometimes indicated that
they feel ignored or disregarded by the Council. At the
same time, some Security Council members feel that
African Union member States have not always
provided unified or consistent views on key issues, and
that the African Union has on occasion been slow to
act on urgent matters.

Beneath those perceptions and frustrations,
however, is a deeper issue, that is, who is on first?
Under the Charter, the Security Council has a unique,
universal and primary mandate to maintain
international peace and security. The Security Council
is not subordinate to other bodies, or to the schedules
or capacities of regional or subregional groups.
Nonetheless, the Security Council wants and needs to

cooperate closely with regional organizations, as
demonstrated by our growing collaboration with the
African Union over nearly a decade. Such
collaboration, however, needs to be based on the
exigencies of the issue at hand, and that cooperation
cannot be on the basis that the regional organization
independently decides the policy and that United
Nations Member States simply bless it and pay for it.
There can be no blank check, either politically or
financially. The Security Council should, and will, take
into account the views of regional and subregional
institutions, while recognizing that sometimes there is
disagreement among them.

For example, the positions of organizations such
as the Economic Community of Western African States
or IGAD on an issue in their subregion might not be
exactly the same as the consensus View of the 54
member States of the African Union. The United States
urges the Security Council to seize this opportunity to
define our relations with the African Union more
precisely, so that we can move forward together in
better meeting the urgent challenges that confront us
all.

In that vein, let us be candid. The periodic
African Union-Security Council consultations have
not, thus far, been altogether productive or satisfactory.
If they cannot be improved, they risk being jettisoned
by one side or the other as not useful or worse. To
make the United Nations-AU relationship more
effective, we must do more than consider formalizing
African Union-Security Council meetings. The
meetings must prove their worth. The meetings must
have set agendas and concrete priorities that lead to
tangible improvements, not only in how we work
together but in how our work helps people in Africa
and around the world. Nonetheless, the opportunities
for us to seize together are considerable.

The European Union has set an example in its
work to strengthen the AU's Peace and Security
Architecture. In peacekeeping, the African Standby
Force is being improved and shows promise.
Bilaterally, the United States continues to train and
equip African militaries for deployment in multilateral
peacekeeping operations. The United Nations-AU Joint
Task Force on Peace and Security is a valuable forum
that can greatly contribute to better United Nations-AU
cooperation on peace and security. The United Nations
could assist further by standardizing training of
peacekeepers. It could go further still in offering
Department of Peacekeeping Operations guidance to
the AU, including through peacekeeping programmes
that give instruction on the rule of law, sexual- and
gender-based violence and the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We would also welcome sustained
collaboration on lessons learned and best practices. It
is also time for a formal lessons learned exercise
concerning United Nations-AU joint operations so far,
including the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and AMISOM.

One lesson that the United States and others
learned in Bosnia is that joint command and control
operations, or so-called dual keys, do not typically
work well. Hybrid missions are very challenging at
best. We need to analyse our experience in the field,
discuss it and agree on optimal mission structures that
are linked to the objectives of the situation at hand.
Recent United Nations-AU coordination in fighting the
Lord's Resistance Army provides one positive example
to consider. The United Nations, for its part, could be
more effective in Addis Ababa. The creation of the
United Nations Office to the African Union is a
positive step, but the annual review of the United
Nations agencies supporting the AU needs to improve.
At present, no single United Nations office is in charge
of United Nations efforts to assist the African Union.
That leads to unnecessary duplication. United Nations
officials on the ground need stronger backing to
streamline their own structures, to better aid the
African Union.

That is definitely, however, a two-way street. For
its part, the African Union should improve its internal
management in the areas of administration, accounting,
financial management and human resources.
Improvement in those areas would help to foster a
more productive relationship on the ground in Addis
Ababa and would energize progress on the United
Nations-AU 10-year capacity-building programme.
Key to that, as the African Union Chairperson
suggested in his report, is for the African Union to
identify priorities, and the United Nations should be
responsive to that. Since the programme was
established in 2006, far too little progress has been
achieved through United Nations delivering as one in
its engagement with the African Union and regional
economic communities. The African Union and the
United Nations have already agreed on a range of
actions to strengthen their operational relationship.
More must be done to galvanize improvements at the
programmatic and administrative levels.

South Africa has rightly emphasized conflict
prevention and mediation in envisioning the future of
AU peace and security policies. An atrocity-prevention
framework should also be developed, and African
Union mediation efforts should be expanded. The role
of women in conflict mediation has not advanced
nearly enough, and the African Union should consider
developing a regional action plan on women and peace
and security.

As we approach the African Union's tenth
anniversary, we should seize this milestone to take
stock and consider where we are going. We all hope
that the peace and security challenges in Africa will
continue to lessen over time. Improved cooperation
between the Security Council and the African Union is
critical to that goal. I urge colleagues not only to laud
progress but to acknowledge frankly the challenges to
that cooperation and to devise concrete ways to match
reality to our shared aspirations.

I thank President Zuma again for convening this
discussion.

