Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Cote d'Ivoire presidency for
taking the initiative to convene this briefing of the
Council on the very topical issue of combating drug
trafficking in West Africa. We also thank Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for his
participation in the meeting and for his informative
and detailed briefing.

We are firmly convinced that effectively
countering the threat of drugs in the West African
States is possible only on a basis of coordinated
efforts by the entire international community, with the
United Nations playing a leading role. In that regard,
we confirm our unwavering support to the sanctions
regime targeting people and organizations linked to the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida who
finance terrorist activity through proceeds from illegal
drug trafficking. The continuing mutual ties between
criminal activity, including drug-related activity, and
international terrorism, particularly where material
support for it is concerned, are very alarming. The high
indicators for pharmaceutical opioids for non-medical
consumption, synthetic drugs and heroin addiction
are particularly worrying. A number of States in the
region continue to be transit hubs for opiates from
Afghanistan and cocaine from Latin America. We are
hoping for a comprehensive review of all ofthose issues
in Vienna in March 2019 during the scheduled review
of the implementation of the Political Declaration on
the Prevention of Drug Abuse, Illicit Drug Trafficking
and Organized Crimes in West Africa and the 2009
Regional Response Action Plan.

Among the priorities within the framework of
measures to deal adequately with the drug issue is the
quest for effective alternatives to this kind of criminal
business. In particular, the promotion of programmes
reconfigured to take local realities into account and
designed to create additional job opportunities in the
region would be of major help in that regard, and the
involvement of the business community, as well as the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization and
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, could make a significant contribution to that.
We believe it is vital to continue giving special attention
to preventing and suppressing the radicalization
of young people, while focusing on raising their
employment and education levels, including through
policies aimed at implementing specialized projects
under the auspices of the United Nations and UNESCO.

We also think it makes sense to continue
improving and strengthening border security, the
exchange of information and the training of law-
enforcement personnel. We have been pleased with
UNODC's success in extending expert assistance
to African States on ensuring security and stability.
We support UNODC's work in that regard, and its
cooperation with the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and other regional
bodies. Needless to say, it is also important to develop
anti-drug cooperation among the countries concerned
themselves, in bilateral, regional, subregional and
multilateral formats, based on the principle of shared
and joint responsibility.
For our part, we have consistently taken measures to
assist African States in training personnel, particularly
in the areas of health care and law enforcement. We are
committed to continuing a constructive dialogue and
effective cooperation in the fight against drugs.

