Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
know that I am the last speaker this afternoon, so I will
be brief. In any event, I should like to begin by saying
that Argentina always welcomes the opportunity to
participate in the open debates of the Security Council.

The United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, have a key responsibility in the maintenance
of international peace and security. They have a central
role to play in post-conflict situations, building lasting
peace, and establishing a sound foundation for
sustainable development.

One major challenge faced today by the
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, is supporting countries recovering from
conflict and seeking to build peace. As the Secretary-
General underscores in his report, an effective response
by the Organization requires a comprehensive and
coordinated strategy that is based on the identification
of priorities by local authorities and establishes clear
objectives and timelines. That task requires the
development of assistance activities in the
humanitarian field, politics, security, the restoration of
the rule of law, the promotion of development, and the
protection and promotion of human rights. The task
ahead is therefore enormous.

In considering the matter at hand, I should like to
focus on three central aspects.

First, we believe that peacebuilding is primarily a
national task and responsibility. Clearly, faced with
diminished or destroyed local capacities in the wake of
a conflict, we need to rely on the support of the
international community. International, regional,
subregional and non-governmental organizations have
a central role to play in developing institutions, but
always based on guidance and priorities established by
local authorities. We underscore the importance of the
participation and responsibility of authorities in the
country emerging from conflict in the design phase of a
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy and in
identifying priorities and resources to be used in that
strategy. These authorities will be involved throughout
the entire rebuilding process, ensuring a consensual
response in addressing the true causes of conflict more
effectively and legitimately. In that regard, I would like
to underscore the point made by the Deputy Prime
Minister Guterres to the effect that a nation cannot be
built on the basis of another nation, since there is no
common model that can be applied to all.
11-21335

Secondly, I wish to note the statement in the
concept paper prepared by the delegation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for this debate that "it is... too late to
start developing institutional capacities when
peacebuilding efforts are already at the exit strategy
phase" (S/2011/16, annex, p. 2). On the contrary, it is
immediately following a conflict that there are the
greatest challenges to and the greatest opportunities for
starting institution-building.

As I have said on many occasions in this Council
on behalf of my delegation, in particular in reference to
the situation of Haiti, we must promote peacebuilding
so that the presence of the United Nations and the
international community will not be necessary. The fact
that local authorities have the institutional capacity to
shoulder their responsibilities will be the gauge of the
success of the Organization's work.

Finally, I wish to stress the important role played
by regional and subregional organizations in conflict
prevention, management and resolution, in line with
the provisions of Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter and the need to strengthen the capacities of
regional systems to support countries in post-conflict
recovery and reconstruction.

In addition, I underscore the key role of the
Organization in post-conflict peacebuilding and its
privileged position in coordinating the international
community's various initiatives, ensuring that all
efforts contribute to the goal of institution-building and
are in line with national priorities.

