Mr. Muvunyi (Rwanda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting to
consider the situation concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The Government of the Republic of Rwanda fully
supports the return of peace and security to the Great
Lakes region as a whole and, in particular, to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his briefing. I also welcome the briefing by
Mr. Vieira de Mello, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.

Rwanda would like to ask some questions.
Mr. Guehenno said that Rwanda supports the Union des
patriots congolais; that is not true. He said that there
might be confrontations with Uganda. That, too, is
untrue.

As for the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, all of his allegations are always
baseless - Rwanda has left the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The international community, including
the members of the Security Council, know that
Rwanda went to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
because it had always been a base for negative forces.
Such forces have been operating there with support
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and they
are a real threat - not only to the population of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo but also to the
security of neighbouring countries, especially Rwanda,
Burundi and Uganda.

That is why Rwanda appreciates the good job that
has been done by the Red Cross, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
United Nations Children's Fund and other non-
governmental organizations, which have been giving
aid to the displaced people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

I and my delegation strongly condemn the
violation of human rights in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, especially the cannibalism which has
taken place in the region of Ituri.

We request the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to implement fully the peace
agreement signed in Lusaka, in Pretoria and in Angola
in order to achieve peace and security in the Great
Lakes region. It is in conformity with the
implementation of those agreements that the
Government of Rwanda requests that the Security
Council exert its influence on the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, all armed groups
and civil society to put in place an all-inclusive
Government which will address the human rights
situation in the country and stabilize it in the interest of
all Congolese citizens. The transitional institutions will
solve the chronic problems of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which have persisted for the past 40
years, characterized by corruption, insecurity and
misrule, and will address the security concerns of
neighbouring countries, namely Rwanda, Burundi and
Uganda.

I take this opportunity to dismiss all of the
alarming information of 31 January 2003, spread by the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the
Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is indeed a well-known fact that the
Rwandan Defence Forces made a total withdrawal from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 5 October
2002. That was confirmed a few days later by MONUC
itself and by the third-party verification mechanism.
Rwanda condemns rumours and unconfirmed reports
spread by alarmists in order to tarnish the image of my
country. Let me conclude by requesting members of the
Security Council not to give credit to such baseless
allegations.

