Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for organizing this debate just a few days after
the holding in Nairobi of the Second Summit of Heads
of State and Government of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. For us, the
outcome of that important event represents a turning
point in the search for peace, stability and sustainable
development in a region that, for far too long, has been
the theatre of armed conflict that has utterly
vanquished any real hope for sustainable growth
commensurate with its natural and human potential.

I also wish to pay a well-deserved tribute to all
the stakeholders who tirelessly committed themselves
to providing various forms of support to initiatives to
promote sustainable development in the Great Lakes
region. I refer in particular to the Group of Friends; the
multilateral partnership of the United Nations, the
African Union and the European Union; and non-
governmental organizations, whose contribution to the
peace process in that region has been decisive.

I refer, too, to my friend Mr. Ibrahima Fall,
sitting beside me today. I believe that he will
understand full well the expression of my
Government's deepest gratitude to him, not only for the
detailed information on the Conference that he has
provided to the Council, but also and above all for the
key role he has played as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General throughout his mandate in
coordinating the process of the Conference at the
regional level. Our region owes him a great deal for his
commitment and expertise.

I should also like to reiterate my delegation's
congratulations to Ms. Mulamula on her appointment
as first Executive Secretary of the Great Lakes
Conference Secretariat.

Following the Dar es Salaam Summit in
November 2004, which issued the Dar es Salaam
Declaration calling on States of the region to work for
peace, security and development in the Great Lakes,
we welcome today the outstanding progress achieved
throughout this year, which has just been crowned with
success in Nairobi. In point of fact, whereas yesterday
the image of the Great Lakes region in the eyes of the
world was one of desolation and destruction as a result
of conflicts that undermined all development efforts
and led to the spread of HIV/AIDS and multiple human
tragedies resulting from flows of refugees and
displaced persons, we can welcome the fact today that
democracy and development are now taking root in
some of the countries concerned.

One example of that is the successful conclusion
of the transitions in Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo following democratic, free and
transparent elections, to the satisfaction of the
international community. We have also seen progress in
the conclusion of agreements between certain
Governments and rebel factions in the region, and in
particular the agreement ending hostilities between the
Government of Uganda and the Lord's Resistance
Army, signed on 26 August, and the agreement
between the Government of Burundi and the Forces
nationales de liberation-Palipehutu, signed on
7 September. The signing of those historic agreements
will, we hope, put an end to decades of conflict that
have claimed an especially high toll of victims,
particularly among women and children.

My delegation therefore wishes to welcome the
convening of the Second Summit, in which the Congo,
a country of the region, played an active part. The
outcome of the Summit - held under the evocative
theme of regional peace, security and development -
is a harbinger of hope, and my delegation has several
comments to make on that issue.

First, as to the designation of the Great Lakes
region as a zone of reconstruction and development,
we hope above all that the region will continue to
enjoy the support of the regional States themselves and
of the international community, which helped to launch
the peace process. We hope that the special fund for
reconstruction and development will move on schedule
into its operational phase so as to consolidate the
positive achievements made in this process, which
Member States must now take ownership of and treat,
individually and collectively, as a platform for joint
action.

We also welcome the adoption of the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes
Region, which represents a turning point in the history
of the region. In point of fact, the Pact gives States
concerned and the international community an essential
tool for action in the restoration of peace and the
promotion of cooperation in that long-troubled region.
It is therefore urgent for us to send an encouraging
signal to our partners so that each of the signatory
States will ratify the Pact as soon as possible.

The success of the Second Summit is a positive
sign of the culmination of the peace process in our
region. The international community, including the
United Nations above all, is therefore called on to
continue to support regional efforts, and in particular to
ensure the implementation of the Pact, which is
endowed with several useful tools, including protocols
that should contribute to strengthening regional
initiatives. The protocols cover such areas as non-
aggression and mutual defence, and judicial
cooperation in preventing and suppressing the crime of
genocide, crimes of war, crimes against humanity and
all forms of discrimination. There is also the protocol
on the illegal exploitation of natural resources and,
lastly, the protocol on the restoration of democracy and
good governance.

We very much hope that the international
community will continue to support - not just for the
moment - the first steps to be taken by the institution
we have established.

I cannot end my intervention without thanking
the delegation of Tanzania, which has introduced in the
Council a draft presidential statement, which my
delegation fully supports.

