Liechtenstein welcomes this open debate and thanks Foreign Minister Heiko Maas for his leadership in bringing urgent attention to the coronavirus disease pandemic - a crisis of enormous proportions that will continue to significantly shape our domestic and international policies for the foreseeable future. Never before in the history of the United Nations have more people felt more insecure than today, faced with the immense health, economic and social fallout of this global pandemic. It is high time that the Security Council addressed the security implications of the pandemic after months of self-inflicted oblivion. Liechtenstein welcomes resolution 2532 (2020), on coronavirus disease (COVID-19), finally adopted yesterday after painstaking negotiations. The Security Council's call for a general and immediate cessation of hostilities in all situations on its agenda and its support for the Secretary-General's efforts in that respect, as well as its call for a 90-day humanitarian pause, are important political signals. They would have been more impactful had they been issued with fewer caveats and closer to the Secretary- General's call for a global ceasefire, which is supported by an overwhelming majority of the United Nations membership. Liechtenstein has, together with other States, pursued early action on the pandemic in the General Assembly and is encouraged that General Assembly resolution 74/270 ultimately also helped the Security Council to overcome its deep divisions for the sake of a common position on COVID-19. Today's debate is an important contribution to a much-needed effort in the Security Council to broaden its overly narrow security paradigm. That paradigm has proved insufficient to embrace the full spectrum of security dimensions that determines international relations and domestic policy today and to deliver on the expectation of the membership that the Council act preventively against threats to international peace and security. The so-called thematic agendas of the Security Council are an essential contribution towards implementing its mandate, and they must obviously include global health emergencies such as the current pandemic. The pandemic has significant and visible security impacts, from wide-ranging human rights restrictions and increased risks of mass poverty and hunger to deferrals of important political processes and heightened social tensions. It has also highlighted the interlinkages between global health and developments in climate change, biodiversity and cybersecurity, inter alia. A proactive approach by the Council to these developments could significantly increase the efficiency of its work, in particular in its preventive dimension. There is a strong indication that the number of situations of concern before the Council that are driven by climate change, health emergencies, economic tensions and other external shocks will only increase in the future. In addressing the drivers of conflict, the Security Council should display openness to embracing and building on the work of other organs of the United Nations to address global challenges to our common security. The extent to which the Council succeeds in that respect will also determine how relevant its work is in the eyes of the membership and the general public over the next 75 years. With the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the international community has agreed on the most ambitious and most comprehensive human development programme ever devised. The SDGs include a clear acknowledgement of the security dimension of sustainable development and constitute a human security programme based on international law, in particular human rights, cooperation, solidarity and multilateralism. The SDGs provide a model not only for how to overcome the crisis of the current pandemic. They are also our blueprint for how to better prepare for future crises of this dimension by comprehensively addressing climate change, poverty, hunger, health, education gaps and inequalities, among other things. While the pandemic affects all countries and impairs human activity at all levels, the challenges are by no means evenly distributed. Past experience points to complex interlinkages between health emergencies and conflict situations. On the one hand, health emergencies, such as the Ebola outbreak, have had very severe security impacts. On the other hand, conflicts have led to increased vulnerability to disease as, for example, in South Sudan. The COVID-19 pandemic is exacerbating already fragile security situations in Yemen, where it is overwhelming an already fragile health system, and in Syria, where cases continue to rise, adding to the plight of the many civilians in need of humanitarian assistance in both countries. People on the move are particularly vulnerable, as the Secretary-General's call for a ceasefire acknowledges and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees recently reaffirmed before the Council (see S/2020/560). Women face higher exposure to the virus in their essential roles as front-line workers, and they may experience greater economic hardship, as they are overrepresented in the informal sectors. Women in lockdown also face an increased risk of physical and psychological abuse. Children across the world are missing out on education and are at increased risk of suffering abuse and violence and, in situations of armed conflict, forced conscription. The pandemic and its ripple effects exacerbate the problem of modern slavery and human trafficking, which requires renewed determination to implement bold solutions, including those promoted by Liechtenstein's Finance Against Slavery and Trafficking initiative. All this points to the clear need for a better understanding of the links between pandemics and security. The Security Council should significantly increase its efforts to analyse these links with a view to improving early and preventive action. Today's debate is a good start to that discussion, and Liechtenstein expresses its hope that the Council will sustain its engagement.
