Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this debate, for
chairing the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions so effectively and for
providing the useful concept paper (S/2014/725, annex)
to help frame our discussions today. This annual debate
generates great interest among Council members and
the wider membership. We can see this again today
from the 40 non-Council members that have asked to
speak in the debate.

The Council has proved itselfthe most adaptable of
United Nations bodies. In recent years it has interacted
with a greater number of outside actors - civil
society, non-governmental organizations, academics
and others - through different types of innovative
meetings, including Arria Formula and other informal
interactive dialogues. It has become more transparent
with more open debates, public briefings, wrap-up
sessions and more honest briefings and reports to the
General Assembly. It has increasingly used technology
to facilitate its discussions - for example, the large
increase in the use ofvideo teleconferencing for briefers
overseas. It has developed a pattern of overseas visits to
help inform its work, and it has made more flexible use
of the range of Council products, particularly press and
presidential statements, to react to unfolding events.

But the Council needs to adopt a continuous-
improvement approach to working methods. In
particular, we need to get better at taking early
preventive action. That requires timely briefings from
early-warning actors across the United Nations. We can
develop more interactivity in informal consultations.
Despite recent efforts, those too often resemble a
formulaic exchange of positions. There is scope to cut
back the Council's formal agenda to create space to
address new challenges and to ensure that we remain
up to date. Some items on the formal agenda of the
Security Council have not been discussed for 60 years.
However, such improvements are only part of
helping the Security Council to take timely and effective
decisions. Effective follow-up action is just as important
as timely decisions. That brings me to the first of the
topics covered in the concept paper, and I want to thank
the International Criminal Court (ICC) Prosecutor of
her brief and clear recommendations today. I strongly
agree with her that the Council needs to do much more
to follow up its referrals to the International Criminal
Court.

The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of the
ICC's work to hold perpetrators of atrocities to account
and to achieve justice for victims. But the Court cannot
act alone. All United Nations Member States and the
Security Council have to play their part in full. The
Council must follow up substantively on its referrals,
especially where the ICC is not receiving the cooperation
from States that it needs to operate effectively. We must
all remember that the decision by the Council to refer
a situation to the ICC does not in itself bring justice
to victims or accountability for perpetrators. It is an
important step in that process, but international justice
requires sustained and concerted international efforts,
including through this Council.

The United Kingdom regrets that the Council has
so far failed to agree on responses to letters from the
President of the ICC relating to the Court's findings
of non-cooperation because those responses are being
blocked by a small number of Council members who
are not themselves States parties to the ICC. We call
once again on all Council members to live up to their
responsibilities to agree on timely and effective follow-
up action, starting with responses to the letters that the
Council has received.

Let me turn to the second topic in the concept paper.
I want to thank the Ombudsperson for her forceful and
compelling briefing this morning.

The United Kingdom continues to be a strong
supporter of fair and clear procedures for United
Nations sanctions regimes. In particular, we have
supported the strengthening of due-process provisions
under the sanctions regime of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, which
include the creation of the Ombudsperson position and
the important subsequent steps to develop her role. The
Ombudsperson has strengthened the regime by keeping
listings relevant to the current threat posed by Al-Qaida.
She has conducted her role independently and fairly, and
I salute her obsession with fair process. We note that the
Ombudsperson's most recent report (S/2014/553) shows
both delistings and retentions, thereby demonstrating
the impartial nature of that process.

The creation of the Ombudsperson role for the
1267 regime shows that the Security Council can create
innovative and effective solutions to specific problems.
However, each regime has its own set of challenges
that may require specific solutions tailored for those
circumstances, rather than replicating an identical
approach for all. We stand ready to consider practical
recommendations for improving due process, including
in the context of the high-level review of United Nations
sanctions. For instance, we see scope for developing the
role of the focal point and for improving the provision
of reasons both for retaining individuals on sanctions
list and for decisions to delist.

We will continue to be staunch advocates of
efficient and transparent working methods of the
Security Council, and of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency agenda more broadly. As you,
Madam President, and Council colleagues will recall, we
practiced those principles during the United Kingdom's
presidency of the Security Council in August. Simply
by observing the guidelines set out in note S/2010/507,
starting meetings on time and encouraging speakers to
limit their remarks, allowed us to get through a lot of
important Council business more effectively.

We are also strong supporters of Security Council
reform, and as such we are active proponents of
improving the working methods of this Council. Apart
from anything else, an expanded Council will certainly
require more efficient working methods if it is to get
through the business it will need to do.

