Monsignor Kassas (spoke in French): At the
outset, my delegation would like to thank the Japanese
presidency of the Security Council for having convened
this open debate on peacebuilding in Africa.

The varied results of the peacebuilding efforts
of African countries in post-conflict situations show
that there is no one single model for peacebuilding.
Certain countries have achieved peace and stability
and sustainable development, while others continue
to sink into extreme poverty, with unstable or even
non-existent institutions.

My delegation would like to begin by mentioning the
role that popular movements, faith-based organizations
and local communities play in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. They have concrete knowledge of local
realities and interact closely with the local population.
They enable individuals and societies at the local level to
identify and encourage the development of new leaders
and to mobilize communities to work together for the
common good. They achieve results that individuals
and local communities can easily recognize and with
which they can identify.

In that regard, the Catholic Church in Africa
contributes directly to conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, thanks to its ubiquitous presence as
reflected by its tens of thousands of institutions, such
as hospitals and dispensaries, as well as schools and
other training centres. Catholic humanitarian and
charity organizations work in all African countries in
various areas, promoting dialogue in villages, providing
emergency assistance and building the capacities of
small businesses. The Holy See supervises this vast
network of rapid-impact programs over the medium
and the long term in order to optimize education and
health-care services, ensure that conflict-prevention
efforts continue and build peace through dialogue and
comprehensive human development.

The Holy See believes that in order to achieve
sustainable peace, people must be brought together in
a spirit of dialogue, so that divergent positions can be
heard and solutions found, agreed and implemented.
Furthermore, the contributions of women and young
people are particularly important to peacebuilding. In
that respect, the Holy See commends the efforts of the
Council and of national Governments to accord greater
recognition to the vital role of women in preventive
diplomacy, mediation and the peacebuilding process.
Furthermore, the Holy See urges the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations to recognize young
people as active individuals, participants, leaders and
partners in the peace process.
Conflict prevention and peacebuilding efforts
demand that we press to make more progress in
disarmament and in controlling both the legal and
the illegal arms trade. The proliferation of weapons
exacerbates conflict and leads to an enormous cost, both
human and material, which deeply affects the search for
peace. It is the responsibility of the entire international
community to take advantage of the concrete efforts in
that area and to support the engagement of civil society
and religious institutions to that end with a view to
preventing conflicts.

Peacebuilding will not be effective unless human
rights are promoted and encouraged, unless the human
dignity of every human being is recognized and
protected and unless we all stand together in mutual
solidarity, leaving no one behind. During his visit to
Brazil three years ago, Pope Francis said:

"No amount of peacebuilding will be able to last,
nor will harmony and happiness be attained in a
society that ignores, pushes to the margins or
excludes a part of itself. A society of that kind
simply impoverishes itself, it loses something
essential. We must never allow the throwaway
culture to enter our hearts. We must never allow
that because we are brothers and sisters. No one is
disposable."

