Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I should like to thank Egypt for its outstanding
presidency of the Security Council last month and
to congratulate Ethiopia through you, Sir, for having
assumed the presidency for the month of September.
You can naturally count on France's full support for
the coming month, which looks to be particularly
busy. I thank you for having convened this emergency
meeting upon our joint request alongside the United
States, the United Kingdom, the Republic of Korea
and Japan. I also thank Jeffrey Feltman for his very
enlightening briefing.

Yesterday, North Korea once again crossed a
major red line towards escalation. After launching two
intercontinental ballistic missiles and placing one ofthe
countries of the region in clear and present danger, last
night it carried out its sixth nuclear test. The event was
immediately detected by the International Monitoring
System of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization.

Through its highest ranking officials, my country
has voiced its most vehement condemnation of that
event. In addition to the expression of solidarity that I
offer to the countries of the region on behalf of France,
with deep concern, I am calling on the countries of
the international community to be lucid and firm.
Obviously, each one of us is concerned today because
each on of us is threatened.

Let us make no mistake. In just a few months,
the threat has changed in its dimensions and even its
nature. The threat is no longer merely regional. It is
global. It is no longer merely virtual. It is immediate.
It is no longer merely serious. It is existential. This
serious and global threat endangers our security,
strategic stability and international peace. Through its
sixth nuclear test, the Pyongyang regime continues to
violate its obligations, and defy us. Every one of the
actions taken by the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea corresponds to its relentless, continuous and
methodical work to make its dangerous obsession into
a reality as quickly as possible. I am speaking of the
possession of an operational nuclear arsenal aimed at
changing not only the regional but the international
balance. The combination of nuclear capability, to
which I referred, and North Korean intercontinental
ballistic missiles constitutes henceforth an erga omnes
danger everywhere.

In that regard, weakness or prevarication is not an
option. That is why France calls for a swift, firm and
unified response from the Security Council, based in
particular on three specific points: the rapid adoption
of new sanctions on the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, very strict implementation of existing
sanctions by all actors concerned and the adoption of
additional measures by the European Union. Let us be
cognizant of the fact that time is running out. We know
that Pyongyang does not hesitate and will not hesitate
to sacrifice its own people in order to flout the most
basic rules we have devised on non-proliferation and
so on. That is understood to be a major threat to the
very foundation of our entire law and security system;

one that we cannot accept. We are all responsible for
ensuring that that system is respected, preserved and
even strengthened; our credibility is at stake.

There are those who believe that the international
community is not willing to engage in dialogue but,
regrettably, the current situation is not at all conducive
to negotiations. My country has always supported
dialogue. Nonetheless, it must be noted that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has not given
us even the smallest sign or assurance that it would
perhaps be willing to negotiate on its nuclear and
ballistic activities. In the light of such blatant disregard
for international law and the authority of the Security
Council, there can be no compromise. We have stated
on multiple occasions that the violation of Council
decisions cannot be treated as a commodity. We cannot
allow others to dictate our response.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea must end
its nuclear and ballistic programme in a comprehensive,
verifiable and irreversible manner and meet its
international obligations without delay. France also
believes that it should join the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty. A firm collective response alone will
be effective in successfully bringing the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, without conditions, to the
negotiating table. We must remain accountable in fully
implementing existing sanctions. They are not an end
in themselves, but they are indispensable.

Let us recall that major economic sanctions were
adopted by the Council only in 2016, and they are
having an effect. Nonetheless, in the light of new
developments, we must put maximum pressure on the
Pyongyang regime. France therefore supports the swift
adoption of new sanctions, in particular economic and
sectoral sanctions, by the Council. As I said, we remain
resolute and committed to similar efforts within the
European Union.

In the worrisome spiral of one-upmanship and
provocation in which it finds itself, the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea must bear the consequences
of its unremitting obstinacy. The only response that we
can provide is a very stringent, unambiguous policy,
with the end goal of a complete dismantling of the
Republic's programmes. Only through a strict policy
and maximum pressure on the regime will we be able
to change the course of events, bring the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to the negotiating table,
without conditions, and embark on the path to a political
settlement to the crisis.

Given the acute and extremely serious threat, the
Security Council must shoulder its responsibility. Rest
assured of France's resolute commitment in that regard,
as a permanent member of the Security Council.

