Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): It is a great pleasure
to see you, Mr. Minister, presiding over our meeting.
We would also like to join previous speakers in
welcoming President Paul Kagame to this Chamber and
thanking him for his very important, comprehensive
and constructive briefing.

As is known, and as has been clearly confirmed
by President Kagame, security in the Great Lakes
region depends directly on the security situation in
each individual country. The general analysis of the
situation proves that the main causes of conflict in the
region, as well as of overall instability, are ethnic
divergence, weak political governance linked to the
lack of national dialogue, the presence of uncontrolled
armed groups, flows of refugees, fluid borders and
poverty.

In this regard, we would like to put special
emphasis on the problem of fluid borders between
countries, which has become one of the main causes of
insecurity in the whole region. This factor leads to the
uncontrolled movement of armed groups and refugees
and does not contribute to creating a favourable
political environment for strengthening national
dialogue. In this regard, we would like to underline the
crucial role to be played by the international
community in resolving the problem through the
elaboration of a comprehensive regional strategy. The
resolution of specific conflicts in the area, in particular
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
Burundi, requires regional approaches involving a wide
range of existing confidence-building mechanisms. In
this context, we entirely support the idea of convening
an international conference on the Great Lakes region,
under the auspices of the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity, which could be become
an important step towards the elaboration of a
constructive, comprehensive, regional approach to
address the problems.

At the same time, we believe that the
effectiveness of international support for the
maintenance of peace and security depends on the
implementation by the parties to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo of their
commitments in the framework of the Lusaka
Agreement and other peace arrangements, and their
readiness for national reconciliation and dialogue.

The crisis in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo generates the main context of general insecurity
in the Great Lakes region and has a very negative
impact on the fragile peace in the Central African
Republic and on the peace process in Burundi. It
should be recognized that without the restoration of
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, there
can be no lasting solution to the crisis in that part of
the world.

I would like to reiterate the position of my
Government by underlying the need for the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement and all
relevant resolutions by all the parties as the key to the
settlement of the conflict in the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo and the restoration of sustainable peace in
the whole area.

We welcome the outcome of the meeting between
President Paul Kagame and President Joseph Kabila in
Washington last week, at which the parties reaffirmed
their commitment to a constructive dialogue aimed at
resolving existing differences. We are convinced -
and this has been stressed by members of the Council
today - that there can be no military solution to the
most complex conflicts in Africa. We urge the
leadership of the countries in the area to take a
pragmatic approach towards the peace process, to
become good neighbours and to cooperate fully for the
sake of progress and peace in Africa.

