Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): I speak on behalf of
the member States of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC).

At the outset, Mr. President, I hasten to congratulate
your country most sincerely, as well as you and your
team, upon Rwanda's rejoining the Security Council
almost 20 years after the genocide. It is a remarkable
achievement, and we salute the people of Rwanda
and wish them continued full enjoyment of peace and
stability.

The current status quo of political stalemate
remains the most pressing concern and long-standing
challenge to the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the international community. Despite the promising
reality following the granting of observer State status
to Palestine by an overwhelming majority of States
members ofthe General Assembly on 29 November 2012
(see A/67/PV.44), the OIC believes that the implications
arising from the significant missed opportunities we
have seen are definitely unfavourable, especially in the
light of the highly unstable and volatile situation in the
Middle East.

Despite the support granted by the majority of
States Members of the United Nations to resolution
67/ 19 elevating Palestine to the status of observer State,
Israel, the occupying Power, persists in carrying out
illegal policies in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, by expanding settlements,
building an apartheid wall, detaining thousands of
Palestinians and illegally besieging the Gaza Strip.
All these activities now threaten to undermine the
prospects for the two-State solution and to destabilize
the region. In that regard, the OIC calls upon the
international community to ensure Israel's halt of its
settlement policies and enable the Palestinian people
to exercise their inalienable rights, in line with United
Nations resolutions and international law.

The detention of Palestinians is very alarming.
That miserable and hopeless scenario is repeating itself,
against the backdrop of pervasive Israeli repressive and
inhumane measures, and shows no sign of ending. The
resort by Palestinians to refusing food can be seen as a
rejection of the widespread harsh and injurious Israeli
instrument known as administrative detention, which
is administered by military courts, so as to detain
Palestinians indefinitely, subject to half-yearly reviews.

At this critical time, the OIC underlines that prompt
action aimed at upholding the principles of right, justice
and freedom; the enforcement of international law;
and the implementation of resolutions of international
legality constitutes an obligation and a responsibility of
the Security Council. Such action is necessary in order
to maintain the prospects for peace and to accelerate its
realization through fulfilling the Palestinian people's
national rights to self-determination and independence;
finding an equitable settlement for Palestinian refugees
based on General Assembly resolution 194 (III);
resolving the Israel-Palestine conflict; and, ultimately,
achieving a durable peace in the region that will lead to
the establishment of an independent State of Palestine
on pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

The OIC remains very concerned over the human
rights violations committed against Palestinians in
Israeli prisons. The death of the Palestinian prisoner
Maysara Abu Hamdieh last month in an Israeli jail not
only exposes the inhumane policies and systematic
violations perpetrated by the Israeli occupation
against Palestinian prisoners, but also requires the
international community to take urgent and effective
action in order to defend Palestinian prisoners' human
rights, save their lives and pressure Israel to respect its
obligations towards Palestinian prisoners in accordance
with international humanitarian law and the Geneva
Conventions, and to release them immediately.

The OIC underlines that the blockade imposed
by Israel on the Gaza Strip constitutes a collective
punishment of the civilian population; has a serious
social, economic and humanitarian impact on the
living conditions of the Palestinian population; and
represents a serious threat to regional peace and
stability. In that regard, the OIC reiterates its firm and
unwavering demand for an immediate end to the illegal
and inhumane Israeli blockade and the opening of all
crossing points controlled by Israel, to allow for the
free movement of persons and goods into and from the
Gaza Strip.

The Organization of Islamic Cooperation is
very concerned over the deteriorating situation and
the ongoing bloodshed, violence and destruction of
property in Syria, and it stresses the need to preserve
Syria's unity, sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. The OIC therefore calls for the immediate
cessation of the violence, killing and destruction, for
the respect of Islamic values and human rights, and for
saving Syria from the danger of an all-out civil war. It
is sad, indeed painful, to acknowledge that the minaret
of Syria's famous twelfth-century Ummayad mosque in
Aleppo has today been destroyed.

The OIC urges the Syrian regime to immediately
stop the killing of its citizens and engage in a serious
dialogue between the National Coalition of Syrian
Revolution and Opposition Forces and representatives
of the Syrian Government, in order to pave the way for
a transition process that would enable the Syrian people
to achieve their legitimate aspirations for democratic
reform and change.

However, the OIC, while reiterating its commitment
to a peaceful solution to the crisis in Syria, calls upon
the international community, in particular the Security
Council, to assume its responsibilities and act promptly
to stop the killing, destruction and displacement
perpetrated against the Syrian people, and to find a
peaceful and lasting solution to the Syrian crisis.

In closing, I wish to reaffirm the full support
and solidarity of the OIC with the Palestinian people
in their endeavour to regain their legitimate and
inalienable national rights, including their right of
return and self-determination and the establishment
of their independent Palestinian State on their national
soil, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

