Mr. Seepanovic' (Montenegro): We thank you, Sir,
for having organized this important open debate and
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January. We also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Patriota
of Brazil; and Nobel Peace Laureate Leymah Gbowee
for their valuable briefings.

Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I would like, however, to add some remarks in my
national capacity.

It is hard to remember a time when the United
Nations, its agencies and the broader international
community were facing more simultaneous crises.
Conflicts hit hardest those who are most vulnerable,
making it impossible to improve their lives. It is our
duty to help resolve conflicts. We must share the burden
and prove that we are capable of building a peaceful,
equitable and just future through joint concrete action
and a proactive approach, based on a framework of
justice and progress, tolerance and the dignity of all
human beings. However, maintaining international
peace and security is not only the task of the United
Nations and other international organizations; it is
a process of individual, collective and institutional
transformation. All Member States, civil society bodies
and individuals have a responsibility to take action
in the process of inclusive development based on the
universal values of respect for life, justice, solidarity,
human rights and equality between men and women.

It is therefore important to recall that
non-discrimination and the inclusion of all groups
in the workings of society are enormous assets that
contribute to our well-being and enhance the vital
perception of social justice, trust and systemic
legitimacy. An enabling environment for inclusive
institution-building essential for peaceful societies free
of conflict implies the active engagement of national
and local authorities, parliaments, communities, civil
society, academia and women's groups. Important focus
must also be placed on transparency, accountability and
effective management and oversight, with a view to
strengthening the legitimacy and integrity of security
and judicial institutions.

Through inclusive education and the implementation
of a variety of inclusive programmes and projects,
younger generations should be equipped with the
self-confidence and ambition to be constructive and
valued members of society and to succeed in this new
globalized economy, promoting peace, tolerance and
diversity. In combination, all of these aspects will
contribute to an inclusive approach and to our common
objective of safeguarding international peace and
security. And this is primarily the responsibility of all
Member States and regions.

We in Montenegro know from our experience
that the best and only truly sustainable way to resolve
differences and rectify tensions and conflict situations
is through peaceful means in a spirit of dialogue and
committed to diplomatic and political efforts and tools.
Countries need to demonstrate strong commitment to
the rule of law, respect for human rights and freedoms,
democracy and the non-use of force in settling disputes.
Regional and subregional organizations can play a
positive and valuable role in facilitating dialogue and
setting a conciliatory tone towards conflict resolution,
as we have seen in many instances in Africa.

However, if Member States fail to address these
challenges, as is often the case in the current, fragile
international peace and security context, it is the
Security Council that should address these issues. We
must recognize that we are far from having a truly
effective system. In order to ensure that the United
Nations maintains its rightful place as the central
mechanism of global governance, our Organization
must take a modern, reformed shape that recognizes
the new geopolitical realities and the world's evolving,
multifaceted conditions and environments.

As many examples across the world familiar to
us all have shown, prevention and early intervention
can and do work, and they are cost-effective. That is
why I would like to underline, as on previous similar
occasions, the significance of the United Nations early-
detection and early-warning mechanisms, as well as
the establishment of mediation as a core function of
the United Nations. Our focus on preventive measures
should definitely be strengthened in order to prevent
crises from developing and escalating, and to mitigate
the possible repercussions of crisis.

The responsibility to protect and its further
operationalization must also remain a priority. In the
era of accountability, perpetrators of crimes against
humanity should not go unpunished. It is only by
strengthening inclusive and democratic institutions,
good governance and the rule of law that the structural
causes of poverty, inequality and violence can be
tackled. We advocate for these issues to be given
a prominent place in the post-2015 development
agenda and for the protection and empowerment of all
individuals to be ensured.

Let me underscore that today's threats must be
tackled through j oint efforts and in an integrated manner
across the entire nexus of development, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding, the rule of law and human rights. In this
way, we can have a balanced and sustainable society
with durable peace. Montenegro will continue to be
reliable partner of the United Nations, working for
international peace and security, proud of its values and
its achievements, and confident in the future.

