Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We join others in expressing sympathy to the
families of all those who have been killed or injured in
the terrorist attacks in Iraq. It is our firm position that
the methods resorted to by terrorists cannot be
tolerated.

We thank Mr. Benon Sevan for his very detailed
briefing. The work to wind down the humanitarian
programme is now reaching its final stage. It is very
important that this entire issue be reviewed regularly in
the Security Council and the sanctions Committee.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General and his
representatives for the work that has already been done
and is still being done on this matter. Resolution 1483
(2003) set the Secretariat a number of very difficult
tasks. Carrying them out has been made even more
difficult because of the severe worsening of the
security situation in Iraq. Nonetheless, we are
convinced that at this point not all possibilities have
been exhausted for the efficient conclusion of the work
of the humanitarian programme. In particular, it will be
necessary to step up efforts to identify priority
contracts using the working mechanism involving the
specialized agencies of the United Nations, the
Coalition Provisional Authority and Iraqi
representatives.

As of 21 November, some 1,600 funded
contracts - about $1.5 billion worth - are not among
the prioritized contracts. These include not only those
that have not been classified as being of relative utility
but also those that have simply not been reviewed by
the tripartite group.

Given the dismal situation of the Iraqi economy,
and in the light of the contribution that could be made
to reconstruction by deliveries through the
humanitarian programme, we believe that by 21
November, using the current system for prioritizing, all
of the funded contracts must have been reviewed. This
is a particularly important issue now, because it is not
clear whether prioritization will be continued in future
by the Coalition Provisional Authority. In order to
ensure the proper monitoring of this process, we would
suggest requesting that the Office of the Iraq
Programme include in its weekly briefings to us
detailed information about how many contracts were
not given priority status, and for what reason.

We are also extremely concerned about the issue
of reaching agreement on conditions for the execution
of prioritized contracts between the United Nations
specialized agencies and the suppliers. The
humanitarian programme will be drawing to a close
very soon, but the number of contracts that have been
amended is still too low. As a consequence, by 21
November the execution of many priority contracts
could be in doubt. They are contracts for the delivery
of goods, for which there is an acute humanitarian
need. The importance of the swift execution of
contracts has been noted by the Iraqi Government and
representatives of the Coalition Provisional Authority.

Of course, we expect the United Nations agencies
and programmes to do their utmost to ensure that this
work is completed by 21 November, and that will
determine the assessment and work of the Council on
terminating the humanitarian programme. We cannot
under any circumstances allow priority contracts not to
be delivered to the Iraqi people simply because there is
no time for their proper technical handling.

We welcome the deployment of the new
mechanism for the delivery of humanitarian supplies
and the confirmation of payments to countries
neighbouring Iraq. At the same time, we are worried
about the lack of clarity as to how the mechanism will
continue after 21 November. Particularly worrying are
the current delays in authenticating the delivery of
supplies at the port of Umm Qasr. Many suppliers have
begun to shift their deliveries to places where Cotecna
personnel are located. If we wait until Cotecna's
authority ends under resolution 1483 (2003), there will
be large amounts of humanitarian goods stockpiled at
the ports of entry.

It is important for the Coalition Provisional
Authority to inform all possible exporters in good time
about future arrangements for deliveries. We trust that
that will be done in the very near future.

Three weeks before the termination of the
humanitarian programme, too many problems are
interfering with its proper winding down. We appeal to
all the parties involved to make every effort to ensure
that the final result of their work meets the needs of the
Iraqi people and responds to the legitimate interests of
the suppliers.

