Mr. Pak Gil Yon (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July.

It is unjustifiable and gangster-like for the
Security Council to debate the missile launch exercise
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, both in
view of the competence of the Security Council and
under international law. The delegation of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea resolutely
condemns the attempt by some countries to misuse the
Security Council for the despicable political aim of
isolating and pressuring the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, and totally rejects the resolution
adopted earlier at this meeting of the Security Council.

The latest successful missile launches were part
of a routine military exercise staged by the Korean
People's Army to increase the nation's military
capacity for self-defence. The Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's exercise of its legitimate right as a
sovereign State is bound neither to any international
law nor to bilateral or multilateral agreements, such as
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea-Japan
Pyongyang Declaration and the joint statement of the
six-party talks.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea is
not a signatory to the Missile Technology Control
Regime and therefore is not bound to any commitment
under it.

As for the moratorium on long-range missile test
flights, which the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea agreed with the United States in 1999, it was
valid only when the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea-United States dialogue was under way.

The Bush Administration, however, scrapped all
the agreements that the preceding United States
Administration had concluded with the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and totally scuttled the
bilateral dialogue. The Democratic People's Republic
of Korea had already clarified, in March 2005, that its
moratorium on missile test firing had lost its validity.
The same can be said of the moratorium on long-range
test firing which the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea had agreed with Japan in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea-Japan Pyongyang
Declaration in 2002.

In that Declaration, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea expressed its intention to extend
beyond 2003 the moratorium on missile firing, in the
spirit of the Declaration. That step was taken on the
premise that Japan would move to normalize its
relations with the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea and redeem its past. The Japanese authorities,
however, have abused the good faith of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. They have not honoured
their commitment; indeed, they have internationalized
the abduction issue, pursuant to the United States
hostile policy towards the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, although the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea had fully settled the issue. Such
behaviour has brought overall relations between the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and Japan to
where they were before the publication of the
Declaration. It is a manifestation of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's broad magnanimity that,
in this situation, it had put the missile launch on hold
for so long.

The joint statement of the six-party talks of 19
September 2005 stipulates the commitments to be
fulfilled by the six sides to the talks to denuclearize the
Korean peninsula. However, no sooner had the joint
statement been adopted than the United States applied
financial sanctions against the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and, through them, escalated
pressure on it in various fields. The United States, at
the same time, has totally hamstrung efforts to
implement the joint statement through such threats and
blackmail as large-scale military exercises targeted
against the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

It is clear to everyone that there was no need for
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
unilaterally put on hold the missile launch in such a
situation. That being a stark fact, it is a far-fetched
assertion, grossly falsifying reality, for them to claim
that routine missile launches conducted by the Korean
People's Army for self-defence have strained the
regional situation and blocked the progress of the
dialogue. It is a lesson taught by history, and a stark
reality of international relations proven by the Iraqi
crisis, that upsetting the balance of forces is bound to
create instability and crisis, and even spark a war. But
for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
tremendous deterrent in self-defence, the United States
would have attacked the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea more than once, as it has listed my country as
part of an axis of evil and a target of pre-emptive
nuclear attack. Peace in the Korean peninsula and in
the region would have been seriously disturbed. The
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's missile
development, test firing, manufacture and deployment
therefore serve as a key to keeping the balance of
forces and to preserving peace and stability in North-
East Asia.

It is also preposterous for them to term the latest
missile launches a provocation and the like for the
simple reason that the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea did not send prior notice of them. It would be
quite foolish to notify Washington and Tokyo of
missile launches in advance, given that the United
States, which is technically at war with the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, has been threatening for a
month to intercept the latter's missiles, in collusion
with Japan. We would like to ask the United States and
Japan if they have ever notified the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea of their ceaseless missile
launches in the areas close to it.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
remains unchanged in its will to denuclearize the
Korean peninsula in a negotiated, peaceful manner, just
as it committed itself in the 19 September joint
statement of the six-party talks. The latest missile
launch exercises are quite irrelevant to the six-party
talks.

The Korean People's Army will go on with
missile launch exercises as part of its efforts to bolster
deterrence for self-defence in the future, too. The
Democratic People's Republic of Korea will have no
option but to take stronger physical actions in other
forms should any other country dare to take issue with
the exercises and put pressure upon it.

