Mr. Esaw (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
allow me to convey the condolences and solidarity of
our country following the terrorist acts that recently
struck the people of Pakistan. I would also like to
commend your country for organizing today's debate
on the question of a comprehensive approach to counter-
terrorism and to welcome the presence in New York of
Ms. Hina Rabbani Khar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Pakistan, to preside over this meeting. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General, not only for his briefing
on the topic under discussion, but also for all his efforts
and for the ongoing United Nations initiatives to curb
terrorism.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
In recent years, terrorism has become one of the
most serious threats to international peace and security.
Indeed, the killings, kidnappings, hostage-taking and
murders committed and called for by terrorists are
serious violations of the rights to life and to live in a
peaceful environment. Terrorism threatens the very
survival of States. Consequently, this scourge remains
the focus of the attention of the international community
and especially of the Security Council. Today's debate
is a perfect illustration of that.

Unfortunately, the tireless efforts to deal with it
are far from achieving the expected results because
terrorists take advantage of cutting-edge technologies
and financial resources derived from criminal acts
of all kinds, such as illicit trafficking in drugs and
the payment of ransoms, in order to reorganize. In
addition, the propensity of terrorists often to operate
through business enterprises, associations and
non-governmental organizations, which comprise their
support networks, further complicates the fight against
terrorism. As a result, the threats become more complex
and require our States to devote significant resources to
the fight against terrorism at a time when they must
also face many challenges that are urgent in many ways
because they are related to the fight against poverty and
the achievement of sustainable development goals.

Given its various manifestations and mutations, it
is important to define the phenomenon of terrorism in
order to better fight it. It is therefore necessary to better
understand the reasons and motives that drive actors
to turn to terrorism. As we know, it more generally
feeds off of situations of social vulnerability and the
frustrations of individuals, especially young people,
who are willing to offer their services for sordid causes
in order to survive. Development and security thus
interact on the levels of both causes of terrorism and its
consequences.

It is also important to remember that religious
fundamentalism and sectarianism act as leavening
agents for terrorism. Based on beliefs, dogmas and
membership in a community, criminal groups use that
form of expression, intolerant and uncompromising, as
a means to assert their opinions.

Another motive may be related to the
internationalization of economies and societies,
which has made the process of change more global
and complex, creating a situation in which the State
finds itself competing with and sometimes defeated
by private interests dominated more by the pursuit of
profit than by other values related to human dignity.

Unfortunately, the economic and financial crises
of recent years, which no nation was able to stave off,
have further widened the gap between rich and poor
and have led to frustration, despair and even to losing
the reason to live. It is that vulnerability that terrorist
organizations and groups exploit when they recruit
desperate people to carry out their demands through
terrorist acts, behind which they hide and for which
they claim responsibility so that they can bask in the
prestige of being fighters forjustice.

The spectrum of factors leading to the spread of
terrorism is therefore broad. However, my delegation
believes that even if poverty, discrimination and
prejudice are factors that feed terrorism, nojustification
can prevail in the commission of criminal acts when
there are frameworks for dialogue, negotiation and a
search for compromise in which the various actors can
assert their claims or views.

Given the scale of the terrorist acts that undermine
societies and bring about disastrous consequences for
States and entire regions - as is the case for the Sahel
region, includingMali, andin Somalia-the international
community must remain constantly mobilized. We
therefore welcome the counter-terrorism efforts
in the United Nations framework, particularly the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which represents the willingness of Member States to
develop a common strategic approach to fight terrorism
effectively and sustainably. In that regard, my country
welcomes the recent review of the Strategy, which
allows for continuous updating of the various aspects
that need to be addressed in the light of the changing
nature of terrorism,

The commitment of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force to allow States to
have the capacity needed to deal with this scourge must
also be welcomed. In addition, Togo fully supports the
work of the Security Council committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
1373 (2001), and 1540 (2004), which are also at the
heart of the United Nations response to terrorism.

My country has always made the fight against
terrorism one of the top priorities of its actions. It has
also adopted the framework made up by the various
legal instruments adopted under the auspices of the
United Nations and regional organizations such as the
African Union, which aim to improve the effectiveness
of States' responses and those of the international
community with regard to the numerous manifestations
of terrorism.

Although there are a number of anti-terrorist legal
instruments in force for the purpose of strengthening
international anti-terrorist mechanisms, a general
convention on international terrorism should be
adopted to fill the gaps in existing treaties and to
strengthen international efforts designed to bring the
perpetrators of terrorist acts to justice. In that regard,
we believe that the consideration by States Members
of the United Nations of certain provisions of existing
regional legal texts, such as the Organization ofAfrican
Unity Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
Terrorism, of 14 July 1999, and its Protocol of 8 July
2004, could help to overcome the difficulties related to
the conclusion of an international convention.

Because of the impact of poverty, inequality and
intolerance of all sorts in the spread of terrorism, we
believe that the security and legal dimensions of the
fight against terrorism cannot be effective unless they
are also considered in the light of efforts related to
good governance, economic development, the creation
of viable democratic institutions, the strengthening of
the dialogue among civilizations, respect for cultural
differences and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Furthermore, the fight against terrorism should also
take human rights into account and promote their
effective implementation.

In other words, all measures taken to prevent and
fight against terrorism must respect the principle of the
rule of law and operate in accordance with international
law, including humanitarian law, international human
rights law and refugee law. In that regard, the United
Nations could commit to working towards model
legislation on terrorism-related offences, as specified
in the relevant conventions and protocols, as it had to
do when it acted in the areas of money-laundering and
the financing of terrorism.

A comprehensive approach to the fight against
terrorism cannot be effective unless it takes place in the
context of sustained international cooperation. Synergy
of action, the sharing of information between the
different institutions involved in the fight and technical
and financial assistance are essential to achieve, in the

short and medium terms, the eradication of the constant
threat hanging over all countries and all peoples.

Togo believes that it is through combined actions
at the bilateral, regional and international levels that
States, especially the less affluent, may expect to
fight effectively against terrorism. To that end, the
central coordinating role of the United Nations must be
reaffirmed and supported by all States.

