Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of December. The Chinese delegation will fully
support you in your work.

I wish also to thank Mr. Annabi for his detailed
briefing. The Chinese delegation endorses the relevant
analysis and views set out in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2001/1132). Further, we place on
record our appreciation for the endeavours of
Mr. Jacques Paul Klein and his team.

The main task of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) is to set up a
professional, democratic and non-discriminatory police
force in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are pleased to
note that since the last report of the Secretary-General
the Mission has made marked progress in the areas of
police reform, training and justice. We must, of course,
acknowledge that many problems remain, and we hope
that judicial reform will therefore be stepped up.
Beyond that process, it is our hope that the nation-
building capacity of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will be enhanced.

We appreciate UNMIBH's efforts to recruit and
train police from ethnic minorities. We hope that the
Mission will make a greater effort, on the basis of
justice and ethnic equality, to ensure the multi-ethnic
character of the Bosnia and Herzegovina police force.

We note with satisfaction that, with the improved
security situation and with further cooperation by some
local officials, more minority refugees are returning to
their homeland. Here, two main problems persist: the
issue of security and inadequate housing. The latter is
the major bottleneck, and we hope that the relevant
United Nations agencies and the international
community at large will focus on that problem and will
provide support.

We support United Nations agencies as they play
a positive role in the process of peace and development
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We hope they will enhance
their coordination and will cooperate through an
appropriate division of labour with a View to improving
efficiency.

The United Nations Mission is expected to
complete its core mandate by December 2002. We
agree with the Secretary-General that thereafter there
will still be a need for continued efforts to preserve
what has been achieved. But we also believe that a new
model is needed. The Secretary-General has set out an
idea on this matter in paragraph 36 of his report, and
the Chinese delegation supports that idea. The
Secretary-General has instructed his Special
Representative to begin preparations in that regard,
about which we hope we will be informed as soon as
possible.

While regional actors are involved, we hope that
United Nations agencies too will step up their
coordination and will play an important role in a joint
economic rehabilitation effort for the country. That is
crucial if there is to be lasting peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

