Mr. Lelong (Haiti) (interpretation from French):
The delegation of Haiti is gratified to see you, Sir,
guiding the work of the Security Council during the
month of December. We are convinced that your
outstanding qualities and great experience will assist the
Council in successfully addressing the important items on
its programme of work for this month.

I take this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador
Nugroho Wisnumurti of Indonesia who, in an outstanding
manner, guided the Council's deliberations during the
month of November.

The Council is today considering a question that is
of considerable importance for the democratic process in
my country. This is the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH),
which expired on 30 November.

The Council is well aware of the vital role played by
the United Nations peace Mission in improving the
situation in Haiti since it was deployed 20 months ago to
continue the work of the Multinational Force in Haiti,
which had allowed for the establishment of an atmosphere
conducive to a return to a constitutional system. The Blue
Helmets provided assistance in various areas, ranging
from the maintenance of security to the rehabilitation of
institutions, as well as in development activities. Thanks
to the protective presence of the United Nations Mission
in Haiti (UNMIH), the Haitian Government was able to
disband the army, which was principally responsible for
the political instability and human-rights violations in the
country, and to establish the National Police in its place.
As for UNSMIH, which followed UNMIH, it has assisted
the Government in improving the professionalism of the
Police and in maintaining security and stability conducive
to the success of ongoing efforts to rebuild the country.

Thus, considerable progress has been made, at the
very least in coping with the crises that have disturbed
public order and have recently been settled firmly and
calmly by intervention units, in spite of domestic and
foreign pressures. It is also gratifying to note that,
recently, no acts against human dignity have been
committed by any Police personnel.

I pay tribute here to the actions of all the men and
women who have contributed to this progress. We wish
to thank the Secretary-General's Special Representative
for Haiti, Enrique ter Horst, the commanders of the
military and civilian police units and the soldiers and
policemen for their devotion. To the Friends of the

 
Secretary-General for Haiti and to all of those who have
worked on this matter and helped us arrive at a solution, we
express our deep gratitude. I would like to extend special
thanks to Canada and the United States for their specific
contributions to the successful implementation of this
operation.

Aware that the international community's assistance to
the Haitian people in the area of public security will
continue to be indispensable to the Haitian Government in
its consolidation of democratic gains and pursuit of reform,
President Preval has decided to ask the Council to extend
the mandate of UNSMIH. This is also the view of the
Secretary-General, who, in his report S/ 1996/813/Add.l of
14 November 1996, recognizes the role played by the
military element of UNSMIH in assisting Haitian authorities
to contain the danger of destabilization by forces
threatening democracy and recommends the extension of
UNSMIH.

The Haitian delegation is particularly satisfied with the
positive outcome of the negotiations that have taken place
over the past few days on the extension of UNSMIH's
mandate, in the course of which the Council members were
able to agree on the draft resolution that the Council is
about to adopt unanimously. We should like to thank the
delegations involved, in particular those of the Russian
Federation and the People's Republic of China, which have
demonstrated understanding towards Haiti and its people.

During the next few months, the Government, assisted
by UN SMIH, will be working as fast as it can to strengthen
the National Police and to address the innumerable
shortcomings which still plague that young corps. In this
regard, an in-depth assessment of the Haitian National
Police was conducted that allowed us to draw up a precise
inventory of that institution, which is in the forefront of the
efforts of the Government to establish a state of law in
Haiti.

Thus, we have identified the Police's specific needs
regarding personnel, upper and middle management, basic
and advanced training, housing, mate'riel, office equipment,
transportation, and so on. On that basis, a schedule of
activities has been drawn up to ensure that, before the end
of next year, the Haitian National Police achieves a
satisfactory level of efficiency and is in a position to
maintain peace and security throughout our national
territory.

But, as is so well stated in the preamble of the draft
resolution, there is a link between peace and development.

 

If the efforts to consolidate democracy and to maintain
social stability are to bear fruit, a fierce struggle must be
waged against the poverty and unemployment that afflict
a significant part of the population. The disastrous state
of our economy does not allow the Government to meet
the basic needs of the population for food, health care and
education. The infrastructure of the country remains
largely dilapidated, rendering living conditions in the
country extremely difficult.

This serious socio-economic situation is a breeding
ground exploited by subversive groups to sow anxiety and
maintain a climate of instability that harms economic
investment and hinders the reform of institutions. The
release of international assistance, following the adoption
by Parliament of laws on the modernization of public
enterprises and civil service reform, should allow the
Government to launch long-awaited infrastructure projects
employing a great deal of manual labour. These should
have a positive impact on the country's economy and
reduce unemployment.

In the same context, we have just launched a
programme for agrarian reform designed to renew
agricultural production and give the peasants in the
countryside, who constitute more than 60 per cent of the
population, the means to cultivate their lands. There are
also Governmental initiatives designed to ease the poverty
in which the people are gripped.

Only two years after Haiti returned in constitutional
legality with the assistance of the international
community, the prospects are indeed encouraging. Every
day, democracy is gaining strength in the customs and
habits of the nation. The construction of a state of law is
advancing steadily. The establishment of infrastructure for
economic development is continuing. The success of this
experiment in Haiti - making the transition from
dictatorship to democracy - is also a success for the
international community, which, since 1990, has been at
the side of the Haitian people in its quest for justice,
democracy and a better life.

