I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to brief the Security Council. The African Union-United Nations joint special report (S/2020/1155), and its annex, on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), provide an update on the situation in Darfur. I will focus my remarks on the recommendations contained in the joint special report and what we foresee as the next steps and key issues. The joint special report recommendations should be considered in the broader context of milestone political developments, such as the signing of the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan on 3 October and the Government's national plan for the protection of civilians (see S/2020/429, annex), which was submitted to the Security Council earlier this year. They constitute a solid basis for addressing the root causes of the conflict in Darfur and other areas of the Sudan, and also create the necessary institutional framework for the parties to the peace agreement to jointly assume the primary responsibility to protect civilians. In that context, the African Union (AU) and the United Nations have had extensive discussions on the way forward for UNAMID. We held a Tripartite Coordination Mechanism meeting in Khartoum at the end of October and met with other Government officials at the national and Darfur state levels during my joint visit with Mr. Chergui, AU Commissioner for Peace and Security. Details of those discussions are presented in the joint special report. What is evident from those consultations is the firm and unequivocal resolve of the transitional Government to assume responsibility for the protection of civilians. We welcome and support that commitment. The national plan for the protection of civilians, developed by the transitional Government, is a comprehensive document that can serve as a basis for the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) and the United Nations country team to develop a complementary support strategy going forward. Pursuant to decree 360 of 13 October, the Government has begun to deploy to Darfur a civilian protection force, whose size and reach are intended to surpass that of UNAMID. This new security arrangement is also in line with the Juba peace agreement, which included the establishment of the joint security-keeping force, composed of Government forces and signatory armed movements, to maintain security and protect civilians in Darfur. During the reporting period, Darfur has seen a spike in clashes involving Sudan Liberation Army (SLA)-Abdul Wahid elements and in intercommunal violence. Attacks against internally displaced persons (IDPs), civilians and protesters have also continued throughout the year. That reflects trends related to seasonal migration, but also anxiety and uncertainty among the Darfuri constituencies about the ongoing transition at the national and state levels. The situation in volatile IDP camps, such as in Kalma in South Darfur, Sortony in North Darfur, and Hamadiya in Central Darfur, and the areas around Golo, in the Jebel Marra region, will be of particular concern, as the Government forces do not yet have a sustained presence there, or even access. We believe that the recent positive indications by SLA-Abdul Wahid of potential involvement in the peace process could bring about a change in the disposition and situation of those constituencies. In the light of these developments, the Tripartite Coordination Mechanism recommended the termination of UNAMID at the end of its current mandate, 31 December 2020, followed by a six-month period of drawdown and liquidation thereafter. The drawdown process will be a major undertaking in Darfur, and I would like to point out a few critical issues for the consideration of the Security Council. First, there is a need to coordinate international support for the Government and the parties to the Juba peace agreement, particularly its civilian protection force, in its efforts to protect civilians. This force is to be deployed to Darfur as UNAMID draws down. In that context, it is critical that we clarify the expectations and roles of UNAMID and the Government during the drawdown, in line with the UNAMID status-of-mission agreement. If the Security Council decides to terminate UNAMID's mandate on 31 December 2020, our troops and formed police units will cease operations as of | January 2021. Our remaining contingents would then be dedicated to the protection of the remaining UNAMID personnel, team sites and assets during the drawdown, while preparing for exit. In the event of a major security incident or threat to civilians in Darfur during this period, the onus would be on the transitional Sudanese authorities and the relevant institutions to respond, as UNAMID would not be able to intervene after 31 December if the mandate has ended. Secondly, it is critical that the transition from UNAMID to UNITAMS consolidate the gains made in peacebuilding. The State liaison functions funded by UNAMID have been a unique, innovative vehicle for joint planning and programming with the United Nations country team. UNAMID will continue supporting State liaison functions and other areas of substantive civilian support for peacebuilding, community engagement, human rights monitoring and police and rule of law assistance, including joint patrols with the Sudanese police, until the last day of its mandate, 31 December, if the mandate is not renewed. We must ensure that UNITAMS and the United Nations country team will be able to assist the Government during the drawdown period in maintaining peacebuilding support and enhancing protections so as to prevent a relapse of the conflict in fragile communities. Thirdly, coordinated political advocacy is required in order to support an orderly and safe drawdown of UNAMID and closure of the team sites. UNAMID is engaging both the central and local authorities, as well as community members, to ensure their cooperation during the drawdown, and also to address the claims and grievances of former national staff, which are increasingly being manifested through protests and demonstrations. The closure of team sites requires labour- intensive processes for environmental clean-up, repatriation and disposal of assets and equipment, including contingent- and United Nations-owned equipment - all of which must be secured throughout the process. The transitional Government has pledged its full support for the facilitation of an orderly and safe drawdown and liquidation process, as agreed in the outcome document of the Tripartite Coordination Mechanism on 25 October. However, at the local level, the operation is facing resistance from State authorities and local communities with regard to the removal and withdrawal of assets and equipment from the team sites. If the drawdown process is further accelerated, the Government would need to provide further concrete support at all levels to facilitate the process, including the identification of feasible and viable civilian end-users for the team sites and a robust security plan to prevent looting and other untoward incidents. Under-Secretary-General Khare will speak more on that issue. Notwithstanding those challenges, there is a real opportunity to end the decades-long conflict in Darfur through the implementation of the Juba peace agreement. The immediate peace dividends, the permanent ceasefire and the deployment of the joint security-keeping forces will change the dynamics on the ground and enhance ongoing Government efforts to gain the confidence of the local communities. That is the critical area for the United Nations and other international partners to further consider optimal modalities for support, in discussion with the parties. Finally, I would like to reiterate our appreciation for the African Union in managing the unprecedented hybrid mission. I would also like to commend the work of our colleagues in UNAMID. There were trying times in the history of UNAMID, but we believe that the presence of the mission averted large-scale violence in the difficult terrains and operating environments that it has faced. It is the responsibility of the transitional authorities of the Sudan and the parties to the Juba peace agreement, with the support of the international community, to safeguard the gains made by UNAMID.
