Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the delegation of Japan for having organized this open
debate on the implementation of the presidential note
of July 2006, contained in document S/2006/507. This
debate provides the opportunity to assess the status of
our ongoing efforts to improve the working methods of
the Council and to allow non-members to share their
observations and proposals.

We View the working methods as a tool to enable
the Council to act with greater effectiveness. They
must provide for the maintenance of a relationship of
transparency and interaction with the entire
membership of the United Nations at the various stages
of the decision-making process. The credibility and
effective authority of Council decisions are linked to
that process.

Expanding the openness of the Council and
strengthening its transparency and its interaction with
the rest of the United Nations are also means of
pursuing the goal of effectiveness. Effectiveness is by
no means opposed to openness; quite the contrary. The
Council acts in the name of all Members of our
Organization. It therefore cannot act effectively unless
it respects two conditions. It must both take into
account the concerns of Member States and give an
account of its work to them. That is possible only
through openness and transparency.

Since our most recent open debate on working
methods in August 2008 (see S/PV.5968), we have
made tangible progress that has contributed to the
transparency of Council decisions in a number of areas
that are important to all the Members of the United
Nations. First of all, cooperation in the crucial area of
peacekeeping has been improved. In particular, it has
been possible to establish more substantial dialogue
between troop-contributing countries and the Council
in the context of the Franco-British initiative on
improving the planning and monitoring of
peacekeeping operations, launched in January 2009. I
underscore the interest that has been shown in
organizing working meetings with troop- and police-
contributing countries prior to Council consultations.
That interstice allows for the effective participation of
military advisors and specialists in police-related and
political issues from the States providing contingents,
and it improves background discussions. We must
continue in this direction.

Secondly, dialogue with regional organizations
has evolved, as evidenced by the Council's debate
organized on this topic under the Chinese presidency in
January 2010 (see S/PV.6257).

Finally, the Council is organizing an increasing
number of open debates on a broad range of subjects in
order to benefit from the opinions of experts,
practitioners and the entire United Nations system.
This allows it ultimately to better address the new
challenges of peacekeeping and international security,
improve its consideration of these issues, and take new
measures as a result. The excellent quality of the texts
recently adopted by the Council on threats related to
terrorism, drug-trafficking, organized crime and
corruption are proof of that.

In conclusion, I commend Japan's excellent work
in its capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
My delegation contributes with interest to the current
evaluation of document S/2006/507 and is prepared to
learn new things from it on the basis of experience and
practice.

We believe that the following principles must
continue to guide our thinking. First, the Security
Council's work must be appropriately distributed
between public meetings and private consultations in
order to facilitate the resolution of issues under
consideration. In this regard, the members of the
Council must bear in mind that they have considerable
leeway in terms of organizing their meetings.

Secondly, the Council must continue to use that
flexibility to innovate by establishing new meeting
formats that are better adapted to the issues addressed
and more regular and flexible. My delegation is thus in
favour of establishing new formats that are more
flexible at each phase of the Council's decision-making
and negotiation process, without believing it necessary
to codify them. The members of the Council must
make the most of the flexibility that they have in their
working methods and thus continue to engage in their
considerations in a dynamic manner.

