Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Bosnia
and Herzegovina would like to thank France for putting
this important debate on the Security Council's agenda.
We would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, and Under-Secretaries-General Alain Le Roy
and Susana Malcorra. We would also like to thank
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
Ms. Ellen Margrethe Loj, Mr. Alan Doss and
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg for their clear
briefings.

Bosnia and Herzegovina wishes to align itself
with the statement to be made by the acting head of the
European Union delegation to the United Nations,
Mr. Pedro Serrano.

We would finally like to reiterate our gratitude to
the personnel of United Nations missions for their
dedicated work and daily commitment to advancing
peace and security.

As a police- and troop-contributing country - a
country, moreover, with critical experience of United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts -
Bosnia and Herzegovina is particularly cognizant of
the vital importance of this debate. Allow me to make a
few brief remarks.

It is a long road from an initial peace agreement
to sustainable peace. Travelling this road to the
endpoint requires clear and adequate mandates,
strategic planning and coherent implementation, as
well as the commitment of the host country. Only
through all this can the transition to peacebuilding
succeed.

This process begins with mandate design. To
achieve a successful transition, it is vital for mandates
to be clear, appropriate and sufficient to addressing
both immediate and long-term needs. A key part of that
mandate design is the definition of a desired outcome
that, as the draft presidential statement recognizes,
reflects the need to create conditions favourable to
sustainable peace. Appropriate and sufficient mandates
allow the United Nations mission to take full
advantage of the narrow window of opportunity to
effect rapid change in the immediate post-conflict
environment.

Furthermore, mandate renewal should not be
automatic, but rather sensitive to and conditioned upon
the evolution of in-country circumstances. This
presupposes a sustained focus by the United Nations on
cognitive capacity, that is, the ability to collate,
examine and interpret all the necessary data to assess
the mission's impact. The Security Council would
benefit from the availability of clear and precise
recommendations from the Secretariat, as referred to in
the draft presidential statement, at least one month
prior to mandate renewal.

At the same time, Bosnia and Herzegovina
attaches the utmost importance to defining exit
strategies for United Nations peacebuilding missions. A
clear exit strategy must be founded on a thorough
evaluation of the situation on the ground and an
accurate assessment of whether peacebuilding
processes have reached a lasting, irreversible stage. We
should not allow inaccurate assessments to prevail and
lead to the premature termination of missions.

Mandates must be matched from the start by
sufficient resources. It is widely recognized - and the
trials of our own experience bear this out - that early
investments are effective investments. Bosnia and
Herzegovina consequently endorses the precedents
relating to resources and achievable goals expressed in
the presidential statement of 5 August 2009
(S/PRST/2009/24) and the Secretary-General's report
of 20 April 2001 (S/2001/394).

Bosnia and Herzegovina stresses the significance
of including, wherever possible, integrated strategic
planning and benchmarks. Clear and carefully
calibrated benchmarks can help improve the Security
Council's strategic oversight of a mission's progress
towards sustainable peace. Such benchmarks will be
meaningful in direct proportion to the cognitive
capacity of the United Nations. We endorse the further
development of existing benchmarks for the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the creation of a strategic
integrated plan for the United Nations Mission in
Liberia.

To achieve a successful transition, coordination
among various actors and the coherence of complex,
integrated missions are of vital importance. Bosnia and
Herzegovina shares the common belief that regional
organizations, such as the European Union and the
African Union, can play a constructive role in
transitions. Most peacekeeping and peacebuilding
environments will involve an extensive array of
stakeholders. Drawing upon their best abilities is
essential to the success of the peacebuilding missions.
The peacebuilding initiatives that worked in Bosnia
and Herzegovina were marked by synergy between
multiple actors and, most important, between civilian
and military endeavours.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the belief that the
quality of dialogue among stakeholders can be further
improved. The Security Council, its Working Group of
the Whole on Peacekeeping Operations, the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the police- and troop-contributing
countries are all salient in planning and implementing
United Nations missions. In particular, the Security
Council could rely more upon the advice of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Finally, it has been exactly 18 years since the
United Nations Protection Force was deployed at the
very outset of the post-cold war period of
peacekeeping. Since that disastrous beginning, the
United Nations has notably improved the effectiveness
of its peacekeeping. It has entered into a new phase of
peacebuilding operations, which has had greater
success in achieving objectives, such as the sustained
peace in El Salvador.

Facing the challenges of an unprecedented degree
of global deployment of United Nations missions will
require further improvements, with particular reference
to mandate design, strategic planning, cognitive
capacity and coherence. The task will continue to
demand the political will of host countries and Member
States alike as an ineluctable prerequisite for
successful transitions and exit strategies. Bosnia and
Herzegovina stands ready to share its experiences and
looks forward to contributing fully to post-conflict
peacebuilding processes.

