I appreciate Germany's initiative to hold a Security Council meeting on Libya and welcome Foreign Minister Maas as the President of the meeting. The Libyan crisis has persisted for a decade, claiming tens of thousands of lives and displacing 400,000 people. It has brought untold suffering to the Libyan people, plunged the region into turmoil and undermined international peace and security. Even as we speak, the armed conflict in Libya continues unabated, opening the door to rampant terrorism, weapons proliferation and massive refugee outflows. The Berlin conference, held last January, reaffirmed the consensus of the international community, but its implementation is fraught with setbacks and challenges. It is imperative that the international community work to translate consensus into action, turn vision into reality on the ground and bring peace to the Libyan people as soon as possible. The Security Council has a particular duty to make that happen. In that connection, let me share the following four thoughts. First, achieving a comprehensive ceasefire and cessation of violence should be our immediate priority. We call on all parties in Libya to heed the call of Secretary- General Guterres for a global ceasefire, immediately pull back from hostilities and restart the 5+5 Joint Military Commission to de-escalate the conflict and bring about a lasting ceasefire. We urge all countries to honour Security Council resolutions, to refrain from involving themselves in the armed conflict or meddling in Libya's internal affairs and to strictly enforce Security Council provisions on the arms embargo. Secondly, striving for a political settlement is the only way forward. Resolution 2510 (2020) endorses the communique of the Berlin Conference and sends a message of support for a political settlement. We call on the parties in Libya to return to dialogue and pursue political, economic and military negotiations in parallel. The principle of a Libyan-led, Libyan-owned process must be upheld by all, and the role of the United Nations must be supported as the main channel of mediation. Regional organizations, such as the League of Arab States and the African Union, have unique resources for facilitating a political solution. They should be encouraged to play an important role. Thirdly, removing the spillover from the crisis is key. The international community must firmly reject terrorism in all its manifestations. In particular, it is imperative to forestall the cross-border movement of foreign terrorists, fight the terrorist organizations and individuals listed by the Security Council and prevent Libya from becoming a hotbed of terrorism. We understand the pressure faced by some countries from the inflow of refugees and commend their efforts to accommodate them. Yet the fundamental solution lies in ending the Libyan crisis and beginning reconstruction in the country. Fourthly, the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations must be adhered to. What we can learn from the decade-long turmoil in Libya is that attempts aimed at so-called regime change only spark turbulence and that military intervention only opens the door to endless trouble. As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations this year, we have a unique opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to its Charter, the principle of non-interference, respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity and the peaceful settlement of international disputes. Commitment to these fundamental principles serves as a major precondition for the Security Council to perform its duties and responsibilities effectively. It also provides a strong guarantee for upholding international peace and security. China's position on the Libyan situation has been consistent, objective and impartial. We respect Libya's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity, and we support a political settlement under the auspices of the United Nations. China will continue to work with the parties to hasten the day when the Libyan people will embrace the peace and development that they so richly deserve.
