Mrs. Chigiyal (Federated States of Micronesia): I
have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of
the Pacific small island developing States (SIDS).

At the outset, we would like to thank Sweden
for convening today's important debate on conflict
prevention and sustaining peace. Similarly, we would
like to commend the President of the General Assembly
for the upcoming high-level dialogue entitled "Building
Sustainable Peace for All: Synergies between the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and Sustaining
Peace", scheduled for 24 January.

We would also like to recognize Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres and to thank him for his proactive
leadership on this very important issue. In many of
his recent statements, including an excellent article in
Newsweek yesterday, he highlighted the interlinkages
between conflict and many of its root causes: poverty,
inequality, human rights violations and environmental
destruction. In his Newsweek article, he stated that,

"climate change, population growth, rapid
urbanization, food insecurity and water scarcity
are adding to the tensions and instability".

The Pacific States fully agree. We must reinvigorate
our political and diplomatic engagement in responding
to conflict, and a significant portion of that energy
must be directed towards improving the material
circumstances of people. Happy, safe and secure
people rarely see the need to reach for a weapon. And
the single-largest threat to the safety and security of
present and future generations is climate change.

In resolution 63/281, the General Assembly agreed
that climate change could have security implications
and invited all relevant organs of the United Nations to
intensify their efforts to address the matter. That was
followed by a landmark report (A/64/350) by former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon entitled "Climate
change and its possible security implications", in
which he labelled climate change as a threat multiplier
and identified food and water insecurity, natural
resources scarcity, exposure to extreme events and
human migration as some of the numerous channels
through which climate change has the potential to
destabilize societies.

In a 2011 presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/15),
the Security Council agreed, recognizing that climate
change could aggravate existing threats to international
peace and security. Since 2011, the threat of climate
change has only increased. Impacts are happening faster
and are more severe than most scientists had previously
projected. The Paris Agreement notwithstanding,
current emission trends are still far from adequate. The
climate-change threat is unprecedented, and therefore
we need new tools to respond. For that reason, the
Pacific States are renewing their call for the Secretary-
General to appoint a Special Representative on climate
and security.

The Special Representative would serve the
Secretary-General, with the responsibilities that would
include reporting regularly to the General Assembly
and the Security Council on emerging climate-related
security threats; facilitating regional cooperation and
the resolution of border issues that might be affected by
climate change; helping vulnerable countries evaluate
theirsecurity-relatednationalcircumstancesanddevelop
action plans to increase their resilience; identifying and
monitoring potentially dangerous tipping points at the
climate change/security nexus; engaging in creative
preventive diplomacy, as appropriate, and supporting
post-conflict situations when climate change is a risk
factor that could undermine stability.

The initial outputs of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in the first two years of
work should include, first, an update of the Secretary-
General's 2009 report (A/64/350), including the
status of implementation of resolution 63/281 and an
assessment of United Nations capacity to respond to
the security implications of climate change; secondly,
working with relevant scientific bodies and research
organizations, a new report that identifies and analyses
potentially dangerous tipping points at the climate/
security nexus, along with recommendations for
improving our ability to monitor and respond; and,
thirdly, preliminary climate-security risk assessments
for interested vulnerable countries.

To be completely clear, the appointment of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General should
in no way alter the mandates of the Security Council.
The mandates of existing bodies and institutions, most
notably the General Assembly, must be respected.

The climate-change risk is real. It is dangerous
and it is growing. It will touch the lives of billions
over the coming century, threatening their well-being
and, in some cases, their lives. It has the potential to
undermine global peace and stability in ways we are
only beginning to understand. Moreover, the nexus
between climate change, peace and security and the
Sustainable Development Goals cannot be ignored.
For those reasons, the Pacific SIDS urge all countries
to support our call for a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on climate and security.

