Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let be begin by thanking
High Representative Valentin Inzko for his briefing.
Poland would like to convey its full support for his Office
and appreciation for its pivotal role in maintaining
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The international
community has entrusted the High Representative with
great responsibility and provided him with far-reaching
prerogatives, the Bonn powers, which should be used if
the situation requires.

Poland aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union later
in our discussion.

There are clear conditions set by the Peace
Implementation Council for the closure of the Office
of the High Representative, namely, the 5+2 agenda.
Like all other members of the international community,
Poland would like nothing more than to see them
fulfilled. As yet, however, that has not happened.

We welcome the adoption today of resolution 2443
(2018), which extends the mandate of the European
Union-led Operation Althea for another year, and the
European Council conclusions of 15 October, which
confirmed its readiness to continue the mission's
executive military mandate of maintaining a safe and
secure environment. As contributors to the mission
since its inception, we are proud to be part of that effort.

We note with appreciation the commitment of the
State-level institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
European integration as manifested in the ongoing
work on the European Commission questionnaire. We
would also like to see the activation of the membership
action plan as soon as possible so that all citizens might
benefit from stability and security within Euro-Atlantic
structures. It lies squarely within the responsibilities
of the governing elites to remove all obstacles along
that path, particularly with regard to the registration of
immovable defence property.

There is much cause for concern in Bosnia and
Herzegovina today. It is worth recalling that, although
there is no imminent danger of armed conflict, stasis
should not be mistaken for stability. Almost a quarter
of a century after the Dayton Peace Agreement, the
country's political elites have signally failed to instil
the sense of common destiny that could unite the
country's peoples. Loyalties still lie along the ethnic
lines. Young people, the future of the country, emigrate
to seek a better future elsewhere. Centrifugal forces
fuelling nationalistic rhetoric glorifying convicted
war criminals and a lack of economic perspective,
combined with the endemic weakness of the State, are
a dangerous mix.

We meet today at a very delicate moment as
the outcome of the October elections is just being
finalized. We welcome the fact that they were genuinely
competitive and conducted peacefully. Regretfully,
however, neither the reform of the electoral law nor the
rulings of the European Court of Human Rights have
been introduced, and the situation remains sensitive.
It is now incumbent upon political parties to proceed
promptly with the formation of a Government on all
levels so that the will of the people is implemented and
fundamental institutional stability is put in place. It is
also the responsibility of the political elites to continue
with the reform agenda with firmness renewed energy.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that Poland is vitally
interested in seeing Bosnia and Herzegovina as a united,
prosperous and modern democratic country, strongly
anchored in the Euro-Atlantic structures. We have been
with Bosnia and Herzegovina since the beginning, and
we will continue our active support as we have done
so far.

