Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): To begin with, I
should like to join previous speakers in welcoming the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, Mr. Svilanovic, to this Chamber. Let me
also thank Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his
briefing, and welcome the report of the Secretary-
General.

Taking into account that on 16 November my
delegation spoke at length on the recent activities of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), particularly on the results of the
municipal elections that were held in Kosovo on 28
October, my comments will be brief and will touch
only on a number of recent events in Kosovo.

One of last month's major developments was the
swearing-in on 20 November of the United Nations-
appointed members of the municipal assemblies in the
three predominantly Serb municipalities in which the
results of the October elections could not be certified
because of inadequate voter turnout. We support these
acts by the Special Representative and note his public
assertion that these are temporary measures. My
delegation favours the Special Representative's
intention to hold by-elections in these municipalities
early next year to replace the appointed municipal
authorities.

As regards the Mission's efforts to create
mechanisms for ensuring respect for human rights, in
our view the establishment on 21 November of the
ombudsperson institution deserves special mention.
That institution is an independent body designed to
investigate and mediate complaints from individuals,
groups and organizations regarding human rights
violations.

In the area of the development of the rule of law,
my country emphasizes the significance of the
inauguration on 14 November of the Supreme Court of
Kosovo. While we note the positive developments in
Kosovo in the course of the last month, we cannot
overlook the discouraging and even disturbing
developments, in particular the upsurge of inter-ethnic,
political and criminal violence in the province;
insignificant returns by Kosovo Serb and national
minorities; and the escalation of armed confrontation in
the ground safety zone along the border between Serbia
and Kosovo.

The latest acts of violence, which resulted in
scores of deaths and injuries, testify to the fact that the
security situation in and around Kosovo is far from
being satisfactory. My delegation supported the
statement by the President of the Security Council of
22 November and his statement to the press of 13
December in relation to these tragic events. A full

S/PVAZA')

 

investigation into these violent and terrorist acts should
be conducted effectively and their perpetrators brought
to justice.

In this regard, my country appreciates all joint
efforts undertaken by UNMIK and KFOR police to
combat this renewed cycle of violence. We support in
particular their coordinated law-enforcement actions
through the mechanism of the Political Violence Task
Force and the joint security operations to combat
trafficking in, and to confiscate, illegal weapons. We
hope that the Ukrainian special police dog unit, which
completed its deployment in Kosovo just a few days
ago, will contribute to broadening the capacities of
UNMIK police in undertaking special security
measures. In our view, the new regulation by the head
of UNMIK of 4 December, allowing law-enforcement
officials to order unruly persons away from specific
areas, will also be helpful in ensuring the security of
the province.

In the context of the protection of minority
communities, my delegation welcomes the
establishment by UNMIK on 29 November of a joint
committee on the return of Ashkalija Roma people,
which will assist these displaced communities to come
back to their homes or resettle in other locations under
appropriate security conditions.

It is our belief that, in the run-up to the Serbian
election of 23 December, UNMIK and KFOR will
again take all necessary measures, as was the case
during the Yugoslav September elections, to prevent
any security threats that may emerge.

Let me make a few comments on the situation in
the Presevo Valley, which was the central subject of the
statement made today by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In our
view, the dangerous events of the past few weeks in
southern Serbia should be seen as a serious warning to
the Security Council and to the international
community of what we can expect in the immediate
future in Kosovo and, on a broader scale, in Serbia,
unless additional measures to eliminate the existing
challenges to security are undertaken now.

We commend the efforts by KFOR that brokered
the ceasefire agreement between the Serbian police and
ethnic Albanian militants, and we acknowledge the
prudence and restraint of the Yugoslav Government in
this situation. In our View, the provocative actions of
the ethnic Albanian fighters from the self-styled

Liberation Army of Presevo, Medveda and Bujanovac,
across the border between Kosovo and Serbia, are
becoming increasingly defiant. This is made clear in
the Secretary-General's report, which indicates that the
military attacks against the Serbian police have
increased in size, duration, sophistication and
aggressiveness.

We condemn the latest attack on the joint Russia-
United States KFOR patrol. In our view, these negative
developments should stop immediately. In fact, the
very existence of this armed group not only challenges
stability in southern Serbia and Kosovo proper, but
undermines all the strenuous efforts of the international
community in pursuit of the very fragile peace process
based on resolution 1244 (1999). It jeopardizes the
prospects for the normalization of relations between
the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
UNMIK and KFOR, and it threatens the democratic
changes in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and in
the whole region.

Therefore, while praising KFOR efforts to ease
the situation in the tense Kosovo border area, we
encourage it and UNMIK to continue to take all
possible robust measures to ensure adequate security
for all inhabitants of Kosovo and to prevent any export
of violence to southern Serbia.

My delegation welcomes the public statement
made by the Secretary-General on 29 November. We
are absolutely confident that the Liberation Army of
Presevo, Medveda and Bujanovac, which acts almost
openly in the uncontrolled ground safety zone, should
be disarmed and disbanded as soon as possible. For
these purposes, we believe that a closer dialogue
between UNMIK and KFOR, on the one side, and the
Yugoslav Government, on the other, is highly needed.

We took note of the appointment by the
Secretary-General of his new Special Representative
and head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Hans Haekkerup. We wish him
every success in meeting the challenges of the
leadership of one of the most complicated and truly
unprecedented missions in United Nations history. My
delegation would also like to pay a tribute to the efforts
of the outgoing Special Representative, Mr. Bernard
Kouchner.

Finally, we support the content of the draft
presidential statement to be adopted today.

S/PVAZA')

 

