Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to once again welcome His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of the State of Palestine. I express the appreciation of Tunisia for his efforts to defend the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. I would also like to commend the efforts of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres to achieve peace in the Middle East and to support a peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict based on the two-State solution and the internationally agreed parameters. I further commend the role of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. It is my pleasure, in the same context, to welcome His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Secretary- General of the League of Arab States. I appreciate his participation in this meeting in order to reaffirm the Arab position in support of the Palestinian question and its attachment to a just and comprehensive peace on the basis of the relevant international resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. My country's delegation would also like to thank the friendly Kingdom of Belgium, the current president of the Security Council, for convening this meeting. This meeting is being held as the Arab-Israeli conflict is at a critical juncture. Tensions are rising in the region, the peace process is stalled and there have been attempts to depart from resolutions of international legitimacy and the fundamental parameters of the settlement that are the basis for comprehensive, lasting and just peace. The aim is to end the occupation and restore the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, most importantly their rights to self-determination and to establish their own independent State along the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Given the responsibility of the Security Council to maintain international peace and security and settle conflicts, we stress its important role in moving the peace process forward, on the basis of the agreed parameters and the two-State solution, with a view to settling all final status issues. In that regard, over the past few days Tunisia and Indonesia, in close coordination with the Palestinians and in consultation with Security Council members, Arab and Muslim countries and regional and political groupings, especially the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, have started negotiations on a draft resolution. The draft text reaffirms the need to reach a comprehensive, lasting and just peace based on international resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016), the Madrid terms of reference and the Arab Peace Initiative, while ending the Israeli occupation of all territories occupied in 1967, including East Jerusalem, and promoting a two-State solution of two States living side by side in peace and security.Tunisia would like to express its thanks and appreciation to Council members for engaging positively in those consultations with a view to enhancing the role of the Council and reaffirming international legitimacy, along with the two-State solution. In addition, the objective is to revive the prospects for peace based on the internationally agreed parameters in order to ensure the legitimate rights of the fraternal Palestinian people, end tensions and guarantee security and peace for all the peoples of the region. The Israeli occupying Power continues to violate international resolutions and to impose a fait accompli by expanding its settlement activities in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. It continues to threaten to annex Palestinian territory, in stark violation of international law, to impose a blockade on the Gaza Strip and to collectively punish the Palestinian people. That calls on the international community to assume its responsibility and quickly take the necessary measures to put an end to those policies, which seriously undermine any prospects for peace and increase tensions and instability in the Middle East. Tunisia is committed to international legitimacy and to the purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and international law, which represent a guarantee of security and stability in the world and a governing framework for international relations. We therefore stress the need for the international community to adopt a unified position against the violation of international law and the imposition of a fait accompli, and emphasizing the importance of multilateralism and the role of the United Nations in reaching a comprehensive and just solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. We strongly believe that restoring security and stability in the region is contingent on Israel's ending its occupation of all occupied Arab territories and on compelling Israel to comply with the will to achieve peace and implement international resolutions. In closing, Tunisia renews its commitment to maintaining its steadfast and principled support for the Palestinian question and the indivisible and inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, which are not time-bound. We stress our attachment to peace as a strategic choice and affirm our support for any constructive efforts to revive the peace process based on international resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the two- State solution as the only path to achieving a lasting, comprehensive and just peace.
