Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this important meeting devoted to counter-terrorism
and extremism. These two scourges are the cause of
untold suffering across the world. The international
community should galvanize its efforts through
international cooperation, which is increasingly
important, to tackle the challenges of international
peace and security undermined by acts of terrorism
perpetrated by extremist groups, which pose a threat to
numerous regions across the world.

The Kingdom of Bahrain has joined the international
coalition. In the statement delivered on behalf of my
country during the general debate of the current session
of the General Assembly (see A/69/PV.17), the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Bahrain, His
Excellency Shaikh Khalid Bin Ahmed Al-Khalifa,
stressed three main areas for action. The first of these
is the security and military area, owing to the growing
threat posed by these terrorist groups as they acquire
heavy weapons that enable them to occupy cities for use
as safe havens and bases from which to launch terrorist
operations that disrupt the stability and security of our
region. Secondly, we must combat all ideology that
runs counter to human nature and betrays true Islam by
distorting its precepts. Thirdly, we must deal with the
financing of terrorism, which enables them to purchase
weapons and materiel and attract vulnerable young
people.

In the framework of international efforts to combat
terrorism, on 9 November the Kingdom of Bahrain
hosted a meeting in Manama on combating the financing
of terrorism within the context of efforts to eradicate
financing in all its forms and manifestations. It was
part of an effort to implement the Kingdom's policy
in the framework of the International Conference for
Peace and Security in Iraq, held in Paris in September.
We have also put forth an initiative to host a conference
to coordinate international efforts to combat terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations.

The Kingdom reiterates the need to curb the
financing of terrorism, which represents half the battle
in the fight against terrorism. There is also a need
to ensure effective mechanisms to put an end to all
financial support for terrorist groups and organizations.
In that regard, specialized conferences aimed at finding
ways eradicate all forms and manifestations of terrorists
and terrorist groups that pose a significant threat
to international peace and security are of growing
importance.

The meeting I spoke of reflected the importance
of bank and financing flows in the framework of
international efforts and counter-terrorism. The
meeting emphasized the need for collective efforts
to halt the financing of terrorism and deal with any
suspicious transfers through three means, including
the implementation of all international resolutions to
combat the financing of terrorism, primarily Security
Council resolutions, and the recommendations of the
working groups and the Financial Action Task Force,
as well as strengthening cooperation internationally
and through specialized bodies and exchanges of
experiences and approaches in combating the financing
of terrorism.

Many experts participated in those meetings,
in addition to representatives of numerous regional
and international organizations, including the United
Nations, the International Monetary Fund, the European
Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy and the Financial Action Task Force,
as well as various bodies working in the Middle East.
The end of the meeting saw the issuance of the Manama
declaration on combating the financing of terrorism.
The declaration contains many recommendations in
line with international law and its provisions, as well as
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
It underscored the need for follow up on the prosecution
of terrorists and the collective need for sanctions in
combating the financing of terrorism.

Among the recommendations put forth was a
reference to the importance of follow up on evaluating
the financing of terrorism and its sources, considering
their means of implementation, and following up on all
relevant activities, for example the financing of terrorist
groups through the Internet and social media, the use of
electronic payments or virtual currency by individuals
or terrorist groups, the use of religious or academic
institutions to finance terrorism or illegal financing
through natural resources, the illicit trafficking
of narcotics and even financing through charities.
The statement stressed the need for participation in
international efforts to combat terrorism, inter alia
through legal assistance between countries and legal
assistance to counter the financing of terrorism.
The meeting considered the possibility of holding a
ministerial conference on the implementation of the
declaration. The participants of the meeting would like
to cooperate in combating terrorism with the United
Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism, co-founded by
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

