Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in Spanish): It is a
great pleasure for me to see my friend, the Ambassador
of Spain, presiding over the Security Council of the
United Nations.

(spoke in English)

In reference to the Middle East peace process,
nowhere is a political solution more overdue than in
Palestine. Japan is concerned by the latest surge of
violence, in particular the conflict at the holy sites,
because of its potentially inflammatory implications.
We welcome Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu's vow
to maintain the status quo at Al-Haram Al-Sharif/
Temple Mount, and Palestinian President Abbas's swift
condemnation of the arson attacks against Joseph's
Tomb. We call for the cessation ofviolence and condemn
all forms of incitement, including those from Hamas.

In the light of the daily onslaught of violence,
we reiterate the importance of maintaining security
cooperation between the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities. Furthermore, while we recognize the
necessity to maintain order, we call on Israel to exercise
its law enforcement with proportionate measures and
to refrain from collective punishment, including the
demolition of homes, which may exacerbate an already
volatile situation.

The current situation did not arise in a vacuum.
Grim economic prospects, social marginalization,
illegal settlements and the stagnation of the peace
process have all served as fodder for discontent. Too
often, the international community, including the
Council, has remained silent. We have offered neither
tangible advances towards peace nor concrete visions
of a viable economy in a future State of Palestine.

The stagnation and difficulties in the peace
process must not stop us from making progress when
possible. Firm in our belief that a viable economy
underpins the feasibility of a two-State solution, Japan
has contributed $1.6 billion in support since 1993.
Through such projects as the Jericho Agro-Industrial
Park, which can provide up to 7,000 jobs with annual
economic benefits totalling $40 million, Japan hopes to
offer real prospects for a viable Palestinian economy.

Countries with the will and capacity to provide
concrete contributions to the political process and
on the ground can strengthen rather than dilute the
traditional framework of the peace process. We
therefore value the initiative taken by the Middle East
Quartet to convene a high-level outreach meeting as
a side event at the seventieth session of the General
Assembly. At that meeting, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Japan, Mr. Kishida, offered additional aid
totalling $12 million and reaffirmed our commitment
to play a more proactive role in the peace process.

With regard to the situation in Syria, the Syrian
crisis has, over the past five years, taken more than
250,000 lives and uprooted approximately 12 million
citizens. In the face of one of the worst humanitarian
crises of our generation, Japan will spare no efforts
to address both the immediate challenges and the
underlying factors of the instability. This year, Japan
will provide approximately $810 million in assistance
to refugees and internally displaced persons from Iraq
and Syria. With particular attention to the Syrian crisis,
Japan has already extended more than $1.1 billion in such
assistance as relief and vocational training, with a view
to empowering individuals and building communities
that are resilient to the allures of extremism.

Japan condemns the rampant acts of terrorism
that have taken countless lives and destroyed cultural
heritages throughout the region. Such heinous acts of
terror have also taken Japanese victims. We note that
the situation in Syria has taken on a new dimension
with the military involvement of Russia. In that regard,
Japan looks to Russia to strictly limit its air strikes to
those against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) in Syria. Any actions against non-ISIL forces
could worsen an already volatile situation in Syria and
would be a cause for concern.

We reiterate that there can be no military solution
to the Syrian crisis. We therefore underline our support
for the United Nations Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General in his efforts to work towards a political
solution, based on the implementation of the Geneva
communique (S/2012/523, annex).

The increasing volatility in the Middle East calls
for concerted effort by the international community,
including the Security Council, to facilitate the return
of peace and stability to the region. I would like to
conclude my statement by assuring the Council that
Japan will continue to play a proactive role, both on the
ground and in the Council, in contributing to the peace
and stability of the region.

