Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. Jan Kubis for his
briefing this morning. I also thank Afghan Ambassador
Zahir Tanin for his statement.

(spoke in English)

Canada welcomes the diligent work of the
Secretary-General in conducting a comprehensive
review of the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) over the
past year. The next four months will present
Afghanistan and the international community with a
series of critical decision points, which will define how
we continue to progress together towards our common
goal of a peaceful and sustainable Afghanistan through
the transition period and into the transformation
decade. Canada looks forward to working with its
partners to further advance those shared objectives. We
are confident that, at the Group of Eight and NATO
summits, as well as at the Tokyo conference, we will
continue to build on the strategic consensus reached in
Bonn this past December - a consensus based on
accountability and the assumption of leadership by the
Afghan Government in its own security, good
governance, and development.

In cooperation with our partners, Canada
continues to endeavour to support Afghanistan in its
efforts to undertake the remaining challenges of
transition. In doing so, Canada continues to invest in
the future of Afghan youth through programming in
health and education; to advance security, the rule of
law and human rights, including through a significant
contribution to the NATO training mission; to promote
regional diplomacy; and to support the delivery of
humanitarian assistance as needed.

(spoke in French)

Canada believes that sustainable economic
growth and constructive regional cooperation are
essential to ensuring a secure and prosperous future for
Afghanistan and the region. Economic growth will
only be sustained by concrete efforts on the part of
Afghanistan to establish a business-friendly
environment and enact measures to strengthen effective
and transparent economic governance. In that
connection, Canada recognizes the commitments that
the Government of Afghanistan has made with regard
to that goal in its economic transition strategy.

Canada of course continues to support
Afghanistan in pursuit of its development goals. The
country must never again become a haven for terrorists
and a breeding ground for terrorism. To that end, the
real long-term measure of success will be determined
by the extent to which Afghanistan can create wealth
by attracting and retaining private-sector investment,
both from within Afghanistan and abroad, and
appropriately leverage it to benefit the Afghan
population in a just and broad-based manner.
Furthermore, in order to be sustainable, Afghanistan's
economic growth must be accompanied by poverty
reduction and increasing productive employment, as
well as improved access to education and health care.

However, Afghanistan's economic potential
reaches beyond its borders and its prosperity will, in
large measure, be influenced by the extent to which it
can harness its strategic position at the crossroads of
markets in the heart of Asia. That will require the
constructive support of its regional partners in
promoting stability, security and prosperity in both
Afghanistan and the region. In that regard, we
commend the recent consensus in the context of the
Istanbul Process to focus on a series of confidence-
building measures aimed at strengthening an agenda
based on mutual benefit and trust. We also look
forward to the fifth ministerial meeting of the Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan.
Canada strongly believes that regional leadership in the
planning and execution of a common prosperity agenda
must be at the centre of Afghanistan's continued
transformation.

To that end, Canada will continue to promote
regional cooperation as one of its four pillars of
engagement over the next two years, in particular
through the ongoing facilitation of the Afghanistan-
Pakistan cooperation process - which we continue to
believe can make tangible progress in strengthening the
management and security of the Afghanistan-Pakistan
border region.

(spoke in English)

Among the most notable successes in Afghanistan
of the past decade are the tremendous gains made by
Afghan women and girls. Those gains must not be lost.
Canada views the status and role of women as a key
barometer by which the success of Afghanistan's
progress will be measured. The recent Ulema Council
statement, as well as cases of heinous abuse of Afghan
women, represents a dramatic step backwards for
Afghan women. Although we noted President Karzai's
remarks on 11 March reiterating his full support of
Afghan women's religious and constitutional rights,
Canada will remain vigilant. We expect the
Government of Afghanistan to uphold its Constitution
and to distance itself from those outrageous remarks.

The protection and advancement of women's
rights has been and continues to be a key pillar of
Canada's foreign policy. That is especially true in
Afghanistan, where promoting and protecting
fundamental freedoms, including women's rights, is a
central theme of Canada's post-2011 engagement.
Respect for the freedoms and rights of all Afghan
citizens is fundamental to Afghanistan's security and
its future prosperity.
All Afghans must, in our View, also have the right
to practice personal religious beliefs in safety and
security. Canada would like to underline the
importance of tolerance and pluralism in establishing a
peaceful and cohesive Afghan society, based on the
principles established by the Afghan Constitution.

Afghanistan has accomplished impressive
progress towards developing a representative and
sustainable democracy. Canada recognizes that
Afghanistan's democratic development faces many
challenges, and we encourage the Government of
Afghanistan to renew its commitment to transparency
and impartiality in all electoral and appointment
processes.

An important element in ensuring sustainable
Afghan peace still resides in the achievement of an
Afghan-led reconciliation process, the outcome of
which must be in accordance with the principles
confirmed at the Bonn Conference. In this respect,
Canada supports an inclusive national peace dialogue
that encourages the participation of Afghan civil
society, victims' groups and, especially, Afghan
religious and ethnic minorities and women in
determining the shape of what we all hope will be a
peaceful and stable Afghanistan.

Permit me to conclude by noting that Canada
remains committed to our common goal of a peaceful,
sustainable Afghanistan led by Afghans with vision,
confidence and hope in their future. In order to achieve
this vision, Canada stands ready to continue working
with the Government of Afghanistan, as well as all our
international partners in meeting this goal.

