Mr. Merimee (France) (interpretation from French):
The action undertaken by the Bosnian Serbs against
Srebrenica marks, in our opinion, the beginning of a new
and particularly serious phase. Indeed, a step has been
taken in the escalation of the situation - this time, a step
that is of a different nature.

Up to now, we had faced incessant violations of the
status of the safe areas, but we had not yet had to confront
a deliberate intention on the part of the Bosnian Serbs to
use force to occupy a safe area. This is what has just been
done by General Mladic's troops.

My Government fervently hopes that the Security
Council will adopt the draft resolution now before us,
because it takes the View that the international community
can under no circumstances accept any questioning of the
status of the safe areas. This is why the draft resolution
calls on the Secretary-General to take all necessary steps to
bring about the withdrawal of Bosnian Serb forces from
Srebrenica and the return of the population.

In supporting this request, France does not wish to
impose the use of any particular means. We are simply
saying that we are ready, if the civilian and military
authorities and the United Nations force consider it
appropriate, to make troops available for any operations
they regard as realistic and realizable.

We will defer to their opinion, as we believe that it
is not up to the Security Council to determine in detail
how the objectives it has set in the draft resolution -
which I hope we are about to adopt - should be
implemented. I would underscore in this respect that the
plight of the civilian population and of the personnel of
the United Nations Protection Force is still of primordial
importance in our eyes.

We must also think about the future, which looms
threateningly. Signs indicate that the Bosnian Serb forces
have no intention of stopping at Srebrenica and that Zepa
could be the next safe area on their list. If this is so, then
a new and very dangerous situation would clearly be
created, and we should draw the appropriate conclusions.

My Government has not given up on any of its
objectives, at the forefront of which, I would recall, is
reopening access to Sarajevo in satisfactory and secure
conditions. We are ready to take any appropriate initiative
to this effect.

