The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I thank Special Coordinator Serry for his briefing.

I will begin with Middle East peace before turning
to Syria and Lebanon.

The United States is deeply committed to ajust and

lasting peace, with Israelis and Palestinians living side
by side in peace and security. That is why Secretary of
State Kerry has made repeated visits to the region and
has focused so heavily on that effort. Last week, after
his sixth trip to the region as Secretary, he was able
to announce that the parties had reached an agreement
that establishes a basis for resuming direct final status
negotiations. He also stressed that the agreement was
in the process of being formalized and that in the
meantime none of the parties would be making public
comments about the negotiations, so as to improve the
likelihood that the talks could indeed succeed.

As Secretary Kerry noted, everyone is aware that
the process will not be easy, and no one believes that
the long-standing differences between the parties can
be resolved overnight or just wiped away. We know that
the challenges require some very tough choices in the
days ahead.

Today, however, we are hopeful, because the
representatives of two proud people have decided that
the difficult road ahead is worth traveling and that the
daunting challenges we face are worth tackling. So they
have courageously recognized that in order for Israelis
and Palestinians to live together side by side in peace
and security, they must begin by sitting at the table
together in direct talks.

It is important to note that that diplomatic
effort would not have been possible without strong
international support. The Arab Peace Initiative
follow-up committee, the Quartet envoys and many
others played a vital role in supporting the resumptions
of negotiations. The Secretary-General, European
partners and others around the world also weighed
in with strong statements of support. We should now
continue to urge all sides to avoid taking unilateral
actions, including steps at the United Nations. Our
shared objective at this critical moment must be to build
the trust and confidence necessary for a lasting peace.

In that regard, the United States position remains
that General Assembly resolution 67/19 did not establish
that Palestine is a State. The United States is committed
to helping bring about a viable Palestinian State through
bilateral negotiations with their Israeli counterparts.
That is the only real path to genuine statehood for the
Palestinian people, as repeatedly affirmed by both sides
and endorsed by the international community.

In the end, those most responsible for that process
are the parties themselves. We applaud the courageous
leadership shown by President Abbas and Prime
Minister Netanyahu in taking that step forward. As the
parties work through the complicated issues they face,
we should encourage them with all possible support.

Turning to Syria, the United States continues to
believe that the only sustainable outcome to the conflict
is through a political solution based on the Geneva
Action Group for Syria communique (S/2012/523, annex), which clearly calls for a transitional governing
body with full executive powers chosen by mutual
consent. We continue to work towards that end. In that
regard, we welcome the election of Syrian opposition
coalition President Ahmed Assi Al-Jarba and look
forward to working with him. A united opposition
that represents all Syrians is essential to achieve a
negotiated political solution that will provide dignity,
freedom and hope to the Syrian people.

Despite professed support for negotiations, the
Al-Assad regime is in fact working to thwart any
possibility of a peaceful solution. In collusion with
Iran- and Hizbullah-backed fighters and advisors,
the Al-Assad regime has waged war against the
Syrian people. Further, the United States assesses
that the regime has used chemical weapons, including
the nerve agent sarin, on a small scale against the
opposition multiple times in the last year, in violation
of international norms.

We again call upon the Al-Assad regime to grant
the United Nations team, led by Mr. Sellstrom, free and
unfettered access to investigate any and all credible
allegations of the possible use of chemical weapons in
Syria. We urge all members of the Council to use their
influence with the regime to reinforce that point and
take other appropriate steps to support the investigation
initiated by Secretary-General Ban.

We also remain deeply concerned by the regime's
ongoing campaign against the besieged city of Homs,
aided by Hizbullah and Iranian-backed paramilitaries.
Residents of the old city of Homs have received little
humanitarian aid for the past year, a result of heavy
fighting and the Syrian Government's refusal to
support the delivery of such aid. We reiterate that
there is no justification for the Al-Assad regime to
prevent humanitarian access to Horns, and we call on
it to allow humanitarian organizations safe access to
evacuate the wounded and provide medical treatment.
We also reaffirm that those responsible for violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law must
be held accountable.

The impact of the Syrian conflict has created
immense challenges for Syria's neighbours. We
strongly commend Lebanon, Turkey and Jordan for
their steadfast support of Syrian refugees, and we urge
all neighbouring countries to keep their borders open
to vulnerable people fleeing for their lives. Refugees
and host countries alike need our urgent and sustained
financial support.

Finally, we remain gravely concerned by the
violent clashes and bombings in Lebanon, including in
Sidon, Tripoli and Beirut. We condemn in the strongest
terms the attacks by militants against the Lebanese
armed forces that have killed soldiers and civilians.
The United States again reiterates our full support for
Lebanon's policy of dissociation from the Syrian crisis
and its commitment to supporting a stable, sovereign
and independent Lebanon. We call on all the parties
in Lebanon to abide by the dissociation policy and to
act with restraint to ensure Lebanon's stability and
security.

We welcome the important step the European
Union (EU) took yesterday in agreeing to designate the
military wing of Hizbullah as a terrorist organization.
With that action, the EU is sending a strong message
to Hizbullah that it cannot operate with impunity and
that there are consequences for its actions, including
last year's deadly attack in Burgas, Bulgaria, which
the Security Council rightfully condemned, and for
plotting a similar attack in Cyprus. We call on other
Governments to follow the EU's lead and take steps
to begin reining in Hizbullah's terrorist and criminal
activities.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

I wish to inform all concerned that, as we have a
very large number of speakers, we will be carrying on
today's open debate right through the lunch hour.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon.

