Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein
is a member of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group and and aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Switzerland. We would now like to raise a few specific
points relating to the Council's work on accountability

and the veto, from the perspective of its working
methods.

During the past year, the Council has made
some progress in improving its interaction with the
International Criminal Court and on related issues.
The open debate of October 2012 on peace and justice
(see S/PV.6894), with a special focus on the role of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), was a good
opportunity for the wider membership to express its
views on the Council's relations to that key institution
of international criminal justice. We also consider the
informal, interactive dialogue between the Council and
the ICC Prosecutor is also a useful format, allowing
for a more fluid exchange of information and a less
limited conversation. While we welcome these events
and thank the delegations that have initiated them, we
are disappointed about the lack of follow-up. As often
seems to be the case in the workings of the Council,
positive innovations are difficult to institutionalize.

The Council began this year well by expressing
its commitment to effectively following up issues of
cooperation with international tribunals, including the
ICC. Unfortunately, the Council has not lived up to this
promise so far. The Council still lacks the proper forum
for interaction with the ICC and on related issues.
One year ago, together with Costa Rica and Jordan,
we encouraged the creation of a new subsidiary body
or the re-tasking of the Informal Working Group on
Tribunals. Since then, the need for such a platform has
only become more pressing as requests to the Council
relating to ICC issues are in the headlines on a daily
basis. Partially due to this shortcoming, the Council
has again failed to take up the Court's decisions of
non-cooperation in the Darfur situation. The failure of
the Council to effectively follow up its own referrals
undermines the credibility of both bodies.

We have seen the recent request by Kenya that
the Security Council defer the cases in the Kenya
situation for 12 months, pursuant to article 16 of the
Rome Statute - an issue that will be taken up by the
Council shortly. This should remind us of the need to
revisit the Council's working methods in dealing with
such requests. The Council's decision-making process
on article 16 deferrals should be informed and made
on the basis of a thorough discussion involving all
stakeholders. The implementation of article 16 of the
Rome Statute is as much a concern of all States parties
to the Statute as it is of the members of the Council. We
therefore encourage the Security Council to enter into a

dialogue with States parties, especially on the question
of criteria to be considered in deciding whether to defer
cases before the ICC.

The situation in Syria, now in its third year, has laid
bare the Council's shortcomings. The Council has been
unable to play its role on nearly all issues, save that
of chemical weapons. While we appreciate the efforts
of Luxembourg and Australia in drafting the recent
presidential statement on the humanitarian situation in
Syria (S/PRST/2013/15), we regret that the Council was
not able to adopt a resolution on this topic.

The Council has also failed in its responsibility to
promote accountability for the war crimes and crimes
against humanity that have been and continue to be
perpetrated by all sides in that conflict. Liechtenstein
was one of 58 States that had called on the Security
Council to refer the situation in Syria to the ICC. Nine
months later, we are still waiting for the Council to take
this issue up.

The Syria crisis also best illustrates that the use of
the veto and the extensive threat of its use continue to
stymie its work. The veto as such is part and parcel of
the Charter of the United Nations, which we have all
ratified, but it is essential that it not be used contrary
to the very purposes and principles contained in that
Charter, and that a minimum of accountability be
provided in this respect. We have repeatedly called on
the permanent members to commit to refraining from
the use of the veto in situations involving genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. We welcome
the initiative of France to bring this topic to the attention
of the international community. Now is the time to
make concrete progress towards such a code of conduct.
We look forward to discussions among the permanent
members on this suggestion and will continue to work
through the ACT group to contribute to its success.

