Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank Rwanda, as President of the
Security Council for this month, for convening this
meeting,. My delegation would like to express our
views on the situation in the Middle East and the
question of Palestine. We take note of the statement
by Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs. My delegation would like to align
itself with the statement made by the Chairman of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The Government of Ecuador reiterates its concern
over the protracted discussions in the Security Council
on the Israeli/Palestinian conflict. At this time of
international political and economic upheaval, it is
important to struggle for a just international system.
In that context, the issue of Palestine has raised the
international community's awareness of the question
of what the United Nations should do. Member States
should, now more than ever, be interested in ensuring
the implementation of existing international laws and
resolutions that advocate an end to the abusive use of
force by Israel in Palestine.

One hundred and thirty Member States of this
Organization supported the appeal made by the
President of the Palestinian Authority on 29 November
2012 to grant Palestine the status of Observer State. That
is an important achievement that must be supported and
must serve as the basis for full-fledged recognition of
the State of Palestine. It is time to seek out mechanisms
that allow us to make progress in the efforts for peace
and to enhance the capacity of the State of Palestine to
meet the security needs of its own people. It is up to the
Security Council to assume its responsibility for having
enabled the continued Israeli violations of international
law, which has allowed that country to maintain a status
of immunity and impunity.

After the adoption of resolution 67/ 19, the Israeli
Government announced that it would not recognize
Palestine as a State or recognize any change in the
situation of Palestinians. After 28 November 2012,
in direct contravention of the peace process, Israel
intensified its settlement activity in the occupied
West Bank, and the situation deteriorated further with
illegal and arbitrary detentions of Palestinians and the
death of some of those detained. In the same vein, the
demolition of houses has caused Palestinians to be
displaced to neighbouring countries, undermining the
entire peace process and inviting the condemnation of
the international community against Israel.

Another Israeli reaction to the recognition of the
Observer State of Palestine was the withholding, for
the past few months, of Palestinian tariff revenues,
in complete disregard of the 1994 Paris Protocol,
which was signed by Israel and is still in force. My
country, Ecuador, believes that it is now time to
implement the Declaration of the High-level Meeting
of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels (resolution 67/1),
which is applicable to all States in equal measure and
to international organizations, including the United
Nations and its principal bodies, so that the respect
and promotion of the rule of law and justice guides all
their activities. In that respect, my delegation would
like to call upon the Security Council to abandon its
passive attitude towards Israeli abuses, as that leads, to
a certain extent, to the Council's becoming complicit
in them.

In conclusion, Ecuador appeals to the international
community to continue to support the request submitted
by the President of Palestine to promote it from the
category of Observer State to that of a full-fledged
Member State of the United Nations, within the 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital. That is
the only way that we will achieve peace and security in
the Middle East and thus peace for all Member States
of the United Nations.

