Mr. van den Berg (Netherlands): Mr. President, I
would like to thank you for joining us here in New
York and for presiding over this important thematic
debate in the Security Council.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania, Turkey and Croatia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia
and Montenegro, and the European Free Trade
Association countries Iceland and Norway, members of
the European Economic Area, align themselves with
this declaration.

There is no peace without justice, and there is no
justice without the rule of law. As the Secretary-
General himself put it before the General Assembly in
his speech on 21 September, the rule of law is indeed at
risk. The fundamental principles of the rule of law are
flouted not only by individuals, armed groups and
terrorists, but also by Member States themselves. The
European Union thanks the Secretary-General for his
excellent and timely report (S/2004/616) and welcomes
the vital importance that the Council attaches to work
on justice and the rule of law.

The European Union is committed to an
international order based on the rule of law, with the
United Nations at its core. At the international level, all
countries need a framework of fair rules and the
confidence that others will obey them. The
maintenance and promotion of the rule of law is an
ever-present imperative.

In conflict and post-conflict societies, there are
additional challenges to the rule of law: at the very
moment when the need for justice is greatest, the legal
structures necessary to deliver such justice may well be
absent, sometimes due to the conflict, at other times
when existing structures may have lost much of their
credibility.

The European Union welcomes the conclusions
and recommendations set out in the report of the
Secretary-General and expresses its support for the
inclusion of justice and rule of law elements in
resolutions and mandates. We urge all States to endorse
the entire set of recommendations set out in the report.
We also strongly urge the United Nations Secretariat to
take forward the recommendations in the report. The
European Union would also welcome expert meetings
on specific parts of the report in order to specify the
necessary actions in concrete situations and any
initiatives of Member States in this regard. Some, such
as Finland, Germany and Jordan, have put forward
thoughts on the organizational consequences for the
Secretariat. These are also worth studying.

The European Union would like to point to the
measures set out in paragraph 65 of the report, which
include strengthening the capacity of the Secretariat.
Adequate resources need to be secured for relevant
departments, in particular the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, so as to respond to the
increased United Nations involvement in this area. The
European Union urges other Member States and
international organizations to contribute national
expertise and materials. The rule of law has been
identified as one of four main priority fields within
civilian aspects of the common European Union
Security and Defence Policy.

In line with the report of the Secretary-General,
the European Union recognizes the need to incorporate
gender justice and gender sensitivity in all efforts and
activities related to justice and the rule of law, as well
as the need to ensure full participation of women.

The European Union welcomes the fact that the
Secretary-General has listed some norms and standards
for international assistance. Peace agreements endorsed
by the United Nations, and Security Council
resolutions and mandates, should never promise
amnesties for genocide, war crimes or crimes against
humanity. Also, the United Nations should never
establish or directly participate in a tribunal that can
impose capital punishment.

The European Union realizes that when the
international community is called to intervene in
conflict and post-conflict societies, there is no one-
size-fits-all formula. Our strategies should take into
account national cultures and traditions, as well as
local structures and capabilities. We should work
towards "locally owned" sustainable post-conflict
structures with well-functioning justice systems,
through which future disputes can be peacefully
settled.

The European Union emphasizes the important
role that criminal justice has to play in a society's
efforts to come to terms with past abuses. We also
recognize the need to give greater attention to meeting
the needs of victims - providing appropriate
reparations for harm suffered. The European Union
supports the full range of transitional justice
mechanisms, as well as international efforts to end
impunity for the most serious international crimes.

The most significant of these efforts is beyond
doubt the International Criminal Court (ICC), which is
now fully operational. The great advantage of the ICC
compared with its predecessors is that it is readily
available when the need arises. The European Union
strongly believes that the Court will be an effective
tool of the international community to buttress the rule
of law and combat impunity. As the Secretary-General
pointed out in his report, the Security Council has a
particular role to play in this regard, as it is empowered
to refer situations to the Court, even in cases where
countries are not States parties to the Statute of the
Court. The European Union shares the conviction of
the Secretary-General that all States Members of the
United Nations that have not yet done so should ratify
the Rome Statute at the earliest possible opportunity.

The European Union notes the report's balanced
appraisal of the lessons to be learned from the
experience of the ad hoc international criminal
tribunals. All these lessons have convinced the
European Union even more of the importance of the
establishment of the permanent International Criminal
Court.

The assessment of contributions to both ad hoc
Tribunals are determined by all and are to be paid by
all in full and on time. We have learned that some are
in considerable arrears, up to tens of millions of
dollars, thus stifling the ongoing work at the Tribunals.
Also, the European Union would like to draw attention
to the Special Court for Sierra Leone, as well as to the
future establishment of the so-called Khmer Rouge
tribunals. We support the idea of financing partially
those United Nations-sponsored efforts to assess
contributions to the extent possible.

The European Union would support a request by
the Security Council to the Secretary-General to keep
the Council informed on progress in taking forward the
recommendations set out in the report, and supports the
Council's intention to consider this matter again within
six months.

