Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security
(S/20l2/133), and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Jan Kubis, for
his briefing. I would also like to thank our colleague,
Ambassador Tanin, for his statement.

While presenting a record of positive
developments during recent months in Afghanistan, the
report and the briefing testify to the need for increased
efforts, including through a continued United Nations
presence, to tackle the existing security, economic,
humanitarian and other challenges in the country. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) plays a critical role in supporting the
Government of Afghanistan. We expect that the
mandate of UNAMA, renewed on the basis of full
recognition of Afghan sovereignty and the progress
made in recent years, will ensure more coordinated,
coherent and efficient work on the part of the United
Nations in Afghanistan.

Despite some decrease in security-related events
during the reporting period, the precarious security
situation continued to pose a serious threat to the
overall peace and stabilization efforts in Afghanistan.
Recent incidents demonstrate that additional resolute
measures are needed to eliminate civilian casualties,
which along with being a human tragedy also seriously
undermine the national and international efforts
towards peace and reconciliation.
We are encouraged by positive political
developments in Afghanistan, in particular by the
progress achieved so far in the implementation of the
Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme.
Azerbaijan welcomes the ongoing national dialogue
and reconciliation efforts. An inclusive Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace process, in accordance with the
Constitution of Afghanistan and with the support of the
international community, is an essential element of
overall stabilization and an absolute prerequisite for
achieving a durable solution.

As the transition period continues towards the
eventual withdrawal of international military forces
and the assumption of overall security responsibility by
Afghan security forces by the end of 2014, it is
becoming increasingly imperative that the international
community maintain its active support of the
Government of Afghanistan. Meanwhile, the timely
implementation of mutual commitments assumed at the
Bonn Conference is of paramount importance to ensure
that the transition period will lay a solid foundation for
the transformation decade of 2015-2024, during which
Afghanistan will be able to consolidate its sovereignty
by strengthening a fully functioning and sustainable
State. We look forward to the forthcoming Chicago
conference on security matters and the Tokyo
conference on development issues, which will give
specific shape to the framework and parameters of the
international engagement in Afghanistan after the
transition period.

We commend the strengthening of regional
dialogue and cooperation, which are necessary in the
broader context of stabilization efforts. In that regard,
the positive momentum gained after the Istanbul
Conference in November 2011 should be further
developed, and we consider the follow-up ministerial
conference to be held in Kabul in June 2012 to be an
important step towards ensuring greater coherence
among existing regional mechanisms. Undoubtedly,
stronger regional ties based on mutual confidence and
common vision will also lead to an increase in foreign
investment in Afghanistan from the region and beyond.

Basing its approach on the principle of the
indivisibility of security and its close relations with
Afghanistan, Azerbaijan decided from the very outset
to contribute to international efforts designed to
enhance the security, stability and prosperity of the
country. Azerbaijan joined the International Security
Assistance Force almost from its beginning and has
steadily increased its military contribution to it.

Azerbaijan is expanding its engagement in non-
military spheres by contributing to developing
capacity-building in Afghanistan. We believe that
capacity-building for Afghan institutions must remain
at the heart of international assistance in order to
enable the Government of Afghanistan to exercise
sovereign authority in all of its functions.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my
country's full support for Afghanistan's sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity. I emphasize my
Government's determination to continue being a part of
the collective efforts being undertaken in Afghanistan.

