Mr. Osvald (Sweden): The Netherlands will speak
later in the debate on behalf of the European Union.
Sweden, of course, stands fully behind that statement.
In recent weeks, a breakthrough has taken place in
the Angolan peace process. The formation of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation, as well
as the installation of the UNITA deputies in the National
Assembly, are Vital steps towards the fulfilment of the
Lusaka Protocol. Sweden also welcomes the agreement
reached on the special status of the leader of UNITA as
the Leader of the Largest Opposition Party.

A stable political environment is essential for social
and economic rehabilitation and long-term reconciliation.
Further strengthening the democratic process in Angola is
therefore of great significance. An exchange between the
Swedish and Angolan Parliaments has been initiated to
support this process.

Important political and military elements of the
peace accords remain to be fulfilled. In particular, it is
imperative that the incorporation of selected UNITA
soldiers into the Angolan Armed Forces and the
implementation of the demobilization plan be completed
without further delay.

The normalization of the State administration
throughout the country is another important issue. It will
require cooperation on a national, regional and local level.
All efforts should be made to complete this process while
the formed military units of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) remain in Angola.

The role of the United Nations in promoting and
facilitating the Angolan peace process will continue to be
vital. United Nations involvement is needed to see the
peace process through to its conclusion and to help
consolidate the progress which has been achieved.
Sweden will vote in favour of the draft resolution before
the Security Council today, extending the mandate of
UNAVEM. III to 30 June 1997. We also support the
proposal of the Secretary-General that UNAVEM. Ill be
succeeded by an Observer Mission. The transition
between UNAVEM. III and its successor should be a
smooth one, and we therefore fully support the intention
of the Secretary-General to begin preparations for the
change in the composition and focus of the United
Nations presence in Angola.

As we move into this period of transition, the
phasing down of UNAVEM. III's military units must

 

continue to be adapted to developments on the ground. We
must also bear in mind the continued need for the security
of all United Nations personnel to be assured.
For its part, Sweden has contributed military
observers, civilian police and demining experts to
UNAVEM. III. Angola also remains one of the major
recipients of Swedish assistance in the development,
demining and humanitarian fields. Sweden will give a
positive response to the consolidated appeal for Angola
launched recently by the Secretary-General. We urge other
States to do the same. Contributions to the appeal are
needed for the successful implementation of the
demobilization and reintegration plan.

We must take this opportunity to build on the progress
already made and move ahead to create the foundation for
durable peace in Angola. Having come so far, the former
adversaries should continue on the road to peace and fulfil
their remaining commitments under the peace accords. The
ultimate responsibility for restoring peace remains with the
Angolans themselves. The international community must,
however, continue to lend its support to what remains to be
accomplished. Sweden stands firm in its long-standing
commitment to the peace process in Angola.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate our gratitude to
the Secretary-General, his Special Representative, Maitre
Blondin Beye, and the three observer States - Portugal,
the Russian Federation and the United States - for their
efforts to assist the peace process in Angola.

