Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): On behalf of
my delegation, I would like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his presence here today and for his
address to the Council. Among other things, the
Secretary-General has addressed a concern that we
share about the continuing violence. He has also
emphasized the need for continued negotiations -
which we support - to resolve the Middle East
conflict. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe for his detailed briefing. My
delegation shares the views of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM) that will be presented by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of NAM.

The resumption of negotiations between Israel
and Palestine on final status issues and the
international efforts in the Middle East peace process
did give us some hope of moving closer to a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the Israel-
Palestine issue based on the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State living in peace side-by-
side with Israel. Our hope, however, is being dimmed
by the realities on the ground.

My delegation is deeply concerned about the
deterioration of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, where Israel's military attacks and
its construction of illegal settlements and the wall in
the West Bank continue. We remain deeply concerned
about the fact that, in disregarding the repeated appeals
of the international community, Israel has not relaxed
its restrictive measures in the Gaza Strip, which are
being implemented in Violation of international law,
including international human rights and humanitarian
laws, and which are taking an alarming toll in human
lives, especially those of women and children, and
great suffering to the Palestinian population.

While expressing our sympathy for innocent
Israeli civilians killed, injured or otherwise harmed in
attacks targeting southern Israel and other acts of
violence, acts which Viet Nam has condemned and will
continue to condemn, we cannot accept that this is
being used to justify the illegal actions of Israel to
which I have referred. By aggravating the already tense
situation on the ground, those actions are endangering
the limited positive progress achieved since the launch
of the Arab Peace Initiative and the Annapolis and
Paris Conferences.

Whether the first act or the response, Violence
only adds to the never-ending spiral of its own. We
urge the parties concerned to exercise maximum
restraint and abide by international law, including
international humanitarian and human rights law. We
call upon Israel to put an end to those actions and abide
by the spirit of the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, in order to de-escalate
tension and create an atmosphere conducive to tangible
results in the negotiations it is engaging in with
Palestine on final status issues, thereby bringing the
Middle East peace process back on track.

In the light of the difficulties that the Palestinian
people in the Gaza Strip are enduring as a result of
restrictive Israeli measures, and while concurring with
the Secretary-General's support for the Palestinian
Authority's proposal to operate the Gaza crossings, we
join the appeal to the international community, United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
to extend to them the necessary emergency and
humanitarian assistance.

My delegation takes note of certain positive
developments that have been recorded in the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), such as the
tripartite cooperation between Israel, Lebanon and the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) to
address key security and military operational issues, as
well as the dialogues taking place between Lebanon
and Syria on border delineation and demarcation.
However, we are deeply concerned about the
continuation of targeted attacks against Lebanese
civilians and UNIFIL personnel, as well as about
Israel's air Violations and its occupation of the village
of Ghajar, on the northern side of the Blue Line. We
continue to share the concerns about repeated
postponements of the presidential elections, the slow
progress in the disarmament of armed groups, the lack
of technical strike data of Israeli cluster munitions and
the unresolved issue of Lebanese prisoners.

While we support the efforts undertaken by the
League of Arab States and the Government of Lebanon
to advance the political process, we urge all parties
concerned to promote political dialogue and national
reconciliation and to proceed to the presidential
elections as planned. We continue to support resolution
1701 (2006) and call for its full implementation,
especially with regard to respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Lebanon, the protection of
assets and the livelihood of civilians, and the safety
and security of international peacekeeping and
humanitarian personnel.

The Middle East has seen too much bloodshed.
Continued Violence will only make the people of the
region - Arabs and Israelis alike - shed more blood.
The Middle East conflict can only be solved through
peaceful dialogue and negotiations in accordance with
the principle of land for peace and the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, taking into account
the legitimate rights and interests of all parties
concerned.

I wish to reaffirm Viet Nam's support for the
roles of the Quartet, the League of Arab States, the
countries of the region and the United Nations,
especially the Security Council, in the quest for a
lasting solution to the Middle East conflict along those
lines.

