Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings on the
completion strategies of their respective Tribunals. My
delegation also wishes to pay tribute to the enormous
commitment shown by the staff of both Tribunals to
meet the goals of the completion strategies.

The work of the International Criminal Tribunals
for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda is at a critical
stage as they strive to complete their cases effectively,
while steering the transition to the Residual Mechanism.
We acknowledge the considerable achievements and
progress of the Tribunals to comply fully with their
mandates.

With regard to the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, we welcome the fact that
all cases, except those held up through delayed arrest
warrants, will be completed and most of the Tribunal's
work will be on appeals. We note the recent decisions of
the Tribunals, all of which we fully respect.

With regard to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, we are pleased that the trials are on
schedule. We are concerned, however, by the fact that
nine people are still fugitives fromjustice. The Rwanda
Tribunal can complete its work successfully only if it
receives the effective cooperation of every State. We
call on all States, especially those of the Great Lakes
region, to step up their cooperation with the Tribunal
and to provide it with all necessary assistance in
arresting and handing over the remaining fugitives. In
addition, as we near the closure of the Tribunal, we are
also concerned about the human rights of those who
have been acquitted or have completed their sentences
but have not been relocated. We urge States to cooperate
with the International Tribunal and to provide it with all
necessary assistance for the relocation of those people.

On the one hand, we welcome the fact that both
Tribunals continue to take all possible measures
to complete their proceedings expeditiously, while
fully respecting due process. We also welcome their
commitment to carrying out the completion strategies,
despite their great burden of work. We remain
concerned by the reports from both Tribunals about
the difficulty of retaining personnel, which is one of
the main obstacles to achieving the completion strategy
goals.

My delegation recognizes the major contribution
of the Tribunals to international justice and
accountability for serious international crimes and to
the re-establishment of the rule of law in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. It is an honour for Guatemala
to chair the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals. At this crucial juncture, we continue to lend
our full support to the Tribunals and to the Residual
Mechanism.

This year, 1 July was a landmark date for two
reasons. First, it was the tenth anniversary of the entry
into force of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. The Tribunals were a source of
inspiration for the establishment of the Court, the
accounts of mass atrocities having called attention
to the pressing need for a permanent court to put an
end to impunity for what the international community
considers the most serious crimes.

The second reason is that 1 July marked the
commencement of operations of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. That
Mechanism ensures that there will be no gaps in the
fight against impunity, given the great number of
remaining tasks after the closures of the Tribunals,
including witness protection, cooperation with national
authorities, reviewing sentences and overseeing their
execution.

We note the Residual Mechanism's forward
progress, as related in the progress report from its
President (S/2012/849, annex I). We approve the ongoing
process whereby in 2013 the Mechanism will begin
operations relating to cases in the former Yugoslavia.
We welcome the fact that the Tribunals have worked
together to ensure a gradual and efficient transition to
the Residual Mechanism.

Lastly, after two decades we have a success story
for international criminal justice - an achievement not
only for the Tribunals but for our Organization and its
Member States.

