Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Madam President, for your attendance at this
morning's meeting and for convening this debate.
In particular, I am grateful to Colombia for focusing
the Council's attention on the important issue of
peacebuilding and on the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). We think that this is a very timely
debate, especially following the Council's recent visit
to West Africa. We thank the Secretary-General,
Ambassadors Gasana and Momen and Mr. Von Amsberg
for their comprehensive briefings.

Peacebuilding remains a central focus for the
United Kingdom. We believe that the Peacebuilding
Commission has a potentially important role to
play within the wider context of United Nations
efforts to support countries emerging from conflict.
But, as Ambassador Momen rightly said today, the
Peacebuilding Commission has not yet fulfilled that
potential.

As Council members will be aware, following our
visit to West Africa I wrote to the Council President on
12 June with some ideas on how we might strengthen
the role of the PBC in the countries visited, and how we
might improve the quality of the interaction between
the Council and the PBC Chairs. I am grateful to the
Colombian presidency for scheduling an interactive
dialogue tomorrow with the relevant PBC country
configurations, and for this wider open debate today.

For now, I would like to highlight three areas where
we see an important added value for the role of the PBC.
They are, first, supporting strong national ownership
of peacebuilding; secondly, promoting coherence in
international support for peacebuilding; and thirdly,
providing informed briefings for the Security Council.
First, on national ownership, as we know, the
primary responsibility for peacebuilding rests with
post-conflict Governments themselves. That means,
as Ambassador Haroon has just reminded us, national
leadership and ownership of the process from start to
finish. But national leaders should not feel that they
are in it alone. The international community has an
important role to play by helping post-conflict countries
build national capacity to lead, and by helping to
strengthen and underpin the political will necessary to
consolidate peace.

We do not have to invent this sort of partnership
from scratch. A number of conflict-affected countries
have come together and produced, after some two years
of effort, an agenda for how the international system
should partner them as they build peace, based on the
core principles of national leadership and ownership.
This agenda, the so-called New Deal, is one we should
actively support.

The Peacebuilding Commission should be working
with the countries on its agenda in line with the
principles of the New Deal. That means helping to
ensure that national Governments are in the driver's
seat and that their leadership is not undermined. But it
also means holding national actors to account for their
commitment to peacebuilding. The PBC should be a
supportive partner, but also a robust one, and should
not shirk engaging in discussion about the tough issues
and political choices that post-conflict countries face,
including, for example, on national reconciliation, the
rule of law and human rights.

Secondly, as the Secretary-General and Ambassador
Momen highlighted, the coherence of the international
effort is absolutely vital. We simply cannot overburden
countries emerging from conflict with individual
agency turf wars or duplication of effort, or major
gaps in support for key peacebuilding sectors. We
must ensure that our own efforts as an international
community are coherent. This is especially true for
the United Nations. We need strong, effective links
between United Nations missions and country teams,
so that the whole is greater than the sum of the parts.
That requires good planning, a clear division of labour
and strong leadership on the ground. I welcome the fact
that the new Deputy Secretary-General has stressed
that message in his first few days in his new job.

The PBC can play a vital role here. It can support
the countries on its agenda in mapping international
assistance, identifying gaps and lobbying international
actors to improve coherence and predictability of
support. It can even name and shame when international
actors are not lining up in support of a coherent,
effective international effort. In that regard, the PBC has
a critical role to play in bringing to bear the perspective
of the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund, which play such a central role in helping many
countries restart their economies in the aftermath of
conflict. We warmly welcome the participation of the
World Bank in today's debate.

Finally, let me turn to the relationship between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
I believe that the PBC can add genuine value to
Council deliberations for the countries on its agenda
by complementing the briefings given by senior United
Nations officials on the ground. For example, the PBC
could provide the Council with an overview of the
effectiveness of international support to the countries
on its agenda. It can elucidate on the kinds of issues
I have talked about today: the coherence, inclusivity
and degree of national ownership of peacebuilding in a
given country. For its part, the Council could be more
direct in requesting specific information from the PBC
Chairs, especially in the run-up to consultations or
mandate renewals. That would enable the Commission
to widen the Council's field of vision across the full
range of peacebuilding challenges and actors.

