Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, China commends the initiative you have
taken as President of the Security Council to convene
today's open meeting. We thank Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed, Mr. Mohammed Bila,
representative of the Lake Chad Basin Commission,
and Ms. Chitra Nagarajan, Senior Conflict Adviser
of Adelphi, for their briefings.

In recent years we have seen African countries
standing united and making concerted efforts to
strengthen themselves, finding African solutions to
African issues and developing more robust collective
security mechanisms for the region. They have thereby
not only strongly defended Africa's peace and security
but have also contributed significantly to international
peace and security. China applauds those efforts.

Meanwhile, Africa continues to face challenges
to peace and security. In certain regions, including
the Lake Chad basin, terrorist and violent extremist
activities are still rampant. Transnational organized
crimes such as drug smuggling and human trafficking
continue to endanger the safety of the African people.
As a result, the countries affected are suffering the
effects of sluggish economic growth, along with
persistent serious unemployment, poverty and refugee
issues. It is therefore imperative that the international
community take concrete measures to help Africa build
its capacity to ensure peace and security.

First, the international community must firmly
support Africa in its fight against the terrorist threats.
Counter-terrorism in Africa is an integral part of the
global counter-terrorism effort. The international
community must uphold common counter-terrorism
standards and support Africa's anti-terrorism efforts.
The United Nations must provide tangible assistance
to African countries in their anti-terrorism capacity-
building so that their counter-terrorism efforts are more
effective. China commends the fact that the countries
of the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel have assumed
ownership of the issue and have been working jointly
for peace by actively combating regional terrorist
threats. While maintaining respect for the sovereignty
and wishes of host countries, the United Nations and
the international community should provide targeted
assistance to countries of the region in areas such
as technology, training, equipment, logistics and
financial support.

Secondly, we should give Africa effective assistance
in addressing the root causes of conflict. The continent's
hotspot issues are a mass of intertwined national,
ethnic, religious and social issues. African countries
have two big jobs to do - maintaining peace and
security, on the one hand, and promoting revitalization
and development, on the other, and to do that they must
address both the root causes and the symptoms. While
it is important to resolve the ongoing peace and security
challenges, it is even more important to address their
root causes from a long-term perspective. This means
in particular that support and assistance should be
provided to African countries, including those in the
Lake Chad basin, in their efforts to reduce poverty
and increase employment, with the aim of improving
economic and social development levels, delivering a
tangible peace dividend to their peoples, and rooting
out breeding grounds of conflict and extremism.

Thirdly, the unique role of regional organizations
should be actively brought to bear. The African Union
(AU) and other regional and subregional organizations
in Africa have an intimate knowledge of regional
and national realities and have long been mediating
complex regional hotspot issues, leveraging their
unique geographic, historical and cultural advantages.
It is therefore important to ensure that the international
community fully respects African countries' ownership
in resolving their own security concerns, deepens
coordination with countries in the Lake Chad basin
and regional and subregional organizations such as
the AU, the Economic Community of West African
States and the Lake Chad Basin Commission, and
enhances cooperation with them in areas such as
conflict prevention, crisis management and post-
conflict reconstruction.

China and Africa are a community with a shared
future, as well as a community of shared interests
and win-win cooperation Strengthening solidarity
and cooperation with African countries remains a key
foundation of China's foreign policy. As a good friend,
brother and partner of the continent, China will continue
to act on the principles of sincerity, practical results,
affinity and good faith that guide China's Africa policy,
as well as on the values of friendship, justice and shared
interests, both articulated by President Xi Jinping, and
it will firmly support Africa's peace and development
efforts. In September, China will host a Beijing summit
forum on China-Africa cooperation, focusing on China
and Africa's joint efforts to build the Belt and Road
Initiative and on the China-Africa Community of a
Shared Future. We will work hard to ensure that the
Belt and Road Initiative is aligned with the development
strategies of African countries, the AU's Agenda 2063
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, so
as to create greater benefits for the peoples of Africa
and bring peace, stability and development to the
African continent as soon as possible.

Last but not least, I would like to stress that as
always, China will continue to stand together with all
the developing countries of Africa. We will always be
sincere friends and reliable partners of Africa.

