Mr. Thambwe Mwamba (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I did not at all wish to
get into a debate, but I think that the excesses found in
the statement given by the Permanent Representative
of Rwanda require me to attempt to re-establish some
truth.

The first thing that must be pointed out is that, as
anyone who knows African geography knows, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a mosaic of
minorities. There is no one dominant tribe. I really do
not like talking about individual tribes. The
representative talked about the Tutsis and I think it is
very sad to have to single out one particular tribe
because we are a mosaic of tribes and the Tutsis are not
the smallest of the minorities. For that, one can look in
Katanga; it is the Banyanzi who are the smallest -
they have only one village.

There was a real problem for the Tutsi minority,
which had to do with their Congolese nationality: after
independence, all of the constitutions that were written
in our country stated that the descendants of ethnic
groups and tribes established on Congolese territory at
the time of the Berlin Conference were Congolese
nationals.

Based on that principle, for a number of decades,
we denied Congolese nationality to Tutsis who had
immigrated afterwards. We then thought that it was
necessary to go beyond that interpretation. Thus, in the
last Constitution, which was adopted by referendum, as
well as in the Transition Constitution drafted as a result
of the Sun City Agreement, deleted that historical
reference to tribes that had been established on
Congolese territory at the time of the Berlin
Conference in favour of the principle enshrined in
today's Constitution, which is that all tribes on
Congolese territory on 30 June 1960 have Congolese
nationality.

Thus, the major challenge that the representative
referred to was overturned by the will of the Congolese
themselves. To say today that Mr. Nkunda is the leader
of an ethnic group that feels threatened is excessive
and deeply shocks us.

At the same time, what is happening today in the
Kivus appears very clearly as a transposition onto
Congolese territory of conflicts that had been raging in
neighbouring countries, because the people being
massacred by Mr. Nkunda in Kiwanja are curiously all
part of the same ethnic group, the Congolese Hutus.
This shows that the Rwandan conflict has been
transferred onto our territory. Today, of the 1.5 million
displaced Congolese persons in North Kivu, 90 per
cent belong to the same ethnic group, the Congolese
Hutus. This means that, if we continue to entertain that
type of argument, we are, in fact, working against the
Congolese Tutsis, because the Hutus that are currently
in North Kivu and the Bantu, generally, what are in the
two Kivus, amount to roughly 10 million people.

Now, if Mr. Nkunda now wants there to be a new
North Kivu province that he might be able to lead,
even in that province he would be in the minority. So,
it is extremely dangerous to maintain such a position.
In the end, Mr. Nkunda, through his actions, is making
enemies out of 10 million people in North Kivu who
already detest him, and he is endangering his own
ethnic group, which he claims he is trying to protect.

The Tutsis are not the smallest minority in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - I told you about
the Bayanzi. We did what we had to do to integrate
them into our institutions. That is why you will find
that in all of our country's institutions today,
Mr. Nkunda's ethnic group, despite its number, has a
presence - in the Senate, in the National Assembly, in
the Government and even in the army, where there are
nine generals of his ethnic group, 19 colonels and
several hundred majors and senior officers. I do not
think that he would find the same proportion in
neighbouring countries.

We do not want to take a step backwards. We are
steadfastly committed to move forward to normalized
relations with Rwanda, but it is still important for
everyone to be involved. In less than two months we
have had six meetings, five on a bilateral basis with
Rwanda, plus a sixth meeting with Burundi and
Rwanda, and that was because we had moved forward
in our programme to normalize the situation.

Therefore, we need to do away with this pretext
that Mr. Nkunda has created for economic reasons, one
that he is continuing to use along with other claims. It
is completely false to say that the Tutsi ethnic group
today is an ethnic group that is threatened. We removed
the major problem in the Constitution; we have done
everything we could to integrate them. In the last
Government, the Governmental representative of the
Tutsi ethnic group was the president of the Tutsi
community of North Kivu.

I do not want to get back into that discussion,
which is rather reductionist, but I did want to correct
the record. If the same efforts were to be made by
neighbouring countries to handle problems inside their
countries, the entire region would be at peace. We do
not want to move backwards, but it is clear that
Mr. Nkunda is a creation from outside, not for reasons
of security, we have always maintained, but for purely
economic reasons.

