Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to welcome you, Mr. President,
to preside over this meeting. We also thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his comprehensive briefing.
We look forward to the submission of at least two written
reports per year on the state of the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016), in accordance with the
agreements reached on different issues in the Security
Council, the provisions of that resolution and the note
by the President contained in document S/2017/507.

"The Security Council is the highest world body.
After the Council, we leave our issue in the hands ofthe
Almighty, until Judgment Day. Ifjustice for all people
cannot be attained here, where should we go? Please
help us. We call upon the Council to help us so that we
do not commit acts that are at variance with our beliefs,
those of the Council and the world." (S/PV8183, 17.10)

Those are the words that His Excellency the
President of the State of Palestine, Mr. Mahmoud Abbas,
the highest Palestinian official, used in addressing
the international community from this Chamber in
February 2018, when he called for the liberty, dignity
and independence of his people, just like other peoples.
Almost one and a half years have passed since he
launched that call and, regrettably, we have not lifted a
finger in response.

The Oslo Accords are nearly 25 years old, and
we have had great hopes for leading to a just and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question
which is at the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
However, the Israeli acts of aggression continue to
entrench the occupation and undermine any real chance
for peace that would ensure the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people. The occupying Power continues its
arbitrary detentions and the demolition and seizure of
Palestinian homes.
Moreover, the occupying Power continues the
construction of settlements in an unprecedented
manner, especially after the most recent announcement
made by the Israeli occupation authority to build
over 2,300 settlement units in the West Bank. It also
continues to expand the already existing settlements
and forcibly displace Palestinian civilians, in another
blatant violation of resolution 2334 (2016). It continues,
as well, to tighten the siege imposed on the Gaza Strip
and its aggression on Islamic and Christian sanctuaries.
The Israeli occupation authority takes illegal unilateral
decisions, such as freezing part of Palestinian tax
revenues and refusing to renew the mandate of the
Temporary International Presence in Hebron, not to
mention its measures that aim to change the historic
and democratic nature of the city of Jerusalem. It tries
to impose a fait accompli and exercises sovereignty
over the territories that it occupies.

There are those who believe that the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories cannot get any worse
than they are at present. However, the daily violations
against the Palestinian people are unprecedented, given
the dangerous precedents that the Palestinian question
has recently witnessed, the most notable of which was
the recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel
and the relocation of embassies there, while ignoring
the fact that East Jerusalem is Palestinian land that has
been occupied since 1967.

All those measures, and many others, have
compelled the Palestinian Authority to halt its
implementation of the agreements that were reached
with the Israeli occupying Power. We all have
responsibilities to help meet the legitimate aspirations of
the Palestinian people and to uphold the responsibilities
that we have been tasked as Security Council members
to protect civilians, given the escalating violence.
We call upon Israel, the occupying Power, to cease
all acts of aggression against the Palestinian people,
commit to the protection of civilians and guarantee the
implementation of international law and the relevant
resolutions. Palestine cannot remain the exception
to the rule. In addition, the international community
must be committed to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and provide its budget with the necessary resources
and financial contributions so that it continues to
offer its educational, health and social services to the
community of Palestinian refugees.

In conclusion, despite what President Abbas said
before the Council, we are committed to peace as
a strategic choice. Arab States concluded the Arab
Peace Initiative in 2002. It is based on international
law, resolutions of international legitimacy and the
principle of land for peace. We cannot accept a solution
to the Arab-Israeli conflict that is not in line with those
international terms of reference, to be preceded by an
end to the occupation by Israel of the Palestinian and
Arab territories occupied since 1967, including East
Jerusalem; its recognition of the State of Palestine
and the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including their right to self-determination and right
of return; compensation to Palestinian refugees; and
resolving their cause in a just manner, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 194 (III). Moreover,
we call on Israel to stop its repeated violations of the
sovereignty of Lebanon and to respect its obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 1701
(2006).

