Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): The delegation of Cote d'Ivoire would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his presence and for his
briefing on the latest developments in Syria following
the air strikes carried out by certain members of the
Security Council during the night of Friday, 13 April.
Cote d'Ivoire requests all the actors involved in the
Syrian conflict at the various levels to show restraint
and not to further complicate the disastrous situation in
which the Syrian people find themselves. Weapons and
bombs have struck Syria too often in disregard for our
collective action towards peace.

Is it necessary to recall that, by signing the
Charter of the United Nations in 1945, the founding
Members sought to establish a new world order based
on multilateralism and its resolve to make peace a
universal common good, the maintenance of which
was entrusted to the United Nations and the Security
Council as its primary responsibility? The Secretary-
General has just reminded us of that. In every situation
in which the Charter of the United Nations has guided
the action of the international community, respect for
its principles has always enabled us to overcome the
most inextricable challenges, thereby preventing many
disasters for humanity.

Based on its strong conviction in the virtues of
multilateralism, my country therefore believes that
resorting to force in order to maintain international
peace and security must be authorized by the Security
Council in order to preserve its essential legal authority
and to thereby prevent any deviation or abuse. Only a
Security Council that is strong and representative of our
time will be able to mobilize all Member States of the
United Nations in support of its primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security.
cote d'Ivoire would therefore like to express its deep
concern over the inability of the Council to relaunch
the dialogue in Syria and to sideline the supporters of a
military solution.

Cote d'Ivoire would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate its unequivocal condemnation of the use
of chemical weapons, no matter who is responsible,
and we call for the establishment of a multilateral
mechanism to attribute responsibility and to bring those
responsible for the use of chemical weapons to justice in
the appropriate international tribunals. In that context,
my delegation reiterates its support for the investigation
to be conducted by the Fact-finding Mission of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
in order to shed light on the allegations of the use of
chemical weapons in Douma in eastern Ghouta. Cote
d'Ivoire once again urges the members of the Security
Council to unite with a view to putting an end to their
differences and to effect the establishment of this
mechanism to establish responsibility, which all the
members of the Council would like to see set up.

Cote d'Ivoire would like to reassert its conviction
and its position of principle that the response to the
crisis in Syria cannot be a military response. Quite
to the contrary; it must be sought in the framework
of dialogue and an inclusive political process, as
envisioned in the road map set out in resolution 2254
(2015). The time has come to decisively give every
opportunity for dialogue a chance and to make sure that
the Council is in step with history.

