Mrs. Papadopoulou (Greece): I would first like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Angela Kane for
today's briefing.

Greece fully associates itself with the statement
to be made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Austria on behalf of the European Union.

In the last few days, the cycle of violence in the
Middle East has reached new peaks, and the situation
seems to be reaching an extremely dangerous point. It
was only a week ago that, during our last discussions
on the developments in the region, we expressed our
concern over recent incidents in Gaza and the West
Bank and condemned, in the strongest terms, the
violence and killings of innocent civilians, including
women and children. Today we can only repeat, in
sadness and horror at the further deterioration, the
same condemnation and deep concern.

We cannot but deeply deplore the killing of the
Israeli hostage, confirmed only yesterday, and the
continued holding of an Israeli soldier as a hostage.
The killing of a hostage is a barbaric act that cannot be
justified and serves no purpose towards peace.

We equally deeply deplore the increasing number
of victims among the civilian population in Gaza and
the West Bank and the exacerbation of the
humanitarian crisis. The suffering of the Palestinian
civilian population has reached new alarming levels.
We call upon Israel to exercise utmost restraint in
dealing with the current crisis.

Let me reiterate some basic points.
We continue to believe that, in taking measures to
defend itself, Israel must respect its obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian
law. In that respect, we repeat our call upon Israel for
proportionate use of force.

We are particularly concerned over the detention
of elected members of the Palestinian Government and
legislature, and about the way it was carried out by the
Israeli army. The international community has long
invested in democratic institution-building as part of
our shared efforts towards the creation of a viable and
democratic Palestinian State living side by side with
Israel in peace and security within internationally
recognized borders. It is very important to preserve the
viability and continuity of those institutions.

We also continue to believe that it is imperative
that the Palestinian Government take effective and
immediate strong action to improve security and to
prevent terrorist attacks against Israel. We call upon
them to immediately release the abducted Israeli
soldier. The Hamas-led Government needs to meet and
implement the principles set out by the Quartet of non-
violence, recognition of Israel's right to exist and
acceptance of existing agreements and obligations.

In this dire situation, we welcome Prime Minister
Olmert's and President Abbas's pledge to carry out
negotiations, and commend the efforts of the latter to
unite all Palestinian political forces to work towards
achieving the widest possible consensus in support of
the objectives of the road map. In that respect, the
conclusion, in the last few days, of a national
agreement reached by all Palestinian factions with the
exception of the Islamic Jihad movement should be a
step in the right direction.

Greece remains committed to striving for the
achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East, based on all the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), as well as
on the Madrid terms of reference and the principle of
land for peace.

We call upon Israel to refrain from any and all
unilateral actions that could prejudge the outcome of
final status negotiations and threaten the viability of a
two-State solution.

At this particular critical juncture, we should not
lose sight of the bigger picture, and we should not
allow ourselves to become distracted from our main
goal, which is to create the necessary conditions for the
re-launching, as soon possible, of the peace process
and the return to the road map.
