Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank the Nigerian
delegation for convening today's meeting on the issue
of security sector reform (SSR). We are also grateful to
Assistant Secretary-General Titov, Assistant Secretary-
General Nakamitsu and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bangura for their detailed briefings.
Security sector reform is one of the most important
components of peacekeeping during the post-conflict
period. Relevant measures help not only in achieving
national reconciliation, but also in ensuring the
security of State institutions, thereby promoting
effective civilian protection, strengthening stability
and preventing the emergence of new violence.

Undoubtedly, security sector reform should be
conducted in the context of broader rebuilding processes,
including a package of efforts on the political, economic
and social fronts. Only a holistic approach will provide
hope for lasting peace and security. The success of
security sector reform depends, first and foremost,
on ownership on the part of national Governments
and their determination to take responsible efforts in
drafting and implementing national strategies and
priorities in that sphere.

A lack ofprogress in security sector reform was one
of the basic causes of an escalation of armed conflict
in South Sudan, where national armed forces broke
into warring camps. Another negative example was
the situation preceding the military coup d'etat in the
Central African Republic in the spring of 2014, where
the army and police did not reflect either the ethnic or
the religious composition of the population. They also
lacked proper equipment and training due, in part, to
fears of former President Bozize of threats to his power.

It is unfortunate that in a number of cases of
countries experiencing conflict situations, they are
unable, without outside support, to ensure security
and rebuild Viable and effective State institutions.
In such situations, assistance from the international
community is of critical importance. Such assistance
should be guided by fundamental principles, including
the host country's agreement, respect for its national
sovereignty and political independence. Such efforts
must also focus on strengthening national capacities,
based on the country's specific situation.

AcentralroleincoordinatingandagreeinguponSSR
efforts should be played by the United Nations, which
has a diverse toolkit of effective instruments. First and
foremost I am thinking of Security Council authorized
peacekeeping missions. Peacekeepers' multifaceted
mandates include tasks aimed at assisting with SSR,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts
and rebuilding law-and-order structures and the rule
of law in general. Outstanding work in that area is
also carried out by the Peacebuilding Fund and the
Peacebuilding Commission, whose complementary
significantly increases the chances for establishing
sound, accountable and professional national security
bodies.

In the current context there is also need to take
into account the regional aspects of conflict and the
transborder nature of threats, in cases where a spike
in Violence in one country could ignite violence in
neighbouring countries and, indeed, in the region
as a whole. In that context, it is of great importance
to develop cooperation between and among the
States of the region, was well as with regional and
subregional organizations. Such cooperation should
include information exchange of frontline experience
and providing resources to ensure swift and effective
responses to emerging threats.

In conclusion we would like to underscore the
Russian Federation's commitment to developing
international cooperation in SSR, including in
peacekeeping operations and providing peacekeeping
staff with the necessary expertise and equipment,
including advanced training for peacekeepers on
United Nations standards.

