The President (Spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 5/2007/482, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Italy, Panama, Slovakia,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America. I also wish to draw the
attention of the members to document 5/2007/481,
which contains the text of a letter dated 9 August 2007
from the representative of Iraq addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a letter from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq.

I welcome the participation of the Secretary-
General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, at this
morning's meeting.

As this is the last time that Ambassador Emyr
Jones Parry will participate in a Council meeting in his
capacity as Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, I wish to take this opportunity to express to
him, on behalf of the members of the Council, our
appreciation of him, both as a colleague and as a
friend. Ambassador Jones Parry has represented the
United Kingdom at United Nations Headquarters since
July 2003, a period during which the Security Council
has taken many important decisions. He will be
remembered as a very active ambassador who
successfully led several missions to various parts of
Africa and also led many rounds of negotiations on
difficult and delicate draft resolutions. The most recent
such resolutions are 1769 (2007), which authorized the
establishment of the African Union/United Nations
hybrid operation in Darfur, and the draft resolution on
which we are going to take action this morning.

In bidding Ambassador Jones Parry a warm
farewell, the other members of the Council and I wish
him every success in his new undertakings.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Congo, France, Ghana,
Indonesia, Italy, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President (spoke in French): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1770 (2007).

I shall now give the floor to the Secretary-
General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.


