Mr. Fowler: Precisely one year ago, the Council
spent many hours discussing the circumstances in which
two United Nations C-130 aircraft were destroyed and
their passengers and crews murdered in Huambo province
in the closing days of 1998, within hours of our joining
the Council last year. There was much debate in the
Council about who was responsible for such despicable
acts, and how the perpetrators might hope to benefit from
them. I believe that the Council will find this next
segment interesting as to how it relates to United Nations
sanctions and, indeed, who was responsible.

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): Savimbi took all these steps
because, in the light of the sanction packages that
were being applied, there was talk about controlling
the tracing of UNITA's assets placed in banks
around the world. That is why I am saying that
Savimbi did not bank any money, but rather, he
went around keeping money in the houses of the
Presidents who were his friends. Even in his own
house he has five safes where he keeps money. He
does not agree to use banks. He does not even have

 

money that travels around in bags and suitcases. He
has a lot of diamonds. And the best diamond he was
able to win is kept with him.

"Mr. Fowler: He keeps it by his side?

"Voice (spoke in Portuguese; interpreted into English at the scene): Yes, close to him. But all his
family is abroad. In Angola there is only him and two
of his nephews. All of his family is abroad. So we do
not know who keeps the diamonds. Where is Dr.
Savimbi now? He is organizing the building of an
airport to be able to welcome some aircraft. From
what point I do not know, because now I am on this
side.

"Voice (spoke in French): I will tell you frankly
that I was his aide de camp for many years. He told
me many things, and I tried to retain what he said. He
said that he would never go into exile. Because of his
personal life he does not want to submit himself to
that. He is aware of all the evil that he has done
everywhere. Once this is exposed to outside scrutiny,
the laws will -

"Mr. Fowler: Pinochet.

"Voice (spoke in French): Exactly. He is here
and he is going to stay there until he loses his life."
