Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
issue before the Council today is an issue of great
importance and significance, not only because of its
strong relation to the issues of international peace and
security but also because of the needed wisdom and
diligence to deal with it, the analytical approach that
the Security Council takes within the context of its
work, and its relation to international conventions.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) in all their aspects, vertical and horizontal, has
always been a threat to international peace and
security, and perhaps the recognition by the
international community of that fact is what made its
members, half a century ago, sit together, with unity of
purpose and nobility of vision, to conclude a group of
conventions and agreements that are relative to WMD
and the materials needed to produce them within a
framework of treating such problems, including the
issues of follow-up and monitoring.

We are conscious of the threats posed by some
groups or individuals producing, developing or
transporting WMD without the knowledge of their
Governments. This makes us feel suspicious about the
ability of the Council to deal with this subject. On the
contrary, the temporary and immediate nature of the
Council's work in dealing with international peace and
security makes it more difficult for it to adopt a
deliberate methodology and develop arrangements that
are continuous and which, in our view, call for detailed
consideration of the way of dealing with these new
threats. Intensifying the system of existing conventions
would constitute a more competent and transparent
response towards these various threats.

While we appreciate the initiative of those who
have presented to us, for first time, an opportunity to
debate in such a broad forum the draft resolution which
is being considered by the members of the Council, we
hope that Council members will take the following
observations of my delegation into consideration - all
the more so because the Council is about to adopt a
resolution which calls on Member States to implement
a number of measures in conformity with the
provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter.

First, the draft resolution before us should
determine clearly the relation between the Security
Council and its proposed committee and the existing
system of conventions and whether the committee is
proposed for the current stage or for the future because
the Council has been established to deal with problems
of this nature. The existing conventions and
agreements, despite the extensive consultations it took
to draft them, have proven their ability and continuity
and have achieved international consensus. Therefore,
consideration by the Council of this issue should be on
a temporary basis and for a specific, limited time until
an internationally ratified agreement can be concluded,
which might lead to an expansion or improvement of
the other existing conventions.

Secondly, it could be a suitable opportunity, when
dealing with the issues to combat the spread of weapons
of mass destruction, to re-emphasize proposals for zones
free of weapons of mass destruction in various regions
of the world, especially in the Middle East.

Thirdly, the proposal to establish a new Security
Council committee to combat the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction requires further
clarification, not only with respect to the mandate and
duration of such a committee but also with respect to
its functions and their relationship with the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999).
Clarification is needed also with respect to the
appointment of experts and their areas of specialization.

Fourthly, it may be useful to recall that many
Member States will need technical, material or
logistical support to comply with the draft resolution.
Here, let me mention danger that might arise from
recourse to Chapter VII of the Charter with respect to
problems that are known to be beyond the control of
Member States.
Fifthly, with reference to the respective legal
systems of Member States, control of borders and exit
points and internal import-export controls, any
measures adopted must result in cooperation, not in
accusations. They must thus not be formulated in a
hurried way. We were surprised to hear that the
sponsors would like to put the draft resolution to the
vote before the end of this month.

We note a growing trend towards granting the
Security Council additional legislative powers. Here,
we wish to make it very clear that membership of the
United Nations and the common desire to strengthen its
role places a number of responsibilities on our
shoulders in conformity with the provisions of the
Charter as drafted by the founding Members. Thus, in
defining the role of the Security Council in terms of the
maintenance of international peace and security and of
guaranteeing compliance by Member States with
international law, the Charter does not give the Council
legislative authority; it gives it the authority to
safeguard the Charter and to monitor compliance with
its provisions. If in the present case that is what is
required, it should be emphasized in the text.

