Mr. Burian (Slovakia): Slovakia fully aligns
itself with the statement that will be delivered shortly
by the Permanent Representative of Austria on behalf
of the European Union. Therefore, I will limit my
statement to the following remarks.

We note with concern the recent violent incidents
and hostilities in Israel and the Palestinian territories,
including indiscriminate rocket attacks against Israel
from Gaza, suicide bombings and major Israeli reprisal
operations. They have brought new suffering and the
loss of innocent lives to both sides.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
our deep sympathy and condolences to the Government
of Israel and the families of the victims of the most
recent terrorist attack in Tel Aviv. We categorically
condemn all terrorist actions, which cannot be justified
by any goals or aims. We urge all parties to stop the
spiral of violence and we call on them to refrain from
taking any steps which might further escalate the
hostilities. We urge both sides to exercise the utmost
restraint.

We take this opportunity to reaffirm our support
for a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement to the
Middle East conflict based on all relevant Security
Council resolutions and negotiations between the two
sides.
Slovakia supports the two-State solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In order to achieve progress
in implementing the vision of two democratic States,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security, both parties have to accept previous
agreements and obligations, return to constructive
dialogue and take concrete actions aimed at building
and strengthening mutual confidence and trust.

In that context, we note with concern that the new
Palestinian Government, which was formed and is led
by Hamas, has not committed itself to the three
principles laid out by the Quartet in its statement of 30
January. We consider that step to be a basic
precondition for the continuation of meaningful talks to
settle the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. In order to
become a partner in the peace process, Hamas and the
new Palestinian Government must recognize Israel's
right to exist, renounce Violence and terror, and accept
previous agreements and obligations.

We support the efforts and leadership of President
Mahmoud Abbas in that direction. We urge the new
Palestinian Government to commit itself to President
Abbas' platform of peace, aimed at creating the
conditions necessary for the continuation of a dialogue
on a solution to the Middle East conflict.

We also join Secretary-General Kofi Annan in his
call on the Palestinian Authority to take a clear public
stance against violence and to take firm measures
against the perpetrators of rocket attacks and suicide
bombings. We urge the Palestinian Authority to
undertake all necessary measures to dismantle the
infrastructure of terrorism in the Palestinian territories.

At the same time, we believe that the new Israeli
Government will reconfirm its commitment to peace in
the Middle East based on the principles laid out in the
road map and that it will refrain from undertaking such
steps and activities that may be contradictory to the
principles of international law. On the other hand, we
believe that Israel has the right of self-defence against
terrorist attacks. Its responses, however, must be
proportionate and everything possible must be done to
avoid the loss of innocent lives.

In conclusion, I would like to emphatically stress
that there is no military solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian dispute. The only way to achieve a
comprehensive and lasting settlement to the conflict is
through peaceful negotiations leading to a two-State
solution in accordance with the road map.

The international community, including the
Security Council, must remain actively engaged in the
peace process in the Middle East. Both sides, however,
must do more and demonstrate clear political will and
commitment to ending this protracted conflict which
has threatened global peace and security for more than
half a century. In spite of the latest wave of violence
and hostilities, we believe that there is a window of
opportunity for the new Palestinian and Israeli
Governments to put the peace process back on the right
track. That window of opportunity must be seized
through concrete and immediate action, leading from
mutual recognition of the right to exist to the mutual
peaceful coexistence of two viable States.

