Mr. Mohammad Kamal (Malaysia): Let me, at the
outset, extend my delegation's warm welcome to Mr. Ivo
Petrov, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Tajikistan, and thank him for his very useful briefing. We
are also grateful to the Secretary-General for his final report
(S/2000/387) on the United Nations Mission of Observers
in Tajikistan (UNMOT).

My delegation welcomes the significant achievements
in the peace and reconciliation process in Tajikistan, as
described by the Secretary-General in his report. We wish
to take this opportunity to congratulate the Tajik leadership
and people for their political will and the strong
commitment that they have demonstrated to end the war in
their country and pursue the path of peace and national
accord. We strongly urge them to strive further, with
determined effort, to strengthen and consolidate the
achievements made thus far so that the peace process will
be irreversible.

The United Nations, with the important support of the
Contact Group and international organizations, in particular
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Commonwealth of Independent States Collective
Peacekeeping Forces, has played a crucial role in the Tajik
peace process. Some seven years of active involvement of
the United Nations in Tajikistan has been recognized as a
success, culminating in the successful conclusion of
UNMOT's mandate. This is indeed a matter of great
satisfaction to my delegation. At the same time, we note
that this success has not been without price. We would like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute to Mr. Petrov and
his predecessors, and to all the men and women of
UNMOT, especially the Mission personnel who gave their
lives in the service of peace in Tajikistan.

There is still a long way to go before peace can
really endure in Tajikistan. The challenge of disarming
armed elements that operate outside the Government's
control, as well as the daunting economic and social
problems, have yet to be fully and effectively overcome.
We fully share the Secretary-General's assessment that
continued international support for Tajikistan will remain
necessary beyond the current transitional period. In this
regard, we strongly support the Secretary-General's
intention to establish a United Nations post-conflict
peace-building office in Tajikistan, following the
withdrawal of UNMOT, with the objective of
consolidating peace and promoting democracy. We
therefore look forward to the details on the establishment
of that office.

Finally, we would like to express our support for the
draft presidential statement that this Council will adopt
following this meeting. We thank the Russian delegation
for its initiative.

