Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic):
We would like to express our deepest gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for having responded so promptly to the
request to convene this urgent public meeting to
discuss the grave and deteriorating situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories.

The Security Council is meeting formally for the
third time in a month and a half to consider the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. The
holding of that many formal meetings in such a brief
period, in addition to the many consultations that have
been taking place on this question and the resumed
emergency special session of the General Assembly,
illustrate the gravity and deterioration of the situation
in the occupied Arab territories, including Jerusalem -
a deterioration that has been taking place since last
September and that was eloquently described by the
Secretary-General after his visit to the region.

In order to confront that explosive situation, the
Security Council adopted resolution 1322 (2000) and
appealed to Israel, as the occupying Power, to avoid
any escalation. Unfortunately, the situation continues to
worsen further, due to Israel's decision to resort to the
policy of excessive force and vengeance-without
taking into account the grave consequences of its
actions - in order to impose its will and to create a
fait accompli - in other words, more occupation. Even
though there is evidence of relative calm after
Chairman Arafat's efforts, the forces of the Israeli
occupation have once again resorted to the excessive
use of force against Palestinian civilians and the posts
and symbols attesting to the existence of the
Palestinian Authority. The most recent reaction of the
occupying forces was to bomb Gaza intensively using
all sorts of weaponry, including air, land and sea
forces.

My country, which is actively and sincerely
taking part in the peace process, profoundly regrets this
grave and sad evolution of the situation. We express
our profound concern at the intensification and
escalation of violence carried out by Israeli forces that
has daily produced a growing number of victims and
brought harm to the Palestinian population. Tunisia
vehemently condemns these repeated acts of
aggression, which violate the most fundamental rights
of human beings, namely, the rights to life and dignity.
In addition, those actions also pose a threat to the peace
process.

Tunisia appeals to the two co-sponsors of the
peace process and to the international community as a
whole to assume their responsibilities in the face of this
dangerous situation that threatens international peace
and security. We call on Israel to quickly assume its
responsibilities under Security Council resolutions-
the most recent of which is resolution 1322 (2000) -
and the Fourth Geneva Convention and other
international instruments. We further call on Israel to
renounce the policy of force, which will solve nothing,
and to act in a way consistent with international law
and agreements.

We heard Ambassador Holbrooke describe the
background of this conflict and the Council's reaction
to it over the course of 50 years. It has been said that
we are moving back to the time when the Council
created two separate entities. But we must ask: what of
the future form of the Palestinian State we are
discussing today? Is this a question of an autonomous
entity? Where is that Palestinian State we created? We
must base our discussions on reality, not on delusions
and distortion of facts.

The representative of Israel spoke of Israeli
forces being attacked. Well, where are those forces?
Are they inside Israel? Our countries know the
meaning of occupation. Is resistance to occupation an
act of aggression? When violence comes from official
authorities, it can only engender more violence. Peace
can only be established in an atmosphere conducive to
peace. There is no other option open to the parties but
the choice of peace and a return to the negotiating
table. That is why we repeat once again today our
sincere appeal to Israel to end its acts of repression.
Many people have experienced such occupation. We
know the consequences of such a policy. We call on
Israel to take measures to return normalcy to the region
and to create a climate conducive to the gradual
establishment of confidence, a requirement for the
continuation of peace negotiations.

In the same vein, like the majority of members of
the Council, we believe the time has come for the
Council to act in this critical situation by taking the
necessary measures to create a protection force for
Palestinian civilians - something that has been called
for by Palestinians themselves, as well as by many in
the international community. We hope the Secretary-
General will continue his mission so that the Council
may continue to give life to this legitimate project to
protect civilian Palestinians under occupation.

The situation confronting Palestine is a grave one,
and it poses inherent threats to the peace efforts in the
region and to the peace and security of the region in
general. This situation must not continue. It must not
be accepted as a fait accompli and as part of the daily
lives of the people of the region, where there have been
so many victims. The rights of the Palestinian people
must be protected. They must be able to create their
State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. Based on
these views, we believe it is up to the Security Council
and all parties concerned to act rapidly so that the fact-
finding committee can do its work to determine
responsibility for the violence. More than ever before,
this situation requires a sincere and serious approach
by the international community, and especially the
Security Council, for the dangers to the future of the
region are incalculable.

It is time to reverse the situation. The priority of
the international community is to protect the
Palestinians and to put an end to the acts of violence,
aggression and violations of international law. Israel's
responsibility is clear. What it must do is clear. The
international community, including this Council, have
recalled this on many occasions. It can start by ending
the violence and facilitating the work of the fact-
finding committee. My country is among those that
have always participated sincerely in the peace process.
But this process can only succeed if it is based on
international legitimacy and United Nations
resolutions, and not on a faulty basis. This is the only
way to bring about the success of the peace process,
which, while being in the interest of all, is also in the
interest of both Palestinians and Israelis and in the
interest of peace and security in the Middle East.

