Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, allow me, first and foremost, to
welcome your presence here amongst us today to
preside over the thematic debate, and to welcome the
participation of the Secretary-General of our
Organization. His presence adds a special dimension to
our debate.

The tragic events that occurred in Mumbai just
two weeks ago have once again reminded us that
terrorism is a reality that spares no country and
remains one of the most serious threats to international
peace and security. In this regard, I would like to recall
that Belgium firmly condemns all terrorist attacks,
including those that were perpetrated in Mumbai,
which targeted innocent civilians. We convey our
condolences to the grieving families. Belgium also
would like to express its solidarity with the people and
authorities of India and with every country that is
dealing with the effects of terrorism.

Your initiative, Sir, to launch this thematic debate
is therefore particularly timely, and it underscores the
resolve of the international community to eradicate this
scourge. Indeed, it is only through a holistic strategy
and unwavering cooperation that we will be able to do
so. Further efforts are, without a doubt, still necessary
in this regard. The world must deal with individuals
and organizations that do not hesitate to carry out
attacks against thousands of innocent victims in an
attempt to further their agenda. These attacks are the
expression of inadmissible hatred and rage. The
international community must respond to them. The
criminals must be detained and brought to justice. The
fight against terrorism must be waged tirelessly and
across the board by attacking terrorist networks and
their sources of financing and by doing everything
possible to prevent their actions, but also by addressing
the factors that could fuel extremism and lead to
terrorism. Moreover, we should recall that terrorism
cannot be associated with any religion or belief.

In this context, the United Nations plays a central
role and, when it comes to this matter, shoulder the
responsibilities that fall to a universal organization, as
provided for in the Charter. The Member States,
through the intervention of the General Assembly, are
committed to better coordinating their counter-
terrorism initiatives and to developing legal standards.
The Security Council is also fighting terrorism actively
through its resolutions. The Al-Qaida and Taliban
Sanctions Committee, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) on weapons of mass destruction
are essential bodies in these efforts.

At the same time, a number of United Nations
programmes, offices and agencies are involved in
specific operational actions aimed at supporting the
initiatives by Member States. The Secretary-General
referred to that in his introductory statement.

In order to further consolidate and improve upon
these activities, the General Assembly has defined a
United Nation Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in
order to combat this scourge. The European Union has
also defined a plan of action and a strategy to tackle
terrorism on a global scale. Belgium fully endorses
these two strategies, which are complementary.

In my country, attempted attacks have also been
thwarted. Networks have been dismantled and trials
have been held. By providing an arsenal of new
measures and establishing new structures to fight
against terrorism, Belgium has implemented European
decisions and United Nations resolutions.

Strengthening our counter-terrorism capacity
must remain a priority for the international community.

All the initiatives to further sensitize and involve
States at the four corners of the globe must be
promoted. The role of regional and subregional
organizations is essential in this regard.

As will be stated by the representative of France
in his intervention, to be made shortly on behalf of the
European Union - a statement that my delegation
supports in full - respect for human rights and the
primacy of the rule of law are fundamental elements in
the fight against terrorism. The protection of these
fundamental rights and freedoms is a moral and legal
obligation. It also corresponds to our interests and is a
central element of any effective and sustainable
counter-terrorism strategy. The fight against terrorism
cannot be waged to the detriment of our principles, of
our values, of human rights or of democratic
institutions; that is precisely what those who threaten
us seek to destroy. That is why Belgium welcomes the
fact that the human rights dimension has been taken
into account in the actions and decisions of the United
Nations. The Global Strategy includes a human rights
and rule of law pillar, and the Security Council has
systematically reminded States since 2003 "that they
must ensure that any measures taken to combat
terrorism comply with all their obligations under
international law in particular international human
rights, refugee and humanitarian law" (resolution 1456 (2003), annex, para. 6).

It is essential that there be clearer and more
equitable procedures with regard to the listing and
de-listing of names on the lists of individuals suspected
of terrorist acts who are subjected to restrictive
measures. By continuing to improve upon those
procedures, as was done in the case of resolution 1822
(2008), the Security Council is not only strengthening
the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime, but is also
strengthening its authority, its credibility and, as a
result, its effectiveness in this field.

We are thus responding to the various legal
procedures that have been introduced, particularly in
Europe, because of the current procedural gaps in the
existing regime. Every measure that is taken to
establish clear and transparent procedures will
strengthen the legitimacy of the United Nations
sanctions system and the authority of the Security
Council and the impact of its measures. By improving
procedures, the Council is reaffirming its role as the
lynchpin of the international sanctions system and will
strengthen the adherence of Member States to that
system. Belgium therefore calls upon the Council to
consolidate and strengthen its efforts in this regard, in
addition to the provisions of resolution 1822 (2008), in
order to heighten the effectiveness and transparency of
the sanctions procedures of the 1267 Committee.

Today's debate has allowed us to underscore
international solidarity in the fight against terrorism. It
is crucial that this solidarity result in everyday specific
actions that will allow us to prevent new tragedies.
While repression is an indispensable dimension to
thwart the intentions of those who are ready to make
use of terrorism, all preventative measures taken are in
the long term the best strategy to eradicate this
scourge. Any United Nations declaration, strategy or
resolution will send a strong signal of the
determination and unity of the international
community. That is why my delegation will support the
text of the presidential statement to be read at the end
of this debate.

