Mr. Nishimura (Japan): At the outset, I would
like to express my appreciation to His Excellency
Mr. Ivo Sanader, Prime Minister of Croatia, for his
initiative to convene this timely and very important
meeting of the Council. We welcome the adoption of
resolution 1851 (2008) by the Council today and its
call for further international collaboration in
addressing the issue of piracy off the coast of Somalia.
In this connection, we are grateful to the delegation of
the United States for its strong leadership on this
particular subject.

The area off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf
of Aden is a critically important sea lane connecting
Europe, the Middle East and East Asia. Given this fact,
those carrying out the incidents of piracy and armed
robbery at sea in this region, which are unique in their
gravity, frequency, number of affected countries and
negative effect on the situation in Somalia and the
peace and security of the region, are quite literally
common enemies of the human race - hostes humani
generis - in today's world. It is therefore essential that
the international community address this issue in a
determined and concerted manner.

In this connection, we welcome the recent
initiatives of the Security Council to suppress acts of
piracy in the region, as demonstrated by the adoption
of a series of resolutions this year. We also wish to pay
tribute to the efforts of those countries that have been
deploying naval vessels in the region. In addition, we
cannot overemphasize the importance of coordination
in combating piracy and thus we strongly hope that the
countries and organizations concerned will take unified
and collaborative action to that end.

As a maritime State and a trading nation, Japan
attaches great importance to ensuring the safety of
marine navigation and security at sea, including
through anti-piracy measures. Clearly, these matters
are directly linked to the survival and prosperity of our
country. The issue of piracy is both a challenge for the
international community and a matter related to the
protection of the lives and assets of our own citizens.
We are therefore gravely concerned about the dramatic
increase in acts of piracy and armed robbery off the
coast of Somalia and recognize that measures to tackle
this problem are urgently required.

In this context, the Government of Japan has been
seriously studying the issue of piracy among its
relevant ministries and agencies with respect to what
new laws we should develop and what actions we can
take under the existing legal frameworks. These are
some of the questions that we have been addressing. It
is our intention to take measures in a prompt and
effective manner, beginning with what we can do now.
We also plan to provide capacity-building assistance
for the countries neighbouring Somalia.

With this resolve in mind, it is our intention, once
an appropriate international cooperation mechanism on
the issue of piracy off the coast of Somalia has been
established, to join at its inception and actively
participate in the discussions within the framework. In
this connection, I wish to note that Japan has gained
practical experience in this area through its initiative to
realize the Regional Cooperation Agreement on
Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in
Asia (ReCAAP). It is our belief that, with this
background, we can provide useful expertise with
regard to the possible creation of a cooperative
framework similar to ReCAAP in the region
neighbouring Somalia.

Finally, allow me to reiterate that efforts to
suppress acts of piracy are urgently needed from the
point of View of the safety of maritime navigation and
the protection of human lives and assets. At the same
time, I must stress that the genuine resolution of the
issue of piracy off the coast of Somalia requires peace
and stability in the country. The African Union Mission
in Somalia has been making tireless efforts towards
that goal and we would like to express our respect for
its admirable endeavours under difficult circumstances.
We, for our part, will extend our support to the fullest
extent possible for the Somali peace process initiated
by the Djibouti Agreement. Japan, which will become a
non-permanent member of the Council in January, is
determined to contribute in a proactive way to peace
and stability in Somalia.

