Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's open debate
on some of the most burning issues in the Middle East
and to express our appreciation to Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing.

The Middle East peace process remains at the core
of all efforts aimed at restoring stability in the region.
Ukraine has consistently supported that crucial process
and the principle of a two-State solution, with Israel
and Palestine coexisting in peace and security. We
share the concerns of the Secretary-General and the
Special Coordinator about the escalation of tensions
and violence in Jerusalem, which reflects the gravity of
the situation in and around the Old City as well as in the
wider context of the peace process.

The recent deadly terror attacks in the Temple
Mount/Haram Al-Sharif and in an Israeli settlement
in the West Bank say a great deal about how far this
pattern of escalation has gone. Unless both sides take
swift and effective measures, these incidents could
ignite further violence. We have stressed time and
again that there can be no justification for any terrorist
acts and have firmly condemned any attempts to glorify
them. We are increasingly concerned about the violent
clashes between Palestinians and Israeli security forces
in East Jerusalem and the West Bank in which at least
three people have died. The decision of the Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas to freeze contacts with
Israel is a worrying sign that the situation could get out
of hand very quickly.

We note the statement of Secretary General Ahmed
Aboul-Gheit of the League of Arab States about the
Temple Mount/Haram Al-Sharif. At the same time,
we would like to take this opportunity to urge both
Jordan, as Custodian of the holy site, and Israel to
find a reasonable compromise between public safety
and freedom to worship. We also urge everyone to
act responsibly so as to avoid escalation and calm the
situation and prevent it from spiralling out of control.
Ukraine reiterates its position that an Israeli-Palestinian
peace agreement is to be found in the framework of the
unconditional fulfilment by the parties of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles,
including land for peace, the road map, the agreements
previously reached by the parties and the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative.

Turning to Syria, let me stress our dissatisfaction
with the slow progress on the political track. Based on
the latest rounds of the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva, I
see only one party willing to work constructively on the
agreed agenda. The Syrian regime's delegation, on the
contrary, has so far demonstrated interest in discussing
only one basket, which is counter-terrorism. I believe
that the Security Council has made it clear on a number
of occasions that one basket cannot be promoted at the
expense of the other three. That is why we underscore
once again that the Geneva discussion needs to be
firmly entrenched in resolution 2254 (2015) and steered
towards the previously agreed common agenda points
covering the issues of governance, the Constitution,
elections and counter-terrorism.

On the whole, the international community should
avoid at all costs falling into the trap of short-term
solutions with regard to the Syrian conflict. Such short-
term fixes seem to provide temporary relief, only to set
the stage for a deeper crisis in the long term. The fact
that none of the root causes of the conflict has been
addressed essentially means more opportunities for
Da'esh and Al-Qaida to capitalize on the grievances of
the disaffected population.

Ukraine is deeply concerned about the rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Yemen: it is
going from bad to worse. The cholera epidemic, which
is quickly spreading in every major Yemeni province,
has pushed the country's population to the brink of
survival. We praise the efforts of the United Nations
and all other humanitarian actors that are delivering
lifesaving assistance to the Yemeni people. We urge the
parties to ensure the sustainable delivery of commercial
and humanitarian supplies; without them, millions of
Yemenis are at risk of famine and death. In the political
sphere, we are worried by the latest trends of an
increasing polarization of key stakeholders in Yemen
and the further fragmentation of the Yemeni political
landscape. We call on all parties to resume direct talks
without preconditions, and to conduct them in the most
flexible and constructive manner possible.

The situation in the Middle East is very worrying
and full of challenges. We call on the Council to remain
united in addressing them.

