Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
Croatia, Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland, Serbia, Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia align themselves with this
statement.

We thank today's briefers for their presentations
and express our appreciation to Special Representative
Zerrougui for her highly esteemed work. Her tireless
efforts have contributed to the advancement of the
children and armed conflict agenda. We would like to
assure her of the EU's strong support for her mandate.

We welcome the opportunity to speak today.
Acknowledging the practical reasons for the format of
the debate at this meeting, we look forward to returning
in the future to the practice of addressing the subject in
open debates.

The annual report of the Secretary General
(S/2013/245) reminds us of the challenges ahead. We
have seen progress in some areas - for example, with
the increasing number of action plans. Still, children in
too many countries are suffering terribly from armed
conflict. The situation in Syria is of a special and most
urgent concern. Children there have been suffering for
more than two years from the most heinous crimes. In
addition, the difficult situation of children in Mali and
the Central African Republic has been highlighted in
the Secretary-General's report.

The widespread targeting of schools and their
military use is very worrisome. Children are threatened
when schools or hospitals are being attacked or occupied
by armed groups. We strongly urge conflict parties to
end that practice.

The report also highlights the growing practice
of States to arrest and detain children, making them
particularly vulnerable to sexual violence. Urgent
action is required to prevent and address sexual violence
against children, including by providing appropriate
and accessible services for their rehabilitation and
reintegration, which demonstrates the importance of the
Security Council's work on the issue. We also support
the work of the delegation of Luxembourg as it chairs
the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.

We welcome today's presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/8). In order to achieve further progress,
we would refer to the valuable findings of the
recent seminar organized by Liechtenstein and the
non-governmental organization Watchlist.

Let me just mention some of those findings.
Briefings by the Special Representative ofthe Secretary-
General to Security Council, its Working Group and
the relevant Sanctions Committees, such as the one she
made following her visit to Syria, should be a regular

feature. In addition, the Working Group toolbox should
in general be fully applied to perpetrators of grave
violations.

Those recommendations go hand in hand with
those in the report of the Secretary-General and
would contribute to adequately addressing the issue
of persistent perpetrators. Still, 29 parties have been
listed for a period of five years or more. The instrument
of regular Security Council Working Group field trips
would help in the follow-up on the implementation of
action plans, as would well-coordinated local networks
of Governments and United Nations actors. In that
regard, it is also essential that Member States allow
the United Nations unconditional access to armed
non-State actors.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) continues
to play a crucial role in fighting impunity. Serious
crimes of international concern should be dealt with by
national judicial systems, but when they are unwilling
or unable to do so, States parties to the Rome Statute
should consider referring those situations to the ICC.
Further institutional dialogue between the ICC and the
Security Council and effective follow up of referrals
made by the Security Council to the ICC could assist in
ensuring accountability.

As it is crucial to implement existing commitments,
I would like to provide the Council with an update on
the EU's strong commitment.

The EU and its member States spent €200 million
between 2009 and 2012 on assistance related to
children and armed conflict in the countries listed
in the Secretary-General's report. The EU is also
systematically addressing child protection in all of
the EU's crisis-management missions and operations.
For example, the EU has adopted minimum training
standards and in 2013 introduced a specialized
training programme on children and armed conflict
for its diplomatic staff, in cooperation with UNICEF.
EU training missions, the most recent one being in
Mali, provide training to armed forces on, inter alia,
humanitarian and human rights law.

Children have the right to be free from fear and want.
Let us make sure that they can enjoy their Childhoods,
so that they will become strong, self-confident and
responsible members of our communities.

