Mr. Catarino (Portugal): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the very able manner in
which you have steered the work of the Council throughout
the month of January. A very special word of appreciation
is also due for the efforts of your delegation in keeping
Member States very well informed, on a daily basis, about
the work of the Council. I should also like to congratulate
your predecessor, Ambassador Bakuramutsa, on his work
as President of the Council in December.

I take this opportunity to welcome very warmly His
Excellency the Foreign Minister of Mozambique,
Mr. Leonardo Santos Simao, whose presence here today
clearly reflects the significance his Government attributes
to the role that the United Nations has played and will
continue to play in Mozambique.
The Permanent Representative of France has already
spoken on behalf of the European Union, and Portugal
associates itself fully with that statement. I should like,
however, to add a few words on this question, which is of
particular importance to my country.

I need not remind the Council of the special
relationship that exists between Portugal and Mozambique,
resulting from historical ties consolidated during the course
of centuries, which today is embodied in the profound
friendship between the two peoples and in the close
cooperation between the two countries. It was therefore
with a profound sense of pleasure that Portugal witnessed
the positive manner in which the peace process in
Mozambique was carried out.

Portugal played an active role throughout the
process, from the very beginning. As an observer of the
peace negotiations, we participated fully in the process
that led to the signing of the General Peace Agreement.
We then contributed significantly to its implementation on
the ground. We took part in all the international
commissions created by the General Peace Agreement, as
well as in the Joint Commission for the formation of the
armed forces of Mozambique. Portugal was entrusted with
the task of forming three battalions of special forces, one
company of marines and a number of logistics units.

In addition, Portugal has supported the organic and
conceptual reorganization of the armed forces through the
dispatch to Mozambique of a specialized team composed
of 100 officers and non-commissioned officers. Without
a doubt, our common language and the profound mutual
understanding between our peoples were decisive factors
in the success of these actions.

Portugal also actively participated in ONUMOZ,
both in its command structure and by sending a
communications battalion which guaranteed, with great
technical competence I might add, the communications
network of that Operation throughout the implementation
of the peace process. We also deployed close to 60 police
officers to the ONUMOZ contingent of civilian police
observers, which played a crucial role in the successful
outcome of the peace process.

A Portuguese judge was one of the members of the
electoral tribunal. Portugal was also present in the
international monitoring effort through the deployment of
42 observers, 30 of whom were part of EUMOZ, the
electoral monitoring operation of the European Union
established following a proposal put forward by my
country.

The Portuguese Government has always held that
only through the full implementation of the General Peace
Agreement will the parties be able successfully to
complete the process designed to bring to an end the
suffering of a people burdened by many years of war. At
a decisive moment, the Mozambican people showed in a
civil and serene manner through an impressive turnout at
the polls that, regardless of whom they voted for, they
fundamentally desired peace. The political leaders of
Mozambique, encouraged by the positive examples in the
region, also contributed towards bringing about the tide of
stability that has emerged. The outcome of the peace
process in Mozambique represents a further step towards

 

the development and progress of a democratic southern
Africa.

Naturally, the role of the United Nations in this
process has been crucial. At this point, I should like to pay
tribute to the efforts of the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros-
Ghali, and in particular to his Special Representative,
Mr. Aldo Ajello, who always found a way out at critical
moments in a process that demanded not only a mediatory
role but also one of bringing the parties closer together and
promoting understanding between them.

I would be committing an injustice if I did not equally
pay tribute here to the work carried out by this body, the
Security Council, which, throughout the peace process,
showed in a clear manner the importance placed by the
international community in, and its commitment to, a
successful implementation of the General Peace Agreement.
At a very delicate stage of the process, the Security Council
did not hesitate to send a mission to Mozambique, which
enhanced the impact and credibility of ONUMOZ, as well
as a better understanding of the manner of ensuring the full
implementation of the General Peace Agreement within the
established time-frame.

It is true that the role of the international community
has been extremely important over the last two years. It
should not, however, end here. We have witnessed the
process of pacification and democratization of Mozambique.
It is now essential to support the consolidation of
democracy. This will be the only way of guaranteeing, over
the long term, the fruition of the investment made by the
international community.

We therefore appeal to the international community to
maintain its efforts now and to support, at both the bilateral
and the multilateral levels, the reconstruction and
development of Mozambique in such a way as to guarantee
the consolidation of peace and democracy in that country.

The recent positive developments that have occurred
in the region have had a positive influence on the choices
made by the Mozambicans. Similarly, there can be no
doubt that the consolidation of peace and democracy in
Mozambique will contribute significantly to regional
stability.

It is therefore necessary to continue on the path of the
process, already under way, of the reconciliation of the
Mozambican family and of an institutionalized
democracy, in which all can contribute usefully to the
development of the country in an atmosphere of mutual
respect and observance of democratic principles. This
evolution will also depend on the Mozambican people's
perception of their future prospects. It is therefore
essential that the international community provide the
necessary assistance which ensure these prospects of
progress and sustainable development, particularly through
the international financial institutions.

On our part, we remain committed to taking on a
front-line role in helping in the reconstruction of
Mozambique. In this context, I should like to point out
that Portugal's largest foreign-investment project relates
to the Cahora Bassa dam, an enormous undertaking which
we hope will come to benefit in a significant manner,
particularly in the key sector of energy, the economy of
Mozambique, as well as those of other countries in the
region.

Nearly 18 years of civil war certainly planted some
seeds of mistrust. We are confident that the continued
effort and commitment of the international community
and the political and civil maturity already shown by the
Mozambicans will prevent those seeds from taking root
and will allow Mozambique to live in a new era of peace
and prosperity.

