The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Sierra Leone, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jonah (Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Security Council:

"The Security Council recalls the statements of
its President of 27 May (S/PRST/ 1997/29) and 11 July
1997 (S/PRST/ 1997/36) following the military coup
d'e'tat in Sierra Leone on 25 May 1997. It condemns
the overthrow of the democratically elected
Government of President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah and
calls upon the military junta to take immediate steps
to bring about the unconditional restoration of that
Government. The Council remains deeply concerned
about the situation in Sierra Leone, which endangers
peace, security and stability in the whole region.

"The Security Council underlines the need to
implement the Abidjan Agreement, which continues to
serve as a viable framework for peace, stability and
reconciliation in Sierra Leone.

"The Security Council expresses its appreciation
to the Committee of Four Foreign Ministers of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) for their efforts to negotiate with
representatives of the military junta from 17 to 18 July
and 29 to 30 July this year in Abidjan on a peaceful
resolution of the crisis and reiterates its full support
for the objectives of this mediation. It deeply regrets
the breakdown of these talks and considers that the
responsibility for this failure rests entirely with the
military junta, who refused to negotiate in good
faith.

"The Security Council considers that the
military junta's attempt to set conditions for the
restoration of the democratically elected Government
is unacceptable and calls upon the junta to renounce
its declared intention to remain in power and to
resume negotiations with the ECOWAS Committee
of Four Foreign Ministers without delay.

"The Security Council will, in the absence of a
satisfactory response from the military junta, be
ready to take appropriate measures with the
objective of restoring the democratically elected
Government of President Kabbah.

"The Security Council remains deeply
concerned at the deteriorating humanitarian situation
in Sierra Leone and at the continued looting and
commandeering of relief supplies of international
agencies. It calls upon the military junta to cease all
interference with the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to the people of Sierra Leone. The
Council condemns the continuing violence and
threats of Violence by the junta towards the civilian
population, foreign nationals and personnel of the
ECOWAS Monitoring Group, and calls for an end
to such acts of Violence. The Council also expresses
its concern at the effects of the continuing influx of
refugees into neighbouring countries, in particular
Guinea, due to the crisis in Sierra Leone. It calls
upon all States and relevant international
organizations to provide help to these countries in
dealing with this problem.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of this matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/42.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.50 am.

