The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Peter Piot, Executive Director of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Piot to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Before we begin, let me ask the secretariat to
distribute among the members of the Council the
HIV/AIDS Awareness Card for peacekeeping
operations, which was issued by UNAIDS as a result of
one of the decisions the Council took earlier.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
successful holding of the twenty-sixth special
session of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS,
and encourages further action to address the
problem of HIV/AIDS.

"The Security Council recalls its resolution
1308 (2000) of 17 July 2000, in which the
Security Council, bearing in mind its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and emphasizing the important
roles of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council in addressing the social and
economic factors that lead to the spread of
HIV/AIDS, inter alia, recognized that the
HIV/AIDS pandemic is also exacerbated by

conditions of violence and instability, and
stressed that the HIV/AIDS pandemic, if
unchecked, may pose a risk to stability and
security.

"The Security Council therefore welcomes
the fact that the declaration adopted at the twenty-
sixth special session of the General Assembly
addresses HIV/AIDS in conflict- and disaster-
affected regions and contains a number of
practical measures at the national and
international levels, to be met within given time-
frames, to reduce the impact of conflict and
disasters on the spread of HIV/AIDS, including
the provision of awareness and training for
personnel employed by United Nations agencies
and other relevant organizations, development of
national strategies to address the spread of
HIV/AIDS among national uniformed services, as
required, and the inclusion of HIV/AIDS
awareness and training in guidelines designed for
personnel involved in international peacekeeping
operations.

"The Security Council also recalls its open
debate on 19 January 2001, taking stock of
progress made since the adoption of resolution
1308 (2000). The Council notes the progress
made in the implementation of the resolution, and
commends the increased cooperation in this
regard between the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and UNAIDS through the
memorandum of understanding between the two
organizations signed in January 2001. Further, the
Council welcomes the efforts to develop practical
measures, such as the planned joint United
Nations field assessment missions to major
peacekeeping operations, and the development of
the HIV/AIDS Awareness Card for Peacekeeping
Operations to be distributed to all peacekeeping
operations after testing in UNAMSIL, Sierra
Leone. The Council also welcomes the fact that
the cooperation framework signed in May this
year between UNAIDS and UNIFEM. expresses
the two organizations' intention to cooperate in
the follow-up to resolution 1308 (2000), as well
as resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and
security.

"The Security Council recognizes that
further efforts are necessary to reduce the
negative impact of conflict and disasters on the

spread of HIV/AIDS, and to develop the capacity
of peacekeepers to become advocates and actors
for awareness and prevention of HIV
transmission. The Council encourages continued
efforts with regard to relevant training for
peacekeeping, pre-deployment orientation,
increased international cooperation by interested
Member States in areas such as prevention,
voluntary and confidential testing and
counselling, treatment for personnel, and
exchange of best practices and countries' policies
in this regard. The Council encourages UNAIDS
and DPKO to further pursue the implementation
of resolution 1308 (2000), including through the
consideration of further efforts to enhance
cooperation, such as the inclusion of HIV/AIDS
advisers in peacekeeping operations, and revision,
as required, of relevant codes of conduct.

"The Security Council expresses its
intention to contribute within its competence to
the attainment of the relevant objectives in the
declaration adopted at the twenty-sixth special
session of the General Assembly in carrying out
the Council's work, in particular in its follow-up
to resolution 1308 (2000)."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2001/16.

This presidential statement is more evidence of
the importance that the Council is giving to the
implications of HIV/AIDS, even for peacekeeping
operations. Reference has already been made to
Council resolution 1308 (2000), adopted last July,
which highlighted the potential damaging impact of
HIV/AIDS on the health of international peacekeeping
personnel, including support personnel. UNAIDS, in
continuing its work on HIV/AIDS prevention and
education, has developed, in cooperation with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, an
"awareness card" for peacekeepers, which has now
been distributed to members. I would like to express
our appreciation to UNAIDS and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for this useful contribution.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 10.25 am.
