Mr. Kavan: Let me express at the outset my great
appreciation for your initiative, Mr. President, and for
giving me the opportunity to speak on this very
important topic. Although never quite fulfilling the
mandate of international trusteeship as described in the
United Nations Charter, the United Nations has
engaged in governance of post-conflict societies,
particularly in the post-cold-war era.

The United Nations has extensive experience in
governance, through setting up United Nations
administrations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo,
and East Timor, and in post-conflict peace-building
efforts in Sierra Leone and most recently in
Afghanistan. Currently the most outstanding challenge
before the Security Council with respect to post-
conflict reconstruction is the situation in Iraq.

Since the end of the cold war, the traditional
United Nations involvement in post-conflict situations,
focusing on political dimensions, has evolved into a
much more comprehensive operation undertaking a
variety of roles. The four basic pillars of post-conflict

reconstruction - security, social and economic well-
being, justice and reconciliation, and governance and
participation - are all closely linked. A positive

outcome in one field depends upon successful
implementation in the others. The international
community has major abilities to influence the security
situation in post-conflict States and regions. It is the
military authorities in charge of a territory who are
responsible for building on and sustaining the security
situation. However, returning the responsibility for
maintaining security to the host country should be
regarded as a priority. Forming a multi-ethnic police
force in Bosnia and Kosovo and training the Afghani
army have been, in my opinion, steps in the right
direction.

When considering the socio-economic aspects of
post-conflict initiatives, the main emphasis has
typically been economic rebuilding and development.
But war affects society in a very profound way and
tends to disrupt social relations - from national and
political to very basic human interactions. I believe that
only a healthy society - where social relations are
restored, life is lived with dignity, free of oppression or
hunger and is fully respected, and where gender
perspective is taken into account - can promote and
sustain durable peace and development.

Through establishing a process for addressing
past and present grievances, the objective of creating a
fair, transparent and effective judicial system is closely
linked to the issues of reconciliation. Prosecution of
crimes against humanity and gross violations of human
rights is often hindered by the existence of political and
legal obstacles. The United Nations war crimes
tribunals prosecuting crimes committed in the former
Yugoslavia, Rwanda or Sierra Leone, as well as efforts
to establish extraordinary chambers within the existing
court structure of Cambodia for prosecution of crimes
committed by the Khmer Rouge, play a crucial role in
reconciliation efforts of post-conflict societies.

Although there are inherent tensions between the
promotion of democracy and previous power
structures, strengthening good governance and
promoting democracy are crucial for preventing the
recurrence of conflicts in crisis-ridden countries. The
collapse of civil administrations, for example in
Kosovo and East Timor, required the United Nations to
assume large-scale government functions. However, a
long-term process of good governance and
democratization must be driven by citizens of the
country and must reflect its specific historical, cultural,
political and religious conditions.

In post-conflict situations, much more is needed
than efforts by States to restore law and order. Taking
the historical background into account - whether
represented by ethnic relations in the Balkans or tribal
relations in Afghanistan - is crucial to any successful
peace-building efforts. It is not only about bringing
peace or humanitarian aid into a society emerging from
conflict. Any external involvement in the society's
affairs must be conducted in a manner most respectful
of the various specific features of that society and of its
rich diversity.

The latest conflict in Iraq is an example of the
complex and unique challenges facing the United
Nations in a post-conflict situation. I have no doubt
that this crisis will become a new important source of
knowledge and experience for the United Nations. The
Organization should use this knowledge to refine its
methods and improve ways of addressing future
conflict situations to be more effective, to be an
organization that can select the appropriate strategies
and tools for preventing or de-escalating conflict and
facilitating peaceful solutions.

Iraq's post-conflict society is confronted with
various problems of instability. They include
unresolved issues relating to years of political and
religious oppression, violence among different clans,
dangers stemming from the past totalitarian structures,
looting, and an abundance of arms in the absence of
effective new local police or security forces. Recent
United Nations experiences elsewhere, for example in
Kosovo or East Timor, have clearly demonstrated that a
comprehensive strategy to tackle these issues in the
immediate post-conflict phase is critical. Furthermore,
it has become evident that a strategy for political and
economic reforms should be crafted in conjunction
with an overall vision for democratization of the Iraqi
society.

The role of the United Nations in Iraq should not
be confined only to an advisory role or reduced to the
provision of humanitarian or economic aid, although
these issues are extremely important. Broader
responsibilities aimed at promoting democracy in Iraq
should be part of any planning process.

For all its shortcomings, real or perceived, the
United Nations is still the only forum which has the
grass-roots experience and personnel to deal with a
wide range of crises, whether in humanitarian relief,
helping people to rebuild their lives and countries,
promoting human rights and the rule of law, conflict
management or post-conflict peace-building.

I am confident that the United Nations needs to
play a vital role in both the economic reconstruction
and the political transformation of post-conflict Iraq. I
do believe that it is in the clear interests of both the
United Nations and the United States authorities, as
Secretary-General Kofi Annan just said, to find a unity
of purpose or to reach a working agreement on the
exact nature of such mutually complementary
cooperation in that country. I do strongly believe that
such cooperation will undoubtedly help to bring about
the common aim of the establishment of a democratic,
free, sovereign and independent Iraq.

