Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important and
relevant open debate on energy, security and climate. I

thank you also for your concept paper (S/2007/186),
and I will try to focus on the issues raised in the
questions for discussion.

The fact that development and the fight against
poverty are important aspects of security has been
recognized globally. It is clear to all that there will be
no security without development and there will be no
development without security.

Increasingly, we have become aware of the
seriousness of climate change with regard to the
security and well-being of mankind. The latest
evidence was presented in the report "Climate Change
2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability", released
in Brussels earlier this month by the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). From that report it is
clear that climate change will hit the poorest hardest.
We can expect more extreme weather events, glaciers
will melt and the sea level will rise. There will be more
severe droughts, and floods and desertification will
increase. We have clear evidence of climate change in
my own country, where glaciers in the highlands are
shrinking fast.

Prior to taking up my post here in New York I
was Ambassador to Canada and had the good fortune to
travel widely in Canada's high north. The Inuit in
Nunavut complained about the melting of the ice in
places where they used to travel. Now there is open
water there, and they have to go great distances on land
instead of being able to take the direct routes on ice
across fjords.

One does not need to be posted a long time here
at the United Nations before it becomes abundantly
clear that for a number of Member States, especially
small island States, climate change with rising sea
levels is the greatest threat to their security.

Mr. President, Iceland agrees with your analysis
that climate change is a serious security issue. In the
longer run, increased migration and diminishing
natural resources, especially food and fresh water, will
bring increased risks of border disputes and regional,
national and ethnic power struggles. In the shorter run,
the highest risks are related to access to secure supplies
of energy.

If climate change is to be effectively slowed and
eventually halted, and if its effects, particularly in
developing countries, are to be mitigated, then wide-
ranging and long-term international cooperation is the
only course open. But we are not fully succeeding
through our international cooperation. Perhaps it is
because we have been treating climate change
principally as an environmental issue. At best we
recognize its socio-economic implications. But with
this open debate in the Security Council, climate
change is finally being recognized for what it is:
climate change is a significant security issue that
requires the highest attention of world leaders.

I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for giving this issue the prominence it
deserves on his list of priorities. We share the view that
it is not too late to take concrete action to avoid the
worst consequences. The next 20 years are crucial. If
we act quickly and effectively to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions, we will have taken significant steps
towards saving millions from suffering and conflict in
the future.

The scale of the problem is such that a solution
will need the commitment of every Member State.
Iceland, as a party to the Kyoto Protocol, is fully
committed to doing its part. Our View is that we need
to negotiate further commitments for the years beyond
2012. Iceland has recently adopted a new climate-
change strategy, with a vision to reduce net greenhouse
gas emissions by 50 to 75 per cent by 2050. That vision
will be realized only through dedicated domestic action
in all major sectors and in the context of a
comprehensive international agreement.

However, mitigation measures should not hinder
development, for which increased energy consumption
is crucial. The focus must be on alternative energy
resources. Renewable energy resources have an
important role to play. Within the lifetime of one
generation, my country has moved from being largely
dependent on coal and oil to fulfilling 70 per cent of
our total energy needs from renewable resources, and a
remarkable 100 per cent of our electricity production is
based on clean and sustainable energy. We can do even
more, and we are exploring new technologies,
including the use of hydrogen in transportation, to
increase still further the share of renewable energy in
our energy profile.

Today, many developing countries rely heavily on
imported fossil fuels. By increasing their use of
renewable energy, developing countries will be in a
position to use their own resources, which will provide
secure access to energy. We strongly believe that our

experience with alternative energy sources is transferable.
Indeed, hundreds of experts from developing countries in
all continents have graduated from the United Nations
Geothermal Training Programme, which was established
in Iceland three decades ago, and most of them are now
playing leading roles in the exploitation of geothermal
resources in their home countries. Iceland has built up
a leading position in the harnessing of geothermal
energy, and our energy companies are now involved in
various projects in Europe, Asia, the United States and
other parts of the world.

There are many possibilities to be developed to
ensure a sustainable energy supply. Through our
development cooperation strategy, we will continue to
focus on sustainable development and on the
sustainable utilization of natural resources, including
through strengthening the United Nations University
Geothermal Training Programme by enabling it to
admit more students and by setting up training courses
in developing countries. We have also strengthened
collaboration with international institutions, including
the Food and Agriculture Organization and the World
Bank, in the field of renewable energy and in increased
emphasis on development cooperation with small
island developing States.

We thank the United Kingdom again for its
initiative in holding this timely open debate to explore
the relationship between energy, security and climate in
the Security Council.

