Mr. Okuda (Japan): The recent terrorist attacks
in Mumbai served as a poignant reminder for all of us
of the serious threat that terrorism continues to pose
seven years after the tragic events of September 2001.
Following the terrorist attacks in Mumbai, Japanese
Prime Minister Aso conveyed to Prime Minister Singh
of India Japan's willingness to cooperate with India
and to assist in the investigation. Having just witnessed
that despicable crime, we consider it very timely to
have an open debate in the Security Council on the
topic of "Threats to international peace and security
caused by terrorist acts". We would therefore like to
express our sincere appreciation for the valuable
initiative taken by President Mesic' in convening this
meeting.

Japan fully agrees with the idea emphasized in
the concept paper prepared by Croatia that it would be
meaningful for the international community to reaffirm
2
its solidarity against terrorism at this juncture. We also
endorse the paper's recommendation strongly
advocating for a multidimensional and comprehensive
approach to countering terrorism.

I hardly need to reiterate the importance of the
role of the Council. In particular, three of the Council's
subsidiary committees continue to play a crucial role.
Member States have primary responsibility for the
implementation of relevant resolutions. The Council
and its subsidiary bodies must do their best to facilitate
the efforts made by the Member States.

This year, as Chair of the Group of Eight (G-8),
Japan has been striving to strengthen cooperation
between the Counter-Terrorism Action Group
established by the G-8 and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate here at Headquarters.
It is our hope that this cooperation will contribute to
enhanced cooperation between the Council and
Member States, especially in the area of counter-
terrorism assistance.

Seven years after the 11 September attacks,
Afghanistan and its surrounding areas remain the most
critical region in our fight against terrorism. In this
regard, in addition to various measures taken on the
ground, we believe that full recognition should be
given to the importance of the related maritime
operations. Japan has been contributing to the counter-
terrorism operations in the Indian Ocean since 2001
and we are determined to continue this effort.

Japan also believes that regional cooperation has
a crucial role in our counter-terrorism efforts. To
advance such cooperation, Japan has been participating
actively in various regional initiatives and working
closely with regional partners, particularly in South-
east Asia. To cite one example, we have been
cooperating with countries that are preparing for their
accession to relevant international conventions. In
2003, we began to organize seminars, mainly for Asian
experts, on the promotion of accession to international
counter-terrorism conventions and protocols.

Counter-terrorism measures must not be confined
to traditional measures related to law enforcement;
non-traditional areas identified in the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy must also be
adequately addressed. In particular, efforts to reduce
poverty and measures in the area of education must be
further strengthened in order to address conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism.
08-63845
Japan continues to believe that the United
Nations must play an integral role in the fight against
terrorism. The United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy provides a valuable basis for our
unified efforts in that context, and the unanimous
adoption of General Assembly resolution 62/272,
which reaffirmed the Strategy and called for its
implementation, was very welcome. Through this open
debate, the Council should renew its commitment to
addressing the serious threat to international peace and
security posed by terrorism. Japan takes this
opportunity to reaffirm its willingness to contribute to
the Council's efforts in that regard.

