Mr. Rock (Canada): Canada wishes to
congratulate Greece on assuming the presidency and to
express our thanks for this opportunity to take part in
an open discussion on this important issue.

Canada firmly believes that the Security Council
has a dual role in regard to humanitarian crises. It must
not only respond quickly to such crises, but also, in the
first instance, seek actively to prevent them.

Five years ago, the Secretary-General called for
an urgent discussion of how we might reconcile the
humanitarian imperatives of situations such as that in
Rwanda with traditional definitions of sovereignty - a
dilemma that continues to impede robust Security
Council reactions in man-made humanitarian crises.
Today, as we mark the tenth anniversary of the
massacres at Srebrenica, we should reaffirm our
collective will to move forward in improving the
Council's ability to identify and to respond quickly to
humanitarian crises.

In northern Uganda, civilians continue to bear the
brunt of a brutal armed conflict - a conflict which the
Council has yet to address. We believe that situations
such as that cannot but benefit from the Council's
sustained attention, and we again urge the Security
Council to put the situation in northern Uganda on its
agenda.

In our consideration of the Council's response to
crises, it is also important to acknowledge that
humanitarian crises are not solely the result of armed
conflict. There are also those prompted by the
misguided and malevolent policies of Governments
towards their own populations. We call on the Council
to take note of the latest humanitarian crisis being
generated now in Zimbabwe. After inflicting hunger
and economic ruin on its population, the policies of the
Government of Zimbabwe are now creating a
significant number of homeless. Canada believes that
this situation deserves the full attention of the Council.

(spoke in French)

The necessary tools and powers for the
international community to exercise its responsibility
to protect civilian populations do not need to be
reinvented - they are in the United Nations Charter.
What is needed, however, is a framework to guide that
immense responsibility.

The responsibility to protect provides such a
framework. The Secretary-General endorsed that
approach in his March report, calling on leaders to
embrace the responsibility of States to protect their
people and the subsidiary responsibility of the
international community to act in extreme cases when a
State is unable or unwilling to provide that protection.

(spoke in English)

A firm declaration of support for that emerging
norm, made by leaders in September, will lay the
normative groundwork for more effective responses by
the Security Council. To ensure its effective
implementation of that norm, we support the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the Council adopt a
resolution that includes guidelines for the use of force.

Hand in hand with the need to respond to conflict
comes the obligation to bring an end to the culture of
impunity that continues to dominate the majority of
such situations. We cannot speak of human security or
of protecting women and children when their abusers
are allowed to go free.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) offers us
the best hope for ending impunity, and we call on this
Council to continue to exercise its authority under the
Rome Statute to refer appropriate situations to the
International Criminal Court as they arise. The
Council's referral of the Darfur crisis to the ICC was
an important and welcome step, but it must not remain
the exception. Through cooperation between the
Security Council and the parties to the Rome Statute,
we can build a reliable and responsible system to bring
the world's worst criminals to justice and to protect
their victims.

The needs and challenges in rebuilding shattered
societies in transition from war to peace are numerous
and daunting. They include disarming, demobilizing
and reintegrating former combatants; ensuring a
framework for transitional justice; providing security,
including rebuilding the rule of law in all its aspects;
re-constituting democratic governing structures and
their legal foundations; rejuvenating a functioning
economy; and guaranteeing the right of refugees and
internally displaced persons to safely return to their
homes. A coordinated response is essential.

In most cases, it is the United Nations that is
called on to oversee that reconstruction process. The
proposed peacebuilding commission will be critically
important to enhance the capabilities of the United
Nations, donor countries and regional organizations to
meet the challenges posed by failed and fragile States.
The situation in Haiti would be an excellent first case
for such a commission to examine. The work of the Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic and
Social Council and the recent joint mission of the
Group and the Security Council to Haiti effectively
illustrated the need to integrate development, security
and institution-building in a mutually reinforcing way.
The peacebuilding commission could carry that work
further and we therefore fully support its establishment
and implementation.

Canada's own approach to dealing with the
conflict cycle is likewise evolving. We are working to
establish a more coherent, whole-of-Government
approach through a new Stabilization and
Reconstruction Task Force. It will address challenges
across the conflict spectrum, from conflict prevention
through to peace support and post-conflict
reconstruction and peacebuilding.

I conclude by expressing the belief that much
progress is being made in improving our ability to react
to crises. The real challenge that remains today is not
how we, the international community, can best deal
with humanitarian crises once they have occurred, but
how we can move more quickly and effectively to
prevent them in the first place. We urge the Council to
consider how best to enshrine that as a guiding
principle in its actions.

