Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council this month, and thank you for
holding this open meeting and giving us the
opportunity to make our own contribution to the debate
on this important subject. I associate myself with the
statement made by the representative of Cuba on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We are glad that you have chosen the issue of
mediation for the thematic debate of the Council
during your presidency, and we also welcomed the
thematic debate held by the Council last September
under the presidency of the President of Burkina Faso
to consider this important subject. We were similarly
satisfied to witness the consensus expressed at that
time by members of the Council on the importance of
supporting and encouraging mediation efforts at the
international and regional levels. That consensus was
expressed explicitly through the adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2008/36.

Mediation is at the heart of the work of the
Security Council and the mandate conferred on it by
the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance
of international peace and security. When we talk about
the mandate of the Council, we must consider the
purposes of the Charter, which emphasizes early and
peaceful solutions of conflicts, especially in
Chapter VI. Although the Council also has a mandate
under Chapter VII, the latter must be used only as a
last resort when need arises. Therefore it is a cause of
concern to see that in recent years Council resolutions
have been frequently adopted under Chapter VII. In
addition, the deployment of peacekeeping forces and
other measures of the use of force result in a much
greater financial burden than the cost of diplomatic
mediation. Hence the relevance of the saying
"prevention is better than cure".

Consequently, diplomatic mediation remains the
most effective way to reach the desired peaceful
settlement, as experience has shown in many cases.
The Security Council must therefore encourage all
forms of mediation that contribute to the peaceful
resolution of disputes. We also encourage the Council
to continue to attach premium importance to the issue
of mediation and its promotion, including by
considering the possibility of establishing a subsidiary
body entrusted with the task of seeking ways of
enhancing mediation by third parties and other means
of peaceful settlement of disputes and disagreements.

If we carefully examine the factors of success of
dispute resolution through diplomatic mediation, we
can conclude that that success is predicated upon a
number of elements.

The mediator must be fair-minded, truthful,
impartial and without vested interest in the
continuation of the conflict or in a specific outcome to
it. The best example of the importance of impartiality
in mediation is the persistence of the crisis in the
Middle East for over six decades. In the same vein, the
intermediary has to be fully aware of the underlying
root causes and origins of the conflict. He also needs to
have a thorough understanding of the characteristics of
each case and each region and take them into account,
particularly conventions, norms and agreements that
exist between the parties to the conflict. The mediator
must have the open-mindedness that allows him to
understand and respect the cultures, sacred symbols
and the views of the parties to the conflict. Last but not
least, the mediator must, by having these qualities, gain
the trust of the parties to the dispute.

Other factors play a role in the success of
mediation. Indeed, it is of critical importance that all
influential stakeholders, or those that are likely to
influence the durability of the settlement reached, take
part in the negotiations. It is also important to
strengthen and consolidate the genuine desire of the
participants in the dialogue process to reach a genuine
settlement. We must work to mobilize the necessary
momentum in order to support and implement
mediation-driven agreements, to achieve consensus
and, in some cases, to secure reconstruction processes.
There is also a need to keep the efforts of mediation
processes from being sabotaged by some stakeholders.

The efforts for reconciliation and accord between
conflicting parties will be doomed to failure in the long
term if we do not work towards spreading a culture of
peace, renunciation of violence, acceptance of others
and peaceful expression of disagreement among the
parties to the conflict and their popular bases.

Based on the views and proposals that I have
mentioned, we believe that the recommendations of the
Secretary-General contained in his report to the
Council on this matter are worthy of consideration. The
establishment of the Mediation Support Unit of the
Department of Political Affairs, which provides the
necessary expertise to support mediation efforts of the
United Nations and of the regional and subregional
organizations, constitutes a step forward. We should
continue to develop the activities of that Unit and its
involvement with Member States under the principle of
respect of sovereignty.

There is no doubt that the endeavours and good
offices efforts exerted by the Secretary-General, either
directly or through his representatives and special
envoys and United Nations mediators, aiming at the
resolution of conflicts in many regions of the world,
are commendable and worthy of assistance and
support. Therefore, the State of Qatar annually
supports the Trust Fund to Support Special Missions
and Other Activities Related to Preventive Diplomacy
and Peacemaking, in the belief that the diplomatic
efforts of the Secretary-General and the United Nations
are important.

The United Nations must also support regional
and subregional arrangements with a view to reaching
peaceful settlement of disputes, taking into account the
specificities of each region due to its circumstances,
which the regional arrangements understand best. In
particular, support from regional arrangements in
resolving regional conflicts is embedded in the Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. The Security
Council has recognized this on several occasions
recently when discussing cooperation with regional and

subregional organizations. We recall that the Council,
in its presidential statement S/PRST/2008/36, was
intent on enhancing the support provided by the United
Nations to regional and subregional mediation efforts
through the enhancement of cooperation. We welcome
that move and call upon the Council to fulfil that
pledge.

Finally, allow me to move from theory to present
a part of the practical experience of the State of Qatar
in diplomatic mediation, since it includes some shining
examples of what mediation can achieve in bringing
the parties to a dispute to the negotiating table so they
can reach agreements to end their differences, or in
putting them on the track of settlement if that
mediation is fair, honest and impartial.

We highlight in this regard the efforts of His
Highness Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani, Emir of
the State of Qatar, in May of last year to bring
Lebanese parties to the dialogue table in Doha, and the
success of these mediation efforts in reaching the Doha
agreement, which was supported by the Security
Council in a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/ 17).
That national reconciliation opened the door for the
election of a president of Lebanon, ending the state of
instability. We would like to highlight in this regard
that the Qatari mediation efforts in Lebanon were in
accordance with the decision of the Council of the
League of Arab States that established an Arab
ministerial committee to mediate an end to the political
crisis in Lebanon, which demonstrates the importance
of the role played by regional organizations in the field
of mediation, as I mentioned earlier in my statement.

Last February, another agreement was reached in
Doha as a result of mediation efforts by the
Government of the State of Qatar, i.e. the Accord of
Good Intentions and Confidence-building, signed in
Doha by the Government of National Unity of the
Sudan and their brothers, the Justice and Equality
Movement of Darfur. My country still endeavours to
complete this effort, with the participation of Mr. J ibril
Bassole, Joint Mediator of the United Nations and the
African Union. This also demonstrates what I
mentioned about the usefulness of cooperation between
the United Nations and relevant regional organizations.

The State of Qatar also made contacts to resolve
the differences between some Arab countries and the
West, and some internal Arab differences. I cannot go
into details here, but those efforts are within the scope
of the maintenance of international peace and security
through mediation to settle disputes.

