Mr. Mahamat (spoke in French): To begin, I
welcome the holding of this ministerial-level meeting
of the Security Council on the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). I want to thank the
French presidency of the Council for having taken the
initiative, and the members of the Council for their
commitment not only to the issue before it today, but
to other important issues involving peace and security
in Africa.

Since I assumed my functions as Chairperson of
the African Union Commission, I have sought, together
with my colleagues, Mr. Sma'il Chergui, Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union (AU),
and Cessouma Minata Samate, AU Commissioner for
Political Affairs, to visit the G-5 countries. The idea
was not only to show the solidarity of the African
Union with the region in its fight against the scourge
of terrorism and organized transnational crime, but
also to contribute to promoting greater international
awareness of the challenges facing us.

Today's meeting is extremely timely. It attests to
the increasing focus of the international community
on the current situation in the Sahel-Saharan region.
Despite their limited resources and the complex
problems facing them, the countries of the G-5 Sahel
have clearly demonstrated their willingness to meet
those challenges. I commend the Heads of State of
the G-5 Sahel countries for their determination and
perseverance. It is incumbent upon the international
community to support them by virtue of the solidarity
that binds its members together. In so doing, of course,
the international community will also be acting in its
own interest.

Let us make no mistake - what is at stake is not
only the security of the countries of the Sahel, but also
the security of countries of the many regions throughout
the world, because the scourges at hand truly know no
borders. They must be combated vigorously and with
the urgency that the situation calls for. That underlines
the critical nature of the contribution of the entire
international community. The United Nations - our
shared home 4 is an ideal setting to address those
issues in a spirit of solidarity. Indeed, this forum
endows regional efforts with the legitimacy that we all
recognize as essential.

It will also be a guarantee of effectiveness, making
it possible to combine judiciously the efforts of the
countries of the G-5 Sahel and those of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the personnel of which
pays a heavy price every day in service to peace in
Mali. It is the ideal complement to multilateral and
bilateral assistance, allowing for coherent and effective
international assistance. I pay tribute to the multilateral
and bilateral partners, including the European Union,
which has already provided assistance to the countries
of the G-5.

The African Union welcomed the adoption on

21 June of resolution 2359 (2017), in which the Security
Council welcomes the deployment of the Joint Force of
the G-5 Sahel. We also welcome the powerful signal
sent through the visit by the Security Council to the
Sahel countries and the spirit of commitment and
solidarity at its heart. The hopes that have been raised
must not be disappointed. I am convinced that Council
members are committed and have heard the message
addressed to them from the region. I address Council
members, certain that they will demonstrate once again
their determination to assume their responsibility to
maintain international peace and security. I address
members in the hope that they will concretize the idea
of prevention; in truth, we are dealing with a threat that
could become much greater if it is not dealt with here
and now.
Through its Peace and Security Council, in April
the African Union endorsed the strategic concept
of operations of the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel and
authorized its deployment for an initial, renewable period
of 12 months. At the same time, we clearly expressed
our expectations regarding the contribution of the
United Nations through the establishment of a financial
support module through statutory contributions to the
operating budget of the Joint Force. I reiterate that
request because, in the face of the terrorist threat and
the threat it poses to the stability of the region as a
whole, half measures will not be sufficient. I note with
satisfaction that this option is included in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2017/869) that members have
before them.

The African Union fully endorses the appeal of
the Secretary-General to the Council to be ambitious,
bearing in mind that only predictable and sustainable
financial support will allow the Joint Force to
contribute sustainably to the stability of the region. We
also note with satisfaction the measures envisioned by
the United Nations to support the secretariat ofthe G-S.
The African Union will continue to work closely with
the G-5 in order to support the technical efforts already
provided through a series of measures, including by
sharing our experience in combating insurrections in
Somalia, galvanizing the Nouakchott process, which
brings together all the countries of the region, actively
participating in the support groups provided for in
the strategic concept of operations of the Joint Force,
and through sustained advocacy efforts to raise the
required funds.

The operationalization of the Joint Force must
go hand in hand with accelerated implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
Significant progress has been achieved, and the
Malian stakeholders must be given credit for that;
however, much remains to be done. The completion
of the implementation of the Agreement will make
it possible to further isolate terrorist and criminal
groups. The Malian parties must further step up their
efforts. The African Union, including through its High
Representative for Mali and the Sahel, Mr. Pierre
Buyoya, will continue to work alongside them in
that task.

Putting a decisive end to criminal and terrorist
groups in the Sahelo-Saharan region will also
require sustained efforts in the areas of development
and governance. We commend the efforts of the
G-5 countries in that regard and encourage them to
persevere in their efforts. We welcome the decision of
the Secretary-General to revitalize the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, under the leadership of
the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohamed.
We are convinced that, thanks to her commitment, no
effort will be spared to ensure that the Strategy fully
meets the expectations of the countries of the region.
The African Union will take the steps necessary to
give new momentum to its strategy for the Sahel and
to strengthen the implementation in the region of the
various instruments that it has adopted in the areas of
governance, democracy and respect for human rights.

I cannot conclude my statement without
paying strong tribute once again to the Secretary-
General, Mr. Antonio Guterres. His report and the
recommendations contained therein, as well as his
support for the G-5 are further evidence of the vision
that guides him and his determination to spare no
effort to adapt the United Nations to the security
challenges we face. We fully share that Vision and will
do everything in our power to help him shoulder the
crushing weight of his responsibility.

