Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): May
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this public
meeting on Bougainville. I would also like to thank Sir
Kieran Prendergast for his very informative briefing,
especially on the issue of Bougainville. During the
briefing of the Council of 29 August, we welcomed the
progress achieved. Similarly, in his report on the work
of the Organization to the current General Assembly,
the Secretary-General emphasized the progress
achieved in the implementation of the Bougainville
Peace Agreement signed on 30 August 2001, as well as
the essential role played by the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) in the
destruction of collected weapons. This was an
operation in which a well-informed population
cooperated fully. Since then, there have been some
setbacks and Sir Kieran has given us some information
on the difficulties which, in the view of my delegation,
should not at all discourage the efforts under way,
given the importance of the approaching deadlines in
this operation, especially the elections in June 2003.

The decision of the former combatants to
conclude the operation by December and the agreement
to cooperate on the part of Mee' Kamui in the
elimination of weapons are encouraging and hopeful.
At this stage, I would like to say how much my
delegation appreciates the quality and effectiveness of
the cooperation between UNPOB and the members of
the Pacific Islands Forum, who are neighbours and who
have been providing contingents for the Peace
Monitoring Group for the implementation of the truce
and the Bougainville Peace Agreement.
We see this as a significant illustration of positive
interaction between the United Nations and regional
organizations, something we most earnestly desire.
Success is, of course, partial, although we welcome it.
It is the result both of the determination of the parties
to settle their disputes peacefully and also of the
intervention of the international community, especially
the United Nations and the Pacific Islands Forum group
of States. I agree with the United States delegation that
we need a road map to enable us to have an overall
view of efforts that are still needed to achieve the final
objectives of the process under way.

This momentum towards peace should be
sustained and supported. This is why Cameroon will
give its full support to the extension of the mandate of
UNPOB, whose essential role is recognized by all
parties. Similarly, Cameroon agrees with the Secretary-
General's proposal to extend UNPOB's mandate by 12
months.

My delegation would also like to thank the donor
community for their valuable financial contributions,
as well as the relevant activities undertaken by non-
governmental organizations in achieving the
Bougainville process and in the many areas of
reconstruction. We would encourage them to continue
with their efforts and to strengthen their joint
participation in this lofty common endeavour for the
dawning of peace and sustainable development that
will no doubt benefit the entire region.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the support
of my delegation to UNPOB and all of its staff and
reiterate our encouragement of their tireless efforts.

