Mr. De Rojas (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish): First, I should like to associate Venezuela with
the congratulations extended to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of January. We wish you every success in the
discharge of this very important responsibility.

Venezuela asked to address the Council on this
occasion in order to express complete support for the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission for the Verification of Human Rights and of
Compliance with the Commitments of the Comprehensive
Agreement on Human Rights in Guatemala (MINUGUA),
 

as contained in document S/ 1996/ 1045 and addenda l and
2, as well as for the draft resolution before the Security
Council, contained in document S/ 1997/ 18. Venezuela is a
member of the Group of Friends of the Guatemala Peace
Process, as well as a contributor to MINUGUA, and as
such, as members are aware, is, together with the other
members of the Group of Friends, a sponsor of the draft
resolution.

We support the deployment of a small United Nations
military component, attached to MINUGUA, as requested
by the Secretary-General in his report. We are convinced
that this is the best way of achieving a firm and lasting
peace in accordance with the agreements signed in
Guatemala City on 29 December 1996 by the
representatives of the Government of Guatemala and the
Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG), in
which both parties request the dispatch of a military
mission by the United Nations in order to verify the
implementation of the ceasefire agreements that were
achieved during the process.

In this respect, Venezuela believes that it is the
responsibility of the international community to give all the
support that is necessary for the full implementation of the
agreements, so that the Guatemalan people can begin to
travel down the road to lasting peace and stable democracy,
for the benefit of all the citizens of Guatemala and of our
Latin American region. We also note the great importance
of the letter from the Government of Guatemala, to which
reference has been made here, and which is contained in
document S/ 1997/23. For all of these reasons we hope that
the draft resolution will be given the full support that it
deserves from all the members of this Council.

In conclusion we would like, through you,
Mr. President, to convey to the representatives of our sister
Republic of Guatemala, our feelings of fraternal solidarity
and steadfast support at this very important moment in its
history. We assure them that we will continue to be with
them at this time, and at all times in the future.

