Mr. Hasan (Iraq) (interpretation from Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank you, Sir, for granting the
opportunity to States Members of the United Nations to
express their views on the question of the protection of

 

civilians in armed conflict. This question assumes today
a greater importance than ever before because of the
growing exposure of civilians to the horrors of armed
conflict. The international community should therefore
accord it due importance so as to secure respect for the
basic standards of international humanitarian law.

The treatment of this question necessitates the
adoption of a balanced approach that takes into
consideration several factors. The question has numerous
facets, requiring the interaction of the efforts of numerous
international bodies.

First, for such interaction to take place, international
organizations should act strictly within their competence
and refrain from encroaching on the competence of other
organizations. On this occasion we would like to highlight
the effective role required of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and all other United Nations bodies and
humanitarian organizations, foremost among them the
International Committee of the Red Cross. At the same
time, we warn against attempts by the Security Council to
encroach upon the competence of those organizations and
against attempts to politicize humanitarian issues.

Secondly, the best way of protecting civilians is to
attempt to prevent the outbreak of conflict through
preventive diplomacy and the role of the Secretary-
General and of the United Nations bodies in accordance
with the mechanisms provided for in Chapter VI of the
Charter. Attempts to invoke action under Chapter VII are
fraught with danger and will have adverse consequences,
as experience has shown.

Thirdly, any action taken in the context of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict must strictly
observe paragraph 7 of Article 2 of the Charter.
Breaching that Article would throw the door wide open to
intervention in the internal affairs of States, especially at
this time when we are witnessing rampant selectivity and
double standards in the Security Council.

Fourthly, there must be comprehensive consideration
of the causes and motives for conflict. The international
community must not, by placing the onus on those
directly involved in such conflict, shirk its responsibility
for dealing with conflict. A partial, premature view of the
conflict will lead to premature solutions, which may
complicate the situation rather than resolve it. It is self-
evident that the majority of conflicts in the third world
have their roots in the heavy legacy of colonialism, the

 

lack of socio-economic development and the tendencies of
nee-colonialism, as well as in the current international
economic environment, which makes the poor poorer and
the rich richer.

The international community must make a parallel
effort in the domain of development, respecting the rights
of peoples to define their own social, economic and
political options. We do not believe, for example, that we
will be very successful in preventing the recruitment of
children in conflicts if we do not provide schools for them
and employment opportunities for their parents.

Everyone has spoken about the role of the Security
Council in protecting the victims of armed conflict. Allow
me to speak about the need to protect the civilians who are
victims of the practices of the Security Council itself and of
some permanent members of the Council.

I believe that it is high time for the Council to face the
facts squarely. In countries plagued by poverty,
unemployment and lack of development, it is not only
regular armies and armed militias that are capable of
perpetrating heinous crimes. Allow me to briefly review
some practices by the Security Council and by some of its
permanent members and compare such practices with the
principles regarding the protection of civilians mentioned by
some of the speakers at this meeting, on the basis of my
country's experience with the Security Council.

First, Mr. Sommaruga, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), said, "Nothing can
justify punishing an entire population" (S/PV.3977, p. 4).
The facts show that on 2 August 1990 the Security Council
imposed comprehensive sanctions against Iraq, which are
still in effect. These sanctions and the aggression against
Iraq in 1991 claimed the lives of 1.5 million Iraqi civilians
and devastated the socio-economic infrastructure of Iraqi
society for generations to come. These sanctions, by any
standard, are collective punishment. If the Council wants to
take a serious step to protect civilians, it can do so at this
very moment. All it has to do is lift the sanctions against
Iraq immediately.

Secondly, Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive Director of
the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), said, "we
must protect children from the effects of sanctions"
(S/PV.3977, p. 7). The facts indicate that with every passing
hour, 10 more Iraqi children die because of the continued
sanctions. Is the Council willing to show more tolerance
regarding this crime being perpetrated in its name?

 

Thirdly, numerous speakers called upon the Security
Council to play a collective role in protecting civilians in
armed conflict and called for individual roles for the
Governments represented on the Council. This sincere
wish runs counter to the fact that two permanent members
of the Security Council consider themselves above the
law and feel that the United Nations Charter and
international law apply only when they are in line with
their own interests. Their most recent aggression against
Iraq, on 16 December 1998, provides the best proof of
that. In this very Chamber, most Council members spoke
on that day of the aggression and stated that the Security
Council has no mandate for the use of force. Some of
them explicitly condemned the aggression; yet the
aggression continued and claimed the lives of hundreds of
Iraqi civilians.

Fourthly, Mr. Otunnu, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, said,
"we have to promote the concept of children as a zone of
peace" (S/PV.3977, p. 9). The facts show that Iraqi
children suffer the daily horror caused by British and
American sorties over the cities and the villages of Iraq.
These aircraft often break the sound barrier over homes,
causing children to tremble in fear. Other Iraqi children
are killed daily by British and American smart bombs.

The United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator in
Iraq, Mr. Hans van Sponeck, reported to the Security
Council on the dropping of American smart bombs on
residential neighbourhoods of the city of Basra on 25
January. This one incident claimed the lives of 17 martyrs
and injured 100 people, mostly women and children. The
report is before the Council, which has yet to take action
on it.

It is my belief that the Council has a good
opportunity to protect Iraqi civilians by preventing the
daily use of force by Britain and the United States against
them through the imposition of the illegal no-flight zones.
It is incumbent on the Council to say to the United States
and Britain that this illegal conduct is in full violation of
Security Council resolutions that call for respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Iraq.
The Council should denounce that conduct forthwith.

Fifthly, we have heard some speakers at this meeting
warn against the use of the media to instigate violence
and sedition. The United States has used this means
against Iraq. The radio station targeting the national
Government of Iraq, which recently began to broadcast in
Prague, the capital of the Czech Republic, is additional

 

proof of some Council members violation of their
responsibilities under the United Nations Charter.

All of this evidence regarding the way the Council, as
an institution and as an assemblage of States, deals with
Iraq, calls for the Council to undertake a comprehensive
review of its position on the question of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and should take decisive steps to
correct the situation. The fault lies with the Council itself.

