Mr. Melkert: This is a significant moment at
which to brief the Council on developments and
prospects in Iraq. When I spoke here three months ago,
the electoral law that had just been adopted by the
Council of Representatives after a complicated set of
negotiations was vetoed by Vice-President al-Hashemi.
That set in motion another round of deliberations that
eventually were concluded with an amended law with
stronger and broader support than the first version.
That was very much constitutional democracy in
action, with the United Nations in a position to respond
to calls from the wide spectrum of representatives to
assist in building bridges towards consensus. It was an
important moment for Iraq to rally broad support
behind the 7 March election date, which will mark the
transition from the first full term of a democratically
elected Parliament to the next term.

There are still forces against that national
agreement that seek to interfere violently in the
reconstruction and reconciliation processes that the
overwhelming majority of the Iraqi people would like
to succeed. While, regrettably, those forces continue to
kill and target innocent pilgrims, public servants,
police officers and election candidates, they cannot
reverse the progress that is taking place in Iraq. The
determination of Iraqis to resist the return of the perils
of the past is real and strong - stronger than the
heinous forces behind the attacks. However, more
international attention and engagement are needed to
allow the people of Iraq to determine their future in
their own way. Allow me therefore to share some
thoughts on the forthcoming elections and the
transition to the next Parliament and Government.

First, I would like to caution against the
persistent skepticism and impatience that characterize
much of the discourse and reporting on Iraq. Yes, it is
not difficult to note imperfections, gaps and
contradictions in the ongoing process, but that is not
the heart of the matter if one considers the decades of
conflict and crime that have gravely affected Iraq's
society, economy, administration and international
standing. The crux is now to see whether there is a
genuine effort under way to reconstruct and innovate.
That is what, in many different ways, is happening. It
deserves to be seen and properly understood,
unprecedented as it is in the course of a long and
distinguished history.

Secondly, it is important that lessons be learned
in the process and properly applied in the future in
10-24053
order to minimize the re-emergence of contentious
issues. From the perspective of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), it will be highly
relevant to advise the new Government on the general
fundamentals of electoral legislation and parliamentary
procedures, as well as to clarify the roles and
responsibilities of the three powers, as that is necessary
to strengthen the authority of the institutions.

Thirdly, there has been much attention paid to the
so-called de-Baathification of candidates for the
elections. It should be noted that the principle of
drawing a line between a former dictatorial regime and
a newly developing democratic order has been seen in
other places. The application of the principle is entirely
an Iraqi responsibility. What has made matters
complex, however, from the perspective of general
international standards for preparing free and fair
elections is the lack of transparency that has marked
the process from the outset. UNAMI has consistently
emphasized the due process requirements and
abstained from judging the outcomes.

While reason for concern remains with regard to
their impact, decisions on the candidate lists should be
assessed in the context of the electoral process as a
whole. What eventually will matter most is the
acceptance by the Iraqi people of the election results.
We will continue to do our utmost to advice and
remind all stakeholders of the need to respect
fundamental standards and to strive for consensus-
building in reconciling the polarized past with a more
harmonious future.

A fourth and different point in preparing for the
transition has been the adoption of the budget. It is
expected that this will allow for short-term support
commitments by the International Monetary Fund and
the World Bank in order to deal with the setback of oil
price decreases during the past few years. However,
transforming the budget into a strategic instrument for
prioritizing and directing expenditures and investments
remains a big task ahead.

The integrated United Nations Mission is
preparing its advice and support to the new
Government. It is doing so by seeking closer
cooperation with the World Bank in particular. It is
hoped that everyone will step up to the plate. Iraq
needs fewer projects and more strategic advice. It
needs to be connected to global standards of
governance that will be of great benefit to the business
climate, and it should urgently respond to the social
deficits that squarely put the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals high on the agenda as
a moral imperative and economic necessity, as the
skills of its workers will define whether and when Iraq
can live up to its full potential.

Fifthly, full transparency and combating
corruption in revitalizing the oil industry would have a
major impact on the future and will improve investor
confidence.

It should be welcomed that Kurdistan Regional
Prime Minister Saleh has taken the initiative to address
the issue of transparency with regards to the contracts
signed by the Kurdistan Regional Government.
Clarifying the competencies between the federal and
the regional governments is an indispensable aspect of
transition towards a more stable future. At the same
time, with the successful conclusion of important oil
contracts, urgency has returned to the stage of avoiding
the pitfalls of monoproduction and the quick-win
exploitation of resources. After all, stability and
prosperity are closely intertwined.

I would like to say a few words on the role of the
United Nations in the important priority areas.

First, on the preparations for 7 March, elections
are not only about politics, but require a lot of hard
work on the ground. The United Nations electoral team
has continued to play a key role in advising and
technically supporting the Independent High Electoral
Commission. As a result of a huge collective effort, the
infrastructure is in place to allow approximately
18.9 million Iraqi voters to visit 48,000 polling stations
on election day. Preparations are also under way for
out-of-country voting in 16 countries that host large
Iraqi communities in diaspora.

Security is a vital consideration for these
elections, in relation both to the integrity of the process
and to voter confidence. The Government of Iraq and
the Iraqi security forces have the lead in this important
area.

Furthermore, observation of the electoral process
plays a pivotal role in ensuring the credibility of the
elections and their oversight. The United Nations is
playing an active role in assisting civil society to
assume this role through the funding of an initiative
that has trained over 29,000 domestic observers.
International observers are being coordinated through
the good offices of the European Union in cooperation
with the Independent High Electoral Commission.
Although UNAMI will not observe the elections due to
its role in supporting the Commission, our Mission will
undertake its own poll-watching activities, sending
teams to different locations in the country as a
confidence-building initiative.

Acceptance of the results is of paramount
importance and will be the litmus test for the success
or failure of the process. UNAMI is supporting the
Independent High Electoral Commission in developing
a robust and timely complaints mechanism to ensure
that the credibility of the results is not eroded by a
delay in adjudication of complaints. While it is
expected that preliminary results will be published in
the days following 7 March, final results could take
considerable time, with the Federal Supreme Court
certifying the election results once all appeals have
been resolved.

The next point I would like to make is on the
national coexistence agenda. For the near future,
cementing long-term stability between the federal State
of Iraq and the Kurdish region is of paramount
importance. Different signs of goodwill, including on
joint security arrangements, seem to signal potential
for further progress.

In the High-level Task Force that has continued to
meet under UNAMI auspices, progress has been made
to address issues that stand in the way of normal life
and business in disputed areas, including property
matters. I recently traveled to Kirkuk to support the
work of the Kirkuk property committee in their
inaugural meeting. In my visit to local multi-ethnic
communities, I got a strong impression that daily issues
are the same for all communities and that much of the
discussion on boundaries and competences is
considered "higher" politics, not necessarily connected
with the average citizen's practical concerns about
living together. This should hopefully serve as a
reminder and inspiration for the inevitable "high"
political dialogue that is ahead of us.

UNAMI intends to interact with key
representatives of the different communities in order to
encourage progress on outstanding questions that are
fundamental for security, stability and economic and
social progress in Iraq as a whole. The coexistence
agenda and the process towards solutions will have to
be decided by the Iraqi parties themselves. The United
Nations is ready to facilitate these steps at the request
of parties. I have observed growing consensus that the
time has come to address the administrative
arrangements for Kirkuk and other areas and to ensure
long-term agreements on revenue-sharing and
provision of security.

Next, a word on the Chapter VII mandates. A next
post-election priority will be the endeavour to promote
constructive neighbourhood relations between Iraq and
Kuwait, in conclusion of a period of turbulence. My
visit to Kuwait in January and the consultations with
the Government of Iraq prior to the visit were intended
to provide me with a first-hand impression of the
positions of the two sides. I was pleased with the keen
interest demonstrated by my interlocutors on both sides
in resolving all outstanding issues in the period ahead.
This would be an important step in the Council's
deliberations on resolution 1859 (2008) and will
hopefully pave the way for a new era in the
relationship between Iraq and the United Nations.

On the policy agenda and development
assistance, with a new Government starting its work in
the course of the year, there is an opportunity for the
United Nations to transform its support of primarily
humanitarian tasks into a more development- and
policy reform-oriented advisory role. Integration will
be the name of the game for United Nations
contributions. The United Nations family in Iraq has
identified four key areas where the United Nations has
specialized knowledge and demonstrated experience:
post-election activities, including census and civil
registration; broader engagement in the disputed
internal boundaries areas in the context of local area
economic and social development; reform of the public
distribution system and the development of social
safety nets; and water resources management and
relevant issues of transborder cooperation.

We are also in the final stages of producing the
first United Nations Development Assistance
Framework (UNDAF) for Iraq for the period 2011-
2014, prepared in close consultation with the
Government of Iraq and concurrently with the
preparation of the Iraq National Development Plan.
The agencies, funds and programmes have also
discussed practical measures to ensure that the UNDAF
will be fully funded, particularly in the light of the
closure of the United Nations Development Group Iraq
Trust Fund as from 30 June 2010.
10-24053
Finally, a word on the future United Nations
presence in Iraq: I would like to draw the Council's
attention to this in anticipation of a more specific
analysis on the next reporting occasion. With its
National Development Plan, the Government of Iraq
counts on enlarged support by the United Nations,
increasingly operating from and in the country. Against
the backdrop of the drawdown of the United States
Forces in Iraq security and logistical support, there will
be considerable implications for the way that the
United Nations can organize itself to respond to future
demand for presence and programmes.

In close cooperation with United Nations
Headquarters, we are currently exploring the
arrangements for the future. Continued presence, let
alone increasing the United Nations footprint in
different parts of Iraq, will come with a higher price
tag. For the plans of the new Government and for our
own operational preparation, it will be important to
count on the Council's attention and guidance.

In conclusion, let me reiterate my gratitude to the
men and women who, in still difficult circumstances,
continue to keep the United Nations flag and spirit
high. It is a privilege to work with this truly
international community in assisting the people of Iraq.
I was happy to recently welcome the new Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, Jerzy Skuratowicz of Poland, who in many places
in the world has proven to be another true United
Nations ambassador. In leading the mission together
with him and the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq, Christine McNab, I look
forward to the Council's ongoing guidance and
support.

