Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I associate myself with the
words of welcome and congratulation addressed to you,
Sir, and those of appreciation addressed to your
predecessor.

I want to thank the Secretary-General for his
interesting and comprehensive report on the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET). Let me also take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Vieira de Mello for his briefing and the additional
information he has provided. I want to state from the
outset that, in my delegation's view, the report before us
today reflects notable progress in virtually all areas of
concern regarding the rebuilding and rehabilitation of East
Timor, despite the challenges facing UNTAET. I have no
doubt that most of these achievements can be attributed
to the personal skills and dedication of Mr. Vieira de
Mello.

Of particular importance to my delegation is the
urgency and Vision with which he has established the
National Consultative Council as a framework for
involving the East Timorese in the administration of the
Territory. That forum is crucial to the nation as well to
confidence-building. The role of that Council in national
reconciliation can also not be overemphasized.

Another positive aspect of the report is the
information regarding the continuing improvement of
good relations between Indonesia and East Timor, which
was enhanced by the visits of Mr. Gusmao and Mr. Vieira
de Mello to Jakarta. The forthcoming Visit of President
Wahid to East Timor will provide an added dimension to
these efforts, which are undoubtedly essential for
cooperation between the countries. Examples of the
positive results derived from the improved relationship,
such as the release of East Timorese political prisoners
and the possible official Indonesian representation in East
Timor, are numerous in the report.

My delegation is gratified at the overall security
situation in East Timor. It is unfortunate, however, that
negative aspects, such as the outbreak of crime and gang
violence, mainly due to socio-economic problems, are on
the rise. It now remains for UNTAET to address this
problem urgently.

We note the great influence of unemployment on the
situation in the country, as well as the efforts under way
to address the situation. It would be interesting to know
what impact the programmes currently envisioned will
have on the overall unemployment situation. Furthermore,

 

it would be useful if Mr. Viera de Mello could give us an
indication of the level of interest shown thus far by other
job-creating entities, such as the private sector, in the
development of East Timor. With regard to the border
incidents, we trust that the latest memorandum between
UNTAET, the International Force in East Timor
(INTERFET) and the Indonesian armed forces (TNI) will,
in the first instance, prevent further incidents and, if it does
not, at least enable the parties to effectively deal with the
situation.
The critical outstanding concern remains the plight of
the refugees in camps in West Timor, their safety and their
repatriation, if they so desire. It is disappointing to note that
the militias operate in the camps and that they prevent the
United Nations from moving freely in the camps. I note
that Mr. Viera de Mello has again discussed the matter with
the Indonesian Government. I would like to know if there
are any visible efforts to curtail the militia activities.

My delegation is gratified at the progress in the
deployment of UNTAET, as well as the envisaged transfer
from INTERFET to UNTAET. In this regard, we share the
Secretary-General's appreciation for INTERFET, for the
excellent work it has done so far.

We welcome the report of the International
Commission of Inquiry on East Timor and have taken note
of its conclusions and recommendations. We agree that
everything should be done to ensure that the perpetrators of
human rights abuses in East Timor are brought to justice.
However, we have also noted the progress achieved thus far
by the Indonesian Commission of Inquiry. At this stage, we
think it would be more feasible to allow this process to take
its course before further steps are taken by the international
community.

Finally, I wish Mr. Viera de Mello and his staff all the
best in their work.

