Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me also begin by
thanking the High Representative, Mr. Valentin Inzko,
for his informative briefing today. Sweden continues to
fully support his mandate and his important work for
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Twenty-three years have passed since those intense
November weeks in Ohio, when the DaytonAagreement
on the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina was being
negotiated. The Agreement marked the starting point of
the long path towards reconstruction and reconciliation.
While much has been achieved over the years, important
steps remain for Bosnia and Herzegovina to build a
country of prosperity, peace, stability and equality
for all.

The conduct of general elections last month was
one such important step. We welcome that the elections
could proceed without any major security incidents.
At the same time, we condemn the threats and attacks
against journalists during the election campaign. We
also regret that the campaign was tainted by divisive
and nationalistic rhetoric, and that more attention was
not given to what is most urgently needed - reform.

Socioeconomic reforms and improvements in
the rule of law must be at the centre of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's political priorities. High unemployment,
widespread corruption and mismanagement erode the
trust between citizens and authorities. As we heard from
the High Representative, young and educated citizens are
leaving the country to look for opportunities elsewhere.
That is a worrying trend that must be reversed. Yet the
pace of reform has unfortunately stalled in recent years.
The country's political leaders must now take on the
responsibility they have to enable it to make a rapid
return to a path of reform. To that end, all the relevant
actors must now engage in constructive dialogue aimed
at forming Governments and parliaments at all levels
without further delay.

Bosnia and Herzegovina reconfirmed its strategic
priority of joining the European Union (EU) with
its application for membership in 2016. The further
integration of the Western Balkans remains a top priority
for the European Union. We welcome the participation
of the observer of the EU in our meeting this morning,
elaborating on EU efforts, and align ourselves with
his statement. A credible EU perspective, based on
progress according to its own merits, continues to be
one of the most powerful drivers of peace, stability and
prosperity in the region. In the work of achieving deeper
integration, Bosnia and Herzegovina and its European
partners must now strengthen their cooperation to
meet their common challenges, which include trade
and sustainable economic development, environmental
protection, organized crime, terrorism and migration,
to mention only a few.

Regional cooperation and reconciliation in the
Western Balkans is crucial to stability and progress.
Sweden therefore supports the Regional Cooperation
Council's important work in strengthening good-
neighbourly relations in the region. Bridging cultural
and social differences through increased regional
exchanges is essential, not least among children
and young people, and involving young people in
peacebuilding activities is definitely an important
prerequisite for sustaining peace anywhere, as outlined
in resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). In that
same context, a stable peace also requires the full
participation of women. More attention and devotion
to that issue is needed, and future reports from the
High Representative should better reflect the specific
challenges and opportunities for women. Such analyses
integrating a gender perspective would benefit our
future briefings and inform a more strategic response.

Finally, for a country to move forward, its focus
must be on the future rather than mired in the past. That
is true both for reconciliation within the country and for
its relations with neighbours. Bosnia and Herzegovina
can continue to count on strong international support,
and in that regard we welcome today's unanimous
adoption of resolution 2443 (2018), renewing the
mandate of the European Union military mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The European Union's commitment to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's EU perspective is unequivocal. Sweden,
for its part, will remain a steadfast partner of Bosnia
and Herzegovina on its path towards a stable and
prosperous future.

