Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, like previous speakers, I too would like to
thank, Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
briefing.

The United Nations Interim Administration in
Kosovo (UNMIK) has been in existence for three
years, and it is necessary for us to review and sum up
the situation in order to further improve and refine our
work in the future. As we do that, therefore, and while
recognizing the achievements made, I believe our
emphasis should be on lessons learned, so that our
work in the future may be more effective.

During the last three years, the international
community has indeed attained some achievements in
Kosovo. We appreciate the fact that, under different
Mission Heads, UNMIK has done a great deal of work.
For instance, we have seen a marked decrease in the
crime rate; a society based on the rule of law is now
taking shape; the Serb minority is now beginning to
participate in the provisional Government; and the
legislature and provisional Government are functioning
normally. In addition, UNMIK and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia have signed a joint document
to resolve a series of problems. There has also been an
exchange of prisoners of war between Kosovo Serbs
and Albanians. UNMIK has also established
benchmarks, including ones relating to the expected
large-scale return of refugees in the years 2003 and
2004.

But I must at the same time point out that we are
still faced with many difficulties and that the situation
in Kosovo is still a cause of concern to us. I now wish
to stress three points.

First, I would like to mention the rights and
interests of ethnic minorities, and in particular as
regards their safety. The question of how the security
situation can be improved to facilitate the rapid return
of ethnic minorities is still a matter that requires the
attention of the Security Council.
The Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, Mr. Covic', in meetings of the
Security Council has repeatedly presented statistics and
other data to describe the living conditions of the
ethnic minorities in Kosovo, eliciting a strong reaction
from many present, including the Chinese delegation.
We hope that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), in
fulfilling its mandates in various fields in accordance
with the benchmarks that have been defined, can fully
consider the legitimate concerns of the ethnic
minorities and work towards resolution of their
problems. The reason for this is simple. Without a
guarantee of the rights of the ethnic minorities there
can be no multi-cultural, multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo, nor can UNMIK really meet the benchmarks.

Secondly, with respect to comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999), we take note
of the fact that promulgation of the Constitutional
Framework of the Kosovo provisional institutions of
self-government has created some doubt as to
whether resolution 1244 (1999) has been effectively
implemented, that is, whether settlement of the status
of Kosovo is being resolved within the framework of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Although a
legislative election took place as scheduled, political
stalemate soon followed within the ruling coalition.
When Mr. Steiner assumed his position as the newly
appointed Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, he set ending this political stalemate as his
priority. But when the provisional Government was
announced, with Mr. Rugova as head, Mr. Rugova
immediately made a statement favouring Kosovo
independence, which had a negative impact on the
situation in the region. Subsequent decisions made by
both the provisional Government and its legislature
regarding the territory of Kosovo have not only been
detrimental to the authority of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General; they are also
in contravention of Security Council resolutions and
international practice. It is necessary to point out here
that attempts to put Kosovo on the road to
independence are not conducive to the stability and
peace of the region.

Thirdly, a comprehensive strategy is needed to
resolve the Kosovo question. The municipal elections
to be held in October are now the focus of our
attention. But without an appropriate resolution of
issues such as the return of refugees, missing persons,
the security and safety of ethnic minorities and
economic reconstruction, achievements in the political
process will inevitably be undermined. It is necessary
for the international community to pay equal attention
to the resolution of the problems I have outlined.

In sum, we hope the work of the United Nations
in Kosovo can be completed in good time so we can
consolidate the achievements already made and live up
to the expectations of those who truly care about the
destiny of the various ethnic groups in Kosovo.

