Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French):
France commends the organization of this debate, held
a few months before the fifth anniversary of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). It is an opportunity
to underscore the initial gains of the PBC and to focus
on priority efforts that could improve the effectiveness
of its work. The 2010 review should allow the
Commission to become an influential tool that will
bring added value to key areas of peacebuilding.

We fully align ourselves with the statement to be
made by the representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union.

I also wish to thank Ambassador Mufioz, Chair of
the Commission, for his dedication and his work at the
head of the PBC since January 2009. France also
wishes to express its gratitude to the four Chairs of the
country-specific configurations engaged in resolute
peacebuilding efforts in the countries in question.

As its report (S/2009/444) indicates, the PBC has
already achieved satisfactory results in the four
countries on its agenda. For four years, the
Commission has played a growing role in its United
Nations peacebuilding efforts in countries that are just
emerging from conflict, by mobilizing resources and
coordinating international assistance. My delegation
emphasizes the importance of the ties that have been
established between the PBC and the national
authorities of those four States, in particular in the
definition of strategic priorities. The ownership of
those peacebuilding strategies by all stakeholders is
vital. We therefore call on the Governments of
Burundi, Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and the Central
African Republic, which have the primary
responsibility for successful peacebuilding, to pursue
their cooperation with the Commission, in particular in
completing the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes under way, reforming their
security sectors and organizing elections.

Despite that progress, we feel that the
Commission's effectiveness can still be improved. The
Commission has not yet achieved all the objectives
entrusted to it when it was created. France favours
strengthened relations between the Commission and
the Security Council, as suggested by the Secretary-
General in his June report (S/2009/304). The primary
objective of the Commission is to ensure the transition
between peacekeeping operations and the
peacebuilding process. To that end, the Commission
and the Council must cooperate more regularly and
more closely to ensure, in particular, that the
peacebuilding dimension is taken into account at the
earliest possible phase in defining post-crisis strategies.

The effectiveness of the Commission also
depends on its relations with the United Nations
system, in particular the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council. Increased synergy with
those organs will ensure the coordination of actions
conducive to the establishment of lasting peace in the
political, economic and social spheres. We also call on
all Member States to pay particular attention to the
work of the Commission and to support it.

The main contribution of the Commission is to
mobilize energies and resources while coordinating
activities on the ground, including the work of
international financial institutions, United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations with
which the PBC is in ongoing contact. In that regard, it
is vital that the Commission follow up on projects
financed by the Peacebuilding Fund in order to ensure
the coherence of the international community's
financial assistance. Thus, the Commission's value
added could lie in the coordinated selection of projects
and of the States that are recipients of funds through
the Peacebuilding Fund.

The Commission should review some of its
working methods and step up its efforts on the ground.
The Commission's presence on the ground in the form
of a PBC focal point, through a United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office, is a prerequisite for
coordinating international efforts and for ensuring the
credibility of the Commission. The Integrated
Peacebuilding Offices should serve as effective day-to-
day intermediaries in the implementation of approaches
jointly defined by the Commission and the State in
question.

Finally, I welcome the role played by the
Peacebuilding Support Office in supporting the
activities of the Commission. I wish great success to
Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins, who recently took up her
post.

In our view, the 2010 review of the Peacebuilding
Commission will be a critical milestone in enabling the
Commission to enhance its effectiveness and to gain
visibility and influence here in New York and, most
especially, on the ground. The in-depth and objective
review should provide a comprehensive view of its
strengths and weaknesses of the Commission's
activities, with a view to making it more effective.

