Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation, Sir, welcomes your coming to
New York to preside over this important open debate of
the Security Council. I am also grateful to the
Secretary-General for his report, as well as to Ms.
Frechette, the Deputy Secretary-General, for her
statement.

The Secretary-General's report is comprehensive.
It has provided us with a detailed analysis of the role of
the United Nations in conflict prevention. It thus
provides the Security Council, the General Assembly
and other United Nations organs an excellent
foundation for the consideration of the subject and for
taking relevant actions.
The report reiterates that the United Nations
conflict-prevention efforts must conform with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and that successful conflict prevention depends
on the agreement and support of the national
governments and other major national actors. These are
very important principles and guidelines that need to be
followed by the United Nations in its conflict-
prevention work. I am confident that through the
consideration of this report the Members will gain a
better understanding of the role of the United Nations
in conflict prevention.

The root causes of the armed conflicts in the
world today can be found in very complex economic,
social, historic and religious issues, as well as in the
tribal and territorial problems that are a legacy of
colonialism. Therefore conflict prevention must treat
both the symptoms and causes of the disease.
Prevention strategies will have to suit the needs of the
different regions, countries and circumstances of given
conflicts.

In the wake of the cold war we have seen an
increase in armed conflicts within States, particularly
conflicts between different ethnic groups. In the
Middle East, the Balkans and the Great Lakes region of
Africa there are ethnic conflicts, and sometimes these
conflicts are further complicated by religious disputes.
As an overwhelming majority of countries in the world
are multi-ethnic and multi-religious, the realization of
national unity and harmony, including the equal
treatment and coexistence of different religions, is the
most basic condition for social stability and
development. Increases in ethnic tension and religious
disputes will only lead to turbulence and economic and
social stagnation in the concerned countries and
regions.

From the perspective of conflict prevention, it is
necessary to advocate national equality, harmony and
the sharing of interests. In particular, minorities need to
be guaranteed equal status and an equal right to
participate in the political, economic and cultural life
of the country. If necessary, minorities also need
preferential treatment and to be encouraged to
participate in the administration of the State. It is also
necessary, in the interest of promoting religious
freedom, to advocate mutual respect among different
religions, and for tolerance and reconciliation.

The international community is a large family
composed of different countries. It is important to
stress the democratization of inter-State relations in
conflict prevention. Because countries have different
social systems, ideologies, value systems and religious
beliefs, it is necessary in international relations to
strictly abide by the basic principles of mutual respect
for sovereignty and territorial integrity, non-aggression,
non-interference in the internal affairs of other States,
equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence.

The United Nations needs to play a significant
role in the democratization of inter-State relations. As
regards the Middle East, the Balkans and the Great
Lakes region in Africa, as well as other countries and
regions where conflicts currently exist, if the parties
concerned can abide by the basic norms governing
inter-State relations, then their conflicts can be
speedily resolved and the outbreak of new conflicts can
be prevented.

Recently leaders of China, the Russian
Federation, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and
Uzbekistan held a successful meeting in Shanghai.
They established a Shanghai organization which
represents a new model for regional cooperation
characterized by joint initiatives on the part of both
large and small States, by making security the top
priority, and by mutual benefit and synergy. The
Shanghai spirit thus fostered stresses inter-State trust,
mutual benefit, equality, consultation, respect for
pluralism in civilization and common development.
This is also an important initiative in the area of
establishing regional conflict-prevention mechanisms
to fight terrorism, separatism and extremism, which are
detrimental to regional security.

The wars and armed conflicts taking place in
some countries and regions have taken a heavy toll on
the lives and property of the people. Although the
capacity and role of the United Nations in conflict
prevention are limited, as rightly pointed out by the
Secretary-General in his report, conflict prevention is
still an important dimension of the maintenance of
international peace and security. It remains one of the
major tasks of the United Nations. China is prepared,
with other Members, to make its contribution to
enhancing the United Nations conflict-prevention
capacity.

