Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my sincere appreciation for your leadership,
Sir, in convening today's open debate. Let me also thank
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Johanna Brandt, Deputy Executive Director
of UNICEF, Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, and Mr. Forest
Whitaker, UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador for Peace
and Reconciliation, and Ms. Sandra Uwiringyyimana
for their briefings.

Today I would like to focus on the issues of child
abduction and matters related to it. On 14 April, the
extremist Islamic group Boko Haram abducted 276 girls
from their school in Chibok, Nigeria. Two-hundred
twenty three of them are still missing. Prime Minister
Abe stated here at the United Nations last September
(see A/68/PV.12) that Japan would do everything
possible to prevent sexual violence against women
during armed conflict and to support, both materially
and psychologically, the people who unfortunately
become victims of such acts. It is absolutely necessary
to prevent similar outrageous crimes from taking place
again, and we should also spare no efforts in supporting
the victims. In that regard, on 13 June, the Government
of Japan contributed $855,000 to provide psychosocial
support and health care for the victims and their
community in Nigeria.

That horrid incident symbolizes the vulnerable
condition of children in armed conflict. It is neither
the first time that children have been abducted, and
it does not happen in Nigeria only. According to the
Secretary-General's current report (S/2014/339, last year 147 students were abducted in the Republic of the
Congo and 250 were abducted in South Sudan. Also, the
number of child abduction cases by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant in Syria is increasing. The Security
Council should consider the best ways to prevent and
eliminate child abductions in armed conflict.

One of the purposes of child abduction is to recruit
child soldiers. In that regard, the success ofthe Children,
Not Soldiers campaign is of considerable significance.

We welcome the progress made, such as the
successful use of the age verification scheme that Chad
has already used in approximately 3,800 of its military
units, in cooperation with United Nations agencies.

Over the past six months, since the last open debate
(see S/PV.7129), the Government of Japan has provided
more than $1 million to the Central African Republic,
the Islamic Republic of Mauritania and South Sudan for
children in need of protection, including psychosocial
support.

In order to achieve the goal ofthe campaign by 2016,
its agenda has to be reinforced. The age verification
procedure must be established universally, and those
who violate it must be sanctioned. While the campaign
is applicable only to Government military forces, the
Security Council should begin to consider how the fruits
of the campaign could be diverted to non-governmental
military groups, given that they make up the majority
of perpetrators.

Lastly, a main objective of United Nations
peacekeeping operations is to protect civilians in
conflict and post-conflict situations. Children are the
most vulnerable in such situations. Yet we still of hear
cases in which United Nations peacekeepers violate
the rights of children. United Nations peacekeeping
operations should be a model for safeguarding our
children. We, the troop contributing countries, should
recognize our responsibility to train our personnel at
home so that they will not abuse children in the course
of their duties, but protect them.

In conclusion, we should be reminded that abduction
is one of the six most grave violations against children.
Yet that subject has not attracted adequate attention in
the Security Council. It is not recognized as a trigger in
the annex of the Secretary-General's report, and is not
subject to the monitoring and reporting mechanism. It
is high time to think anew on this matter.

