The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Belgium, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Namibia and Rwanda, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mukongo
Ngay (Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a
seat at the Council table; Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium),
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia) and Mr. Gasana
(Rwanda) took the seats reservedfor them at the
Side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of members to
the following documents: S/2001/759, letter dated
1 August 2001 from the Permanent Representative of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo addressed to the
President of the Security Council; S/2001/774, letter
dated 8 August 2001 from the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda addressed to the President of
the Security Council; and S/2001/815, letter dated 17
August 2001 from the Permanent Representative of
Belgium addressed to Secretary-General.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Hedi Annabi,
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Annabi to take a seat at the Council
table.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hedi Annabi.

As there is no list of speakers, I would invite
those who wish to take the floor to indicate their wish
to the Secretariat.

I now give the floor to the Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hedi
Annabi.


