Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
Ian Martin for his briefing and the Kuwaiti presidency
for having scheduled this open debate. I should like also
to congratulate Kuwait on taking up the chairmanship of
the Informal Working Group of the Security Council on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. I look
forward to a productive two years under its leadership.

I am afraid, Sir, that you have a tough act to follow,
and I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to Japan as the outgoing Chair, particularly for its
stewardship of the negotiations that led to agreement
on a new note 507.

The new note 507 is a valuable resource for all
current and future members of the Council. It brings
together almost all of the Council's myriad procedural
documents and contains a number of important changes.
In particular, I would highlight the new language on
the conduct of informal consultations, the negotiation
process and cooperation with non-Council bodies,
including the Peacebuilding Commission and the
African Union, and I echo what the representative of
Ethiopia said on the value of African Union briefers to
the Council, something we called for collectively when
we were in Addis Ababa for our annual meeting.

Many parts of the note reflect best practice, which
is built up gradually over the years, but it also signals
our collective ambition for a more inclusive, transparent
and effective Council that is better able to tackle the
challenges of the modern world. One of the ways in
which we can deliver this ambition is through a stronger
relationship with external partners. Last week the Cruz
report reminded us of the risks face by peacekeepers
deployed by the Council.

The United Kingdom is pleased to have worked
with Pakistan to strengthen triangular cooperation
between the Council, troop- contributing countries,
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat, and
looks forward to further discussions on this crucial issue
in the forthcoming session of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping.

The Security Council needs to work closely with
those countries whose troops and police are on the front
line when we consider our peacekeeping deployments,
and we in the United Kingdom will continue to ensure
that we do so when considering mandates.

We also need to hear more from civil society and
in particular from women. I would just note that today
marks 100 years since women first gained the right
to vote in the United Kingdom. All too often we hear
only one perspective and do not hear from those most
affected by our decisions in this Chamber. Last yearjust
30 representatives of civil society briefed the Council,
and under a quarter of our briefers were women. We
need to do better.

We also need to continue our efforts to make our
meetings more effective and action-oriented. This
means making sure that the briefings we receive from
the Secretariat are comprehensive by promoting more
interactivity in consultations and seeking outcomes
from our meetings. This will not be accomplished
by more change to the guidance but requires the
commitment of all of us around this table, especially
during Council members" presidencies.

Finally, the Council needs to work harder to meet
the Secretary-General's ambition and our own to do
more on preventative diplomacy. This means focusing
our time on the conflicts of today and tomorrow, not
only those of previous decades. It means being flexible
in how we handle our agenda and making the best use of
the Secretariat's insights, including through situational
awareness briefings.

As the world's threats evolve, so, too, must the
Council. We must implement note 507. We must also
challenge ourselves to continue to adapt as a Council
so that we better meet our mandate of maintaining
international peace and security.

May Ijust finish by thanking those who work so
hard to support us as a Council, including in particular
the Security Council Affairs Division and our
excellent interpreters.

