Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to begin by thanking the Permanent Representatives of
Croatia and Brazil for their comprehensive briefings
this morning.

The end of a given conflict and the cessation of
hostilities will not lead to peace so long as the root
causes of the conflict remain, as these could lead to a
spiral of Violence. We must therefore address the root
causes of conflict and try to resolve them.

Let us recall the words of the Secretary-General,
who said, in paragraph 63 of his report (S/1998/318):

"By post-conflict peace-building, I mean
actions undertaken at the end of a conflict to
consolidate peace and prevent a recurrence of
armed confrontation."

The concept ofpeacebuilding entails a vision for the
post-conflict era and addresses the very sensitive period
that follows armed conflicts. However, this period
might appear even more sensitive in non-international
conflicts, given their nature, as they have a higher
potential for problems that could make the recurrence
of conflict more likely.

It is therefore extremely important to ensure
integration and coherence between peacebuilding on
the one hand and peacemaking on the other, so as to
realize permanent peace and security and prevent a
recurrence of armed conflict.

The activities of peacekeeping operations are
different from those of peacebuilding ones; however,
the developments witnessed by peacekeeping
operations make such forces capable of playing a part
in the peacebuilding process, particularly in the context
of multidimensional peacekeeping operations. Those
forces are capable of undertaking certain aspects of a
peacebuilding operation requiring particular security
and military skills.

The process of enabling a State to regain its
ability to undertake its tasks and shoulder the burden
of governance must include many aspects relating
to assisting the more vulnerable segments of the
population, that is, women and children, as well as
laying the foundations of a development process in the
post-conflict era. That would be achieved by working
with United Nations partners at that stage.

Peacebuilding therefore requires more than
diplomacy and military action. We must stress here
the role of women in the post-conflict peacebuilding
agenda. A follow-up to the measures aimed at enhancing
the participation of women in the implementation of
the Vision set out in Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) is vital in this context.

Returning to the report of the Commission on its
seventh session, my delegation welcomes the fact that
the Commission has maintained the format for reporting
on the progress in taking forward the recommendations
of the 2010 review, which it introduced for the first time
in the report on its sixth session (S/2013/63). We also
stress our support for the Organizational Committee
and commend in particular its efforts with regard to
the series of informal discussions aimed at generating
shared understanding within the membership on areas
requiring immediate action, outreach and practical
implementation.
We also stress the role of the emerging partnership
between the Peacebuilding Support Office and
the Dag Hammarskjold Foundation, which aims
at supporting the Commission's consideration of a
number of policy-related work streams. We believe
that the Commission's giving greater priority to the
role of its membership, especially in view of its unique
compositional structure, is Vital to maximizing the
results and impacts of the Commission. We must note
the importance of the role of the Commission with
respect to addressing issues, including identifying risks
and loopholes that peacebuilding operations could face
in countries on its agenda, to identifying the level of
interest and commitment on the part of active parties
at the national, regional and international levels, to
promoting coherence among United Nations policies,
activities and objectives and those that are outside the
United Nations, and to garnering support for United
Nations missions' processes in the countries on the
Commission's agenda.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
ofthe consultative role ofthe Peacebuilding Commission
in peacebuilding activities and its current role in the
fields of advocacy and mobilization of resources. I
would also request that the international community
remain engaged and active with regard to responding
to the peacebuilding needs of countries in which such
activities have been undertaken.

