Ms. King (Australia): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your country's presidency of the Council
this month, and to thank you for having convened this
important debate at a critical time for the region. I
should also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing this morning.

One year on from the dramatic events in Tunisia,
then Egypt, Libya and other countries in the Middle
East, the outlook for the region is one both of
encouraging progress and of situations of continuing
concern. Australia will continue to actively support the
historic process of democratic transition under way in
the Middle East and North Africa. Elections are an
important step in this process, including in Egypt,
where strong participation rates in the country's first
elections in November last year underscored the will of
the people to act on their legitimate aspirations to
freedom and democracy.

During this period of profound political change in
the Middle East, it is imperative for the future stability
of the region that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict be
resolved. The rapidly changing geopolitics of the
region present a new opportunity for reaching an
12-21419
enduring peace agreement. However, if this
opportunity is not seized and positive steps towards a
conclusion of the peace process are not made soon, the
prospects for a lasting settlement will become
increasingly remote.

Australia has consistently supported a negotiated
two-State solution that allows a secure Israel to live
side by side with a secure and independent Palestinian
State. As a friend of Israel, we recognize Israel's
legitimate security concerns, and as a friend of the
Palestinian people we support the realization of their
right to self-determination through their own State.

We commend the ongoing efforts of the Quartet
to promote a resumption of direct negotiations. We also
commend and have been encouraged by the efforts of
Jordan, under the leadership of His Majesty King
Abdullah, to bring the two parties together for the first
time since late 2010. We also greatly welcome the
recent activity of the Secretary-General in support of
the peace process, including during his recent visit to
Lebanon and through his forthcoming visit elsewhere
in region, which are occurring at a critical juncture and
provide all parties with an opportunity to advance the
cause of peace.

We urge both sides to build on these initiatives
and move forward to substantive negotiations urgently
and without delay. To achieve this, both sides must
demonstrate that they are serious about resuming
negotiations in accordance with the Quartet's statement
of 23 September 2011, including by refraining from
provocative actions that undermine the prospects for
achieving a two-State solution. This includes the
expansion of Israeli settlements and outposts in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem, which the Australian
Government has called on Israel to end. Violence of
any kind targeting civilians must also cease. And,
while we recognize Israel's legitimate security
concerns, more must be done to ease the humanitarian
situation in Gaza.

We applaud the efforts of the Palestinian
leadership in building the necessary economic and
institutional base for statehood. Australia's five-year
funding plan of over $300 million is evidence of our
strong support for this endeavour. Now it is clear that
this institution-building must be matched by political
progress towards peace on both sides.

We continue to support the work of the League of
Arab States in assisting positive transformation in the
3

Arab world. This includes its efforts to end the
bloodshed in Syria. The continuing violence in Syria is
appalling; since the violence began in March last year,
the death toll has surpassed 5,000 according to
estimates of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. We urge the Syrian regime to stop
its brutality and to implement credible political
reforms, including genuine dialogue with opposition
groups, in accordance with the Arab League plan of
action. And we urge members of the Security Council
to discharge their responsibility to deal with the
violence in Syria promptly and expeditiously.

To conclude, the Middle East remains a region
confronted by both challenges and opportunities. We
have common interests in securing durable peace and
stability and in satisfying the legitimate aspirations of
the people of the region for practical reform and
economic opportunity. It is imperative that the Council,
regional actors and other engaged members of the
international community take urgent, positive steps
towards realizing these goals.

