Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): Djibouti is very grateful
for the opportunity to address the Security Council
on how it can more effectively support mediation as
a means for the pacific settlement of disputes. My
Government would like to thank Lord Ahmad of
Wimbledon and the United Kingdom delegation for
bringing this important subject before the Council.
Coincidentally, this open debate on mediation and the
settlement of disputes is taking place as we continue to
mourn the loss of a truly inspirational leader, Mr. Kofi
Annan, who not only made an immense contribution
to peace in the world as Secretary-General but also
devoted the remaining years of his life to mediation
and resolving crises in many parts of the world. We in
Djibouti will be forever grateful to him for the support
he gave in 2000 to the Djibouti-led Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) peace process,
the so-called Arta peace process, named for the city
of Arta, 30 kilometres from Djibouti city. His support
and that of the Security Council were crucial to the
success of the largest Somali-owned peace process,
which culminated in the formation of the Transitional
National Government and offered a basis for peace and
national reconciliation in Somalia.

Djibouti's views on mediation are informed by its
long and continuing involvement in peace and conflict-
resolution processes in the region, and by its recent
experience of participation in the six-year mediation
effort conducted by Qatar to resolve a territorial
dispute and related issues between Djibouti and Eritrea.
The mediation did not succeed, but there are important
lessons to be learned from it.

First, mediation is not for amateurs. It requires
special skills honed by experience, and cannot be
performed successfully by just anyone, no matter
how well intentioned. That is why Djibouti welcomed
the creation of a platform for sharing experience and
learning between the members of the IGAD roster of
mediators, the African Union members of the Panel
of the Wise and members of the Pan-African Network
of the Wise from regional economic communities and
regional mechanisms. We want to take this opportunity
to commend those involved in developing the Strategic
Guidelines on Mediation document, which, to borrow
the words of Dr. Aleu Garang, Coordinator of the IGAD
Mediation Support Unit, will serve the crucial purpose
of informing mediators about the steps that must be
followed in order to achieve professionally oriented,
impartial and efficient intervention in conflict-
prevention and mediation processes. Most importantly,
Djibouti applauds the Secretary-General's establishment
of a High-level Advisory Board on Mediation, and urges
the Council to lend it the maximum support. States
and international organizations called on to mediate
international disputes should be encouraged to seek
the active involvement and assistance of the Secretary-
General and the Advisory Board.

Secondly, there must be genuine commitment to the
process by the disputing States. Paying lip service is not
enough. Mediators cannot succeed if one of the parties
refuses to appoint representatives, appear at meetings
or cooperate with the mediator's fact-finding efforts.

Thirdly, there must be accountability and
consequences. Participating States must be made aware
that they will be held accountable for non-participation
in the process, and that there will be meaningful
consequences if they fail to act in good faith.

Fourthly, there must be a time limit. If not,
mediation can be dragged out for years - six, in our
case - without meaningful progress. Mediators do not
easily admit failure. A cynical party may exploit the
cover that mediation provides to extend the settlement
process rather than expedite it, and to avoid an amicable
resolution rather than contribute to it. Time limits, in
our View, address both of those problems.

Fifthly, it should be understood from the outset
that recourse will be made to another of the settlement
procedures listed in Article 33 of the Charter of
the United Nation in the event that mediation fails.
Mediation will have a better chance of success if the
parties understand that one of the consequences of
failure will be arbitration or litigation, not a continued
stalemate. The fundamental objective is not mediation
for mediation's sake, but settlement of the dispute.
If mediation fails, settlement must be pursued by
other peaceful means. In that regard, we want to call
attention to the decision that the Secretary-General
made in January following the failure of the good-
offices process - a form of mediation - to resolve
a controversy between Guyana and Venezuela, ruling
that it would have to be resolved by judicial settlement
in the International Court of Justice. That will ensure
a final, binding and peaceful settlement of the dispute.

Another noteworthy precedent is the mediation
between Guatemala and Belize conducted by the
Secretary General of the Organization of American
States. This process produced an agreement providing
that if the parties were not able to settle their long-
standing territorial dispute, they would submit it
for resolution by the International Court of Justice.
Djibouti understands that both States are now in the
process of fulfilling their respective constitutional
requirements so that the matter can be resolved by
the Court. To the same end, Djibouti has proposed
that the Secretary-General, with the support of the
Security Council, and potentially the Advisory Board,
undertake a new, time-limited mediation effort to
achieve a final settlement between Djibouti and Eritrea,
with the proviso that if it proves impossible to reach
an agreement, the dispute will be submitted to binding
arbitration or the International Court of Justice.

Djibouti joins you, Sir, and all the members of
the Council, in supporting the peaceful settlement
of disputes in accordance with international law via
the means set out in Article 33. Mediation is one of
them and therefore merits our encouragement, as do
arbitration and judicial settlement, when mediation is
unavailable or unavailing.

