Mr. Duale (Somalia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to address the Security Council
once again. Somalia welcomes the adoption of today's
resolution 2232 (2015). Progress in Somalia since the
transition in 2012 has been strong. We are building our
institutions and making progress towards agreeing a
federal structure ahead of elections in 2016.

We are grateful for all the support we have received
from our international partners in making that progress.
The African Union Mission in Somalia has been with
us on the front line of our efforts to free the people
of Somalia from the threat of Al-Shabaab. We shall be
forever grateful for the sacrifices that they have made.

Al-Shabaab is getting weaker and weaker and
controlling less and less territory. But, as we have seen
in recent days and months, we still need to work together
in order to eliminate the threat it poses in Somalia and
all of East Africa. That is why today's resolution is so
important. It sets out the international community's
strong commitment to Somalia - something for which
we are extremely grateful.

For our part, we continue to work towards ensuring
that Somalia can one day soon assume complete
responsibility for its security. We have launched the
Gulwade Plan as a framework for ensuring a fully
integrated Somali National Army. We are doing the
same for the police through the Hegen Plan. We appeal
to international partners to support both Plans.

On the political front, over the past two years some
of the Somali Government priorities in achieving Vision
2016 milestones have been achieved in the form - as
I have stated before in the Security Council - of the
confirmation by the Federal Parliament of the members
of the National Independent Electoral Commission
and the Boundaries and Federation Commission,
as well as the formation of the interim regional
administrations - specifically, the the Interim Jubba
Administration, the Interim South West Administration
and the Galmudug Interim Administration.

Important Government plans to be implemented
in line with the progress I have mentioned include
soon establishing the Hiiraan and Middle Shabelle
interim administration through increased trust, social
cohesion and mutuality within local communities.
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud and Prime Minister
Sharmarke have both underlined their commitment to
make sure that Vision 2016 is implemented and its goals
achieved.

We strongly welcome the support that the
African Union Mission in Somalia has provided to
the Federal Government. We pay tribute in particular
to Ambassador Nicholas Kay, with whom the highest
levels of the Government have a strong and frank
working relationship.

Somalia is changing. We are grateful for the
support of the Security Council. We ask it to continue
to support us in the critical months and years ahead.

The meeting rose at10.15 am.
