Mr. Munoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening a debate on the
important topic of children in armed conflict. I would
like to express my support for your country on account
of the difficult time that it is currently experiencing.
Chile endorses the statement by the representative of
Ireland, the country that is chairing the Human
Security Network to which Chile belongs.

Although the international community recognizes
children as subjects in law, in reality their rights are
disregarded daily in situations of armed conflict. For
that reason, we support the work done by the Working
Group of the Security Council on Children and Armed
Conflict, established by resolution 1612 (2005), as well
as by UNICEF, various non-governmental
organizations and civil society, actors that are jointly
contributing to the implementation of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism under that resolution. We
also acknowledge the significant work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, and are following with interest her
activities in the field. We also thank her for her
presence this past Saturday at a football match between
3
ambassadors and the Secretary-General in aid of the
children of Sierra Leone.

As a State party to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict and International Labour
Organization Convention 182 concerning the
Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination
of the Worst Forms of Child Labour, Chile reiterates its
commitment to the initiatives aimed at eliminating all
forms of violence against children, in particular, those
that we are discussing today.

True to that commitment, on 25 September 2008,
Chile endorsed the Principles and Guidelines on
Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups, known as the Paris Principles, which reflect
significant progress in prevention and reintegration and
in the special needs of girls in armed conflicts. In
accordance with the Principles, we support multilateral
actions aimed at lessening and eradicating this scourge
by means of more consistent planning, sustainable
reintegration and the promotion of prevention activities
aimed at protecting the environment of children.

The Council should use its authority to identify
and punish those responsible for the atrocities
documented in the latest report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict (S/2009/158)
and to implement its important recommendations.
Chile believes that the Council should enhance the
protection of children, enabling the strengthening of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism, envisaged in
resolution 1612 (2005), such that it can be triggered in
cases of intentional actions that do not constitute
collateral damage. We support the recommendation
that giving equal attention to children affected by
armed conflict in all situations of concern be
considered. We particularly welcome the
recommendation that the Council consider, at a
minimum, expanding the criteria for the annexes of the
report of the Secretary-General to include parties that
commit rape and other grave sexual violence against
children in situations of armed conflict. Likewise, we
note with interest the possibility of addressing other
types of abuse, including, if possible, the intentional
killing and maiming of children, which, like the
recruitment and use of children and sexual violence,
constitute deliberate and selective acts reflecting
criminal intent.
Similarly, we call for guarantees that the
mandates of the relevant United Nations peacekeeping
operations and political missions continue to include
specific provisions for the protection of children, the
permanent deployment of child protection advisers and
the training of troops on this issue. In that regard, since
its creation in 2002, the Chilean Joint Centre for
Peacekeeping Operations has been training Chilean and
foreign civilians, military and police, using a
comprehensive approach.

We also urge that the monitoring and reporting of
violations against children should be accompanied by
effective measures to prevent such violations and to
generate timely reactions. Lastly, we stress the
importance of the Working Group having the necessary
resources to carry out its work effectively and to use
the tools at its disposal, in particular field visits and
emergency meetings.

Almost four years after the adoption of resolution
1612 (2005), Chile reiterates its commitment to
actively contribute to the elimination of all forms of
violence affecting children throughout the world from
armed conflict to urban violence. We will continue to
support all initiatives that seek compliance with
international commitments in that area.

