The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste,
His Excellency Jose Luis Guterres, and the
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission, His
Excellency Peter Wittig, for their statements.

Having come to recognize that institution-
building plays a crucial role in preventing the renewal
of conflict, Bosnia and Herzegovina convened this
debate to ensure that post-conflict institution-building,
as such, becomes one of the priorities on the Security
Council's agenda. We hope today's debate will
highlight the importance of a more effective and
coherent international response to this complex and
challenging task.

Given the experience of my country, among
others, I would like to draw the Council's attention to a
few key issues.

Building accountable, legitimate and resilient
institutions should be a strategic objective from the
early stages of a peacebuilding process. The traditional
approach leaves institution-building for a later stage,
focusing first on providing humanitarian relief and
rehabilitation assistance. However, it is usually too late
to start developing institutional capacities when
peacebuilding efforts are at the end stage. The
immediate post-conflict period offers the greatest
opportunity to strengthen the institutional capacities
needed to see peacebuilding efforts through.

Priority has to be given to the development of
those institutions that will prevent a relapse into
conflict and secure the survival and renewed credibility
and legitimacy of the State. While specific institutions
that should be given primacy will vary from country to
country, certain institutions are crucial to consolidating
peace regardless of the country context, and significant
efforts should be invested in their development. They
are: first, institutions carrying out political functions -
implementing peace agreements, carrying out
elections, resolving political disputes peacefully and

ll-2l268
making and implementing laws and regulations;
secondly, security and rule of law institutions; thirdly,
public finance institutions; and fourthly, institutions
entrusted with economic revitalization and the delivery
of basic services.

The post-conflict institution-building process
should be carried out based on the principle of the rule
of law. All international and domestic actors in the
process should fully respect a post-conflict country's
constitution, its internal legal order, its international
agreements, rights and obligations, including the peace
agreement that ended the conflict, as well as all other
applicable principles and norms of international law.

The success of post-conflict institution-building
critically depends on forging between the international
community and a post-conflict society a partnership
that is based on a set of shared goals. When domestic
and international stakeholders build consensus on a set
of common goals, achieving those goals itself becomes
a driving force for institution-building. That in turn
stabilizes a post-conflict society by bringing all
stakeholders to collaborate on a shared agenda until the
risk of relapsing into conflict is eliminated.

Given the weakened and vulnerable state of post-
conflict countries, the international community may
initially have to assume much of the responsibility for
post-conflict institution-building and, in certain cases,
set up transitional institutions that carry out functions
and provide services that would normally be rendered
through domestic capacities. However, the objective of
institution-building should be to progressively reduce
dependence on the international community and
promote self-reliance by creating stable, viable and
responsive domestic institutions.

National ownership is a condition sine qua non
for the establishment of effective institutions and the
securing of sustainable peace. The transfer of
responsibility from the international community to
domestic actors and institutions is a very delicate and
extremely important task that should be carried out in a
gradual and timely manner. The installation of
transitional administrative mechanisms by the
international community should go hand in hand with
enhancing the capacity of domestic institutions.

Peacebuilding missions should be allowed more
flexibility in adjusting their institution-building
activities in order to account for changes and
developments on the ground. Coordination between
missions mandated by the Security Council and
country teams, including development agencies and
donors, must be clearly defined in order to avoid
redundancy and overlapping. The assessments of the
institution-building process in regular reports of
Council-mandated missions need to be improved. That
should also be taken into consideration when drafting
resolutions for renewing mission mandates or
peacebuilding configurations.

The Security Council should make greater use of
the advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission, in
particular with regard to the development of viable and
accountable institutions, in supporting domestic
stakeholders in the countries on its agenda, identifying
priority institutions to be developed and determining
existing capacity gaps that require immediate and long-
term support from the United Nations and the
international community as a whole.

Allow me to offer two examples from Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The first is our defence reform, which
started in 2003 and resulted in unified modern armed
forces that are operating under civilian command and
with democratic oversight in accordance with
commonly adopted standards. Several factors greatly
contributed to the success of this process: political will
and the consensus of domestic stakeholders in the first
place, followed by extensive consultations, the
involvement of all relevant domestic and international
stakeholders, a proper and well-executed strategy, clear
and coherent standards, good timing and a sufficient
level of financing.

The second example is our electoral process,
which in the first few post-Dayton years was organized
with the extensive support of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. The responsibility
for the electoral process was gradually transferred to
domestic authorities, so that Bosnia and Herzegovina
today has full ownership of this process and the
capacity to conduct fair, transparent and credible
elections.

I would like to conclude by stressing that
coordinated, rapid action to support post-conflict
Governments in building credible and accountable
institutions is of critical importance to the success of a
peacebuilding process as a whole. If properly executed,
such action helps restore security, legitimacy,
accountability and effectiveness, thus delivering clear
peace dividends. Post-conflict institution-building is a
complex and demanding process, involving multiple
stakeholders and the need to find a balance between
achieving short-term results and long-term capacity
development. The search for optimal solutions that
achieve synergy in this multifaceted endeavour never
ends.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the previous
statements of its President on post-conflict
peacebuilding. The Council stresses the
importance of institution-building as a critical
component of peacebuilding and emphasizes the
importance of a more effective and coherent
national and international response to it, so that
countries emerging from conflict can deliver core
government functions, including managing
political disputes peacefully, providing security
and maintaining stability, protecting their
population, ensuring respect for the rule of law,
revitalizing the economy and providing basic
services, which are essential to achieving durable
peace. The Council emphasizes the importance of
national ownership in this regard.

"The Security Council underlines that the
primary responsibility for successful
peacebuilding lies with Governments and
relevant national actors, including civil society, in
countries emerging from conflict and that the
United Nations can play a critical role in support
of building their national institutions. The
Council acknowledges the need for continued
improvement in the delivery of support in the
immediate aftermath of conflict in order to help
stabilize the situation, whilst at the same time
starting the longer-term process of institution-
building, including those institutions that promote
democratic processes and foster economic and
social development, with a view to sustainable
peace.

"The Security Council emphasizes that the
United Nations and the international community
need to be more effective and coordinated in
assessing needs and planning for effective
institution-building, including how to make better
use of existing national capacities and

ll-21268
perspectives in order to ensure national
ownership. The Council stresses the need for
mainstreaming support to national capacity
development in all United Nations peacebuilding
activities as a system-wide priority and
underscores that peacebuilding strategies and
institution-building should be considered in a
country-specific context.

"The Security Council stresses the need for
greater integration of effort, as well as
predictability and accountability within the
United Nations, in helping build institutions in
countries emerging from conflict. The Council
highlights the importance of coordinated, sector-
wide and context-driven approaches in
governance, economic stability, enhancing the
rule of law and strengthening the security sector
that must be nationally owned.

"The Security Council stresses its
willingness to make greater use of the advisory
role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
The Council notes the potential role the PBC can
play in helping achieve critical peacebuilding
objectives, including the development of viable
and accountable institutions in the countries on
its agenda. The Council also stresses the
importance of focused and well-defined
partnerships among the United Nations,
development agencies, bilateral partners and all
other relevant actors, in particular regional and
subregional organizations, and the international
financial institutions, to implement national
strategies aimed at effective institution-building,
which are based on the achievement of results
and mutual accountability.

"The Security Council reaffirms the critical
importance of timely, flexible and predictable
funding for peacebuilding, including institution
and capacity building, and urges Member States
and other partners to increase efforts towards
achieving this goal, including through the
replenishment of the Peacebuilding Fund and
through multi-donor trust funds, acknowledging
contributions already made.

"The Security Council expresses its
commitment to continuing to improve its
consideration and reflection of early peacebuilding
tasks related to institution-building in the
mandates and composition of peacekeeping
operations, special political missions and
integrated peacebuilding offices, with a View to
making the necessary adjustments, where
appropriate, according to progress achieved,
lessons learned or changing circumstances on the
ground. In this context, the Council notes with
appreciation the contribution that peacekeepers
and peacekeeping missions make to early
peacebuilding and recognizes the need to integrate
mission expertise and experience into the
development of peacebuilding strategies.

"The Security Council looks forward to the
report of the international review of civilian
capacity in early 2011, recognizing the need for
improved mechanisms for timely deployment of
skilled civilian experts in support of national
institution-building needs in post-conflict
countries. The Council requests the Secretary-
General to include in the next follow-up report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict an assessment of the impact that his
agenda for action has had in contributing to
building viable institutions in post-conflict
countries, as well as additional recommendations
to improve the effectiveness of the United
Nations contribution to more effective, stable and
sustainable institutions that can help prevent a
relapse into conflict."

This statement will be issued as document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/20l 1/2.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Belgium.

