Mr. Serry: It has indeed been a long day, so I
will be brief.

First of all, let me thank all those delegations that
have expressed appreciation to me and to the
Secretary-General for our work and contributions to
the various aspects of the peace process. I have
listened, of course, with close attention to this debate
and I must say that I, too, return this evening to
Jerusalem with a feeling that it has largely been very
constructive. I should like in particular to welcome the
contributions made by the representatives of Palestine
and Israel. I think that this is the spirit that we should
take with us into the new year.

In my own statement, I also highlighted the fact
that, with the prospects created by the important new
resolution 1850 (2008), in the uncertain period ahead
we have to make sure that we are able to continue this
process with great vigour in the coming year. I
highlighted in particular one issue that, I think, has
been highlighted in almost all the contributions to
today's debate - the difficult situation in Gaza. Again,
I appreciate the many expressions of strong support
that I have heard around this table for the urgent appeal
I have been making in the Council on behalf of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for the calm to be
respected and extended. In the meantime, if one has
followed today's events, one knows why that is
important, because we have heard from the press in
Gaza statements that call the extension of the calm into
question.

Let me make one thing very clear: The return of
full-scale violence to the Gaza Strip cannot be in the
interests of the Palestinian people. The rocket attacks
on Israel and the crossings must stop and all acts of
violence must cease, including Israeli incursions and
air strikes.

We had an important Quartet meeting on Monday,
calling for the continuous provision of humanitarian
supplies to the people of Gaza. In fact, what we have
now is international unity behind efforts to secure the
reopening of crossings and an easing of the
unacceptable suffering of the Palestinian people, in
accordance with international humanitarian law. The
Secretary-General has personally led those efforts.
Again, those efforts will be placed in serious jeopardy
if the calm is not respected, so we will need the help of
all Council members to make that happen in the time to
come.

