Mr. Mminele (South Africa): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, for ably steering the
work of the Security Council for the month of March
and for hosting this important debate.

In the same breath, I wish to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Prince Zeid Ra'ad
Zeid Al-Hussein, and other briefers for their insightful
and informative briefings.

Today's debate takes place against the backdrop of
a world that in recent months has witnessed deplorable
systematic persecutions of individuals belonging to
different ethnic, religious or other minority groups. Like
the rest of the world, South Africa has been appalled
by the cold-blooded public execution of religious
and ethnic minorities throughout the region. We are
dismayed by the report of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights of 13 March, and again today, that
it appears that the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham
(ISIS) may have committed war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide.

ISIS's threat of violence against ethnic and religious
minorities and the rape of women and girls, who are
often captured as sex slaves, are deplorable, as are the
forced conversions and the forced recruitment of child
soldiers. It is our collective duty as States Members of
the United Nations to reject all forms of intolerance
and its manifestations, regardless of where they occur.
Our own country's history has taught us that racial,
religious and ethnic intolerance is immoral. It is
therefore imperative that the international community
reaffirm the rights of the individuals who are suffering
persecution to live in peace in their countries.

As we move towards the seventieth anniversary
of the Organization, which was built on the ashes of
the most devastating war and the most horrific crimes
against humanity, we are obliged to uphold and enforce
the principles of the Charter and to reaffirm the
fundamental human rights of all humankind. We should
also be particularly firm in focusing on the eradication
of the root causes of all forms of intolerance and find
ways of addressing fundamental ideologies that create
hatred.

South Africa comes from a past that is defined by
racial discrimination and racial intolerance. Chapter 2
of our Constitution states that everyone has the right
to freedom of religion, belief and opinion. Section 9
of the Constitution prohibits unfair discrimination on
various grounds, including religion. Section 39 protects
the right ofpersons belonging to a religious community
to practice their religion in peace, and Sections 185 and
186 provide for the promotion and protection of the
rights of cultural, religious and linguistic communities.
South Africa believes that these principles are sacred,
and will continue to promote them in all of our
engagements.

South Africa is also of the View that in addressing
terrorism, it is important to focus on its fundamental
causes. There is a need to understand and address the
conditions that make terrorism an attractive option to
the disaffected and to develop appropriate strategies
to address them. In that regard, concerted efforts must
be made to resolve conflicts in all parts of the world,
including the Middle East.

In conclusion, South Africa would like to reaffirm
its commitment to working with the international
community in our collective quest to fully eradicate all
forms of intolerance.

