Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to express our gratitude for the convening of
this meeting and for the briefings by Mrs. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Ambassador Karel van Oosterom, in his capacity as
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), and Ambassador Joao Pedro Vale de Almeida.
We also welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Germany at today's meeting.

As a country committed to multilateralism,
international law and the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, Peru gives high priority to
safeguarding the nuclear non-proliferation regime,
including as it concerns delivery systems, as well as to
promoting disarmament and arms control. We therefore
affirm the importance of the implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) for the Iranian
nuclear programme, achieved thanks to the unity that
the members of the Council were able to maintain with
regard to that issue for years and adopted unanimously
under resolution 2231 (2015), which is still in force.

In the circumstances, we would like to commend
the commitment of the parties to preserving the
agreement and the need to safeguard it. We express
our appreciation and support for the verification and
monitoring work of the International Atomic Energy
Agency. We also want to underline the importance of
ensuring that Iran continues to fulfil its obligations
in that sensitive area. We take due note of the Iranian
compliance, as mentioned by the Secretary-General in
his fifth biannual reports (S/2018/601, S/2018/602 and S/2018/624) on the implementation of the JCPOA. We
also emphasize the importance of duly investigating
the allegations mentioned in the most recent report
(S/2017/1030) on the alleged violations of paragraph 2
of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015).

We also underscore the importance of continuing
to verify that in accordance with paragraph 3 of annex
B to resolution 2231 (2015), Iran does not undertake
any ballistic-missile-related activity aimed at
launching nuclear weapons, including launches that use
such ballistic-missile technology. We believe that the
Iranian ballistic-missile programme has the potential
to increase regional tensions. We therefore believe
that it is important that the Iranian authorities act
with extreme prudence. We are particularly concerned
about the reports of the alleged delivery of missiles or
ballistic technology to the Houthis in Yemen. In that
regard, we support the Secretary-General's proposal to
conduct additional outreach and training activities for
Member States on the procedures and requests that must
be submitted through the Procurement Working Group.

We also believe it appropriate to recall the
obligations of all States, pursuant to resolution 2231
(2015), with regard to the bans on travel and the
transfer of arms and related materiel, and the freezing
of assets of the persons and entities listed in the
resolution's attachments.

In conclusion, I affirm Peru's commitment to the
non-proliferation regime, the need to maintain the
unity of the Council around its responsibility to ensure
the full effectiveness of that regime and its importance
for maintaining international peace and security.

