Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (interpretation from French): The duty of solidarity urged on us by the United
Nations Charter implies, especially with regard to
situations in which human lives are at risk, that our global
Organization is able to act promptly in order to contain
threats or to extend the necessary assistance when such
threats cannot be contained in time.

For several months the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has been fighting a secessionist movement in
the province of Kosovo that has not hesitated to engage
in terrorist acts - acts that are therefore deserving of
condemnation. The reprisals that ensued are, in the
unanimous opinion of international observers,
abominations without parallel. Thousands of homes in
many villages have been destroyed by indiscriminate
bombardments or by fires set deliberately, forcing
hundreds of thousands of women, old people and children
to scatter throughout the countryside or to cross borders
in search of refuge in neighbouring countries.

All of these excesses have not only caused panic and
disarray among the civilian population, but have further
worsened the situation in Kosovo, creating the risk, as
winter approaches, of a real humanitarian catastrophe.

What should be done? While it is true that this is an
internal matter of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, it
is equally true that the members of the international
community, and particularly the United Nations, have a

 

duty and a moral obligation to provide assistance and relief,
and to do so without distinction.

We believe that this spirit of solidarity must be
demonstrated in similar situations throughout the world. If
we act otherwise, will we not be failing to shoulder our
responsibilities under the Charter?

For our part, we welcome the tireless efforts that
United States and European leaders and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) have made,
and are continuing to make, with a view to restoring peace
and stability throughout Central and Eastern Europe.
Recently, on 16 October, thanks to the perseverance and
skill of the United States envoy, Ambassador Richard
Holbrooke, those efforts resulted in the conclusion of an
agreement authorizing, inter alia, an international
verification mission in Kosovo.

Once again diplomacy, which is to say dialogue and
negotiation - in other words, peaceful means - has
prevailed. As a matter of principle, that is the approach that
we most strongly support for the settlement of disputes,
both internal and external.

That having been said, experience has shown that the
safety of the personnel of missions and humanitarian
organizations has often been threatened. We can no longer
allow such personnel to be subjected to aggression by the
parties to the conflict. That is why the text under
consideration contains precautions to prevent such
occurrences.

Impelled by all these considerations, my delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

