Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Security Council, for giving me this
opportunity to address the issue of the protection of
civilians affected by armed conflict.

Since the debate held on this question in the Security
Council last February, new crises and further attacks on
the lives and rights of civilian populations have reminded
us of the urgency and gravity of the subject under
consideration. The fine report of the Secretary-General
before the Council emphasizes the magnitude of the
challenge confronting the international community. It
recommends precise and practical measures to counter the
threats and to put an end to the violence and abuses
against civilians in times of armed conflict. Those
recommendations deserve our support.

Practically no major event can take place anywhere
today without societies and States being witness to it,
including, in this case, violence against civilians in armed
conflict. Civil societies and Governments become
involved in such situations through remarkable and
necessary actions of solidarity, or they intervene
decisively. Nevertheless, on other occasions such events
take place as if a culture of indifference to human
suffering had become the norm in international relations

 

and as if the ideals that are the foundation of the
cooperation symbolized by the United Nations had been
lost. It is therefore necessary to examine the mechanisms
that help to make public opinion, parliaments and
Governments decide what is intolerable and what is not. It
is also urgent for us to consider the relationship between
mass media and political decision-making. In fact, the
United Nations and States must pay attention when solemn
declarations and recognized principles on respect for
humanitarian law do not succeed in arousing action exactly
at the time when such action is needed. The credibility of
our commitment is at stake.
The recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General prompt me to make the following
comments. First, my delegation supports the Secretary-
General's appeal to all States to ratify the major
instruments of international humanitarian law. States
involved in conflicts of which the Security Council is
seized are not all parties to the Geneva Conventions. Many
States have not yet ratified the Protocols Additional to the
Conventions. Too many States Parties violate their duty to
respect and enforce the provisions of the Conventions as
they are committed to do under common article 1 of all the
Conventions. We must emphasize the need for all warring
parties to respect the emblems and premises of the Red
Cross and the Red Crescent, which have recently been
subjected to intolerable attacks.

Switzerland invites States to recognize the competence
of the humanitarian International Fact-Finding Commission
by making the declaration contained in article 90 of
Protocol Additional I to the Geneva Conventions.

We are in favour of continued consideration of how to
bring about better respect for humanitarian law. Switzerland
will be co-chairing a workshop on this subject within the
framework of the twenty-seventh International Conference
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, which will be held in
Geneva from 31 October to 6 November 1999. As
depositary of the Conventions, we hope that this
Conference will help the international community to further
mobilize to promote compliance with international
humanitarian law and that the appeal signed last 12 August
on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the
Conventions will be heeded and furthered through concrete
actions.

Lastly, Switzerland wishes to welcome the entry into
force on the very day of that appeal of the Secretary-
General's bulletin on respect for international humanitarian
law by United Nations forces.

Given the nature of current conflicts, in which
attacks on civilian populations are often committed by
non-State armed groups, it is important to promote respect
for humanitarian law by those non-State entities, and to
confirm the fundamental nature of the rules enshrined in
common article 3 of the Geneva Conventions. Let us
repeat here that non-compliance with the provisions that
protect vulnerable groups can often be ascribed to all the
parties to a conflict, whether they are States or not. The
Security Council must take this into account and act
accordingly.

The suppression of acts of violence that deliberately
target civilian populations must be effective and
vigourous in order to avoid the establishment of a culture
of impunity. My country supports the work of the
International Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda and is in favour of the rapid
entry into force of the International Criminal Court.
Switzerland is also among the States to have adopted
legislation to allow it to cooperate closely with the two ad
hoc Tribunals. Swiss military law officials have been
involved in bringing to trial nationals of Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia accused of having participated in
crimes committed during the conflicts that recently
affected their countries.

With respect to the maintenance of peace, the
comprehensive and integrated approach to crisis solving
advocated by the Secretary-General is a necessity.
Switzerland is convinced of the crucial nature of a
concerted commitment on the part of all actors to assure
the protection of civilians during and after conflicts. We
favour strengthening the Organization's capacities in the
area of rapid deployment and planning, as regards both
civilian and police elements. Consideration of this subject
is also under way in other organizations such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. It
would be useful for the various initiatives to be
complementary and consistent.

My delegation supports the many proposals made in
the report in the areas of light weapons, arms embargoes
and anti-mine activities. Our priority task for in the next
few years is to give concrete shape to the commitments
that have been undertaken and to make a reality of
established principles and norms. It is only in this way
that our action will lead to more effective protection for
civilians in armed conflicts. In the area of light weapons,
my delegation believes it is urgent to establish closer
control over their transfer and their presence in society.
This should be done by preventive and by regulatory

 

actions. The marking of weapons, measures to control trade,
the development of codes of conduct and arms-reduction
measures must be on the agenda in this field. Switzerland
hopes that a forceful plan of action can be developed and
adopted in the context of the conference being planned for
2001. My country has offered to host this conference in
Geneva.

The protection of children affected by armed conflicts
was the subject of a recent Council debate. My delegation
participated in that debate, and therefore I will confine
myself to repeating here that my country is convinced of
the importance of raising to 18 years the minimum age for
recruitment - be it voluntary or mandatory, by regular
armed forces or armed opposition groups - and for direct
or indirect participation in armed conflicts.
Finally, my delegation supports the Secretary-
General's recommendations regarding sanctions. For some
time now my country has been supporting efforts for a
maximum reduction of the humanitarian impact of sanctions
and to introduce appropriate mechanisms for humanitarian
exemptions. In the framework of the Interlaken "smart
sanctions" process, the Swiss Government has also
facilitated reflection on the subject of targeted financial
sanctions.

Taken individually, each of the recommendations of
the Secretary-General represents progress in efforts to
ensure the protection of civilian populations in armed
conflicts. These days, however, attacks on the rights of
these populations represent such a grave problem that only
systematic implementation of these measures can lead to
real breakthrough in the fight against these violations. Even
in the case of such a coordinated implementation, intense
efforts will remain indispensable. The outcome is uncertain,
but the fight must be waged.

The PresidentzThe next speaker is the representative
of Finland. I invite her to take a seat at the Council table
and to make her statement.

