Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful to Under-Secretary-General Guehenno and to
Executive Director Costa for the information they have
given us, and I also thank your country, Sir, for having
taken the initiative of convening this meeting on
Afghanistan, especially from the standpoint of drug
production and trafficking.

Mexico wants to express its appreciation to all
donor countries and troop-contributing countries, to
governmental and non-governmental organizations that
are making possible this great humanitarian endeavour
that the international community has undertaken in the
reconstruction of Afghanistan.

We wish to highlight the coordination work being
accomplished by UNAMA and the concerted work of
all the competent bodies and agencies of the United
Nations system, the multilateral financial institutions,
humanitarian assistance organizations and civil society.

In Afghanistan, as in other contemporary
conflicts, the international community must strengthen
international cooperation in order to tackle the causes
of these conflicts and to act in a timely way to
reconstruct national institutions and to bring about
economic rehabilitation. Nonetheless, in spite of the
progress made by the Interim Authority since the Bonn
Agreements, Mexico is concerned that problems
remain that are real threats to security and to the
democratic process that is beginning to be established.

There are still major unresolved challenges in
Afghanistan, including the formation of an army and a
national police force, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants, fighting drug
production, promoting a culture of respect for human
rights, the drafting and adoption of a new constitution
and the holding of general elections. In all of these
tasks, international cooperation will be fundamental in
order to meet these challenges appropriately.

The challenges must be tackled at the same time
as that of creating conditions for the holding of general
elections, scheduled for the year 2004. In Mexico's
opinion, this process should be supported vigorously
by UNAMA and by the international community, so
that it can be transparent and legitimate, by
establishing a reliable model and through the
establishment of an autonomous authority for the
holding of the elections and appropriate international
monitoring to ensure their legitimacy.

Towards this end, we emphasize the need to
strengthen security in Afghanistan, through projects of
infrastructure, education and health, with a View to
accomplishing the immediate tasks of humanitarian
assistance and implementing long-term plans for
development assistance. We forcefully condemn the
attack on the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) on 7 June, and we also condemn the attacks that
have occurred in recent months against humanitarian
personnel.

As was made clear by the briefings that we have
heard, the situation in Afghanistan is quite complex.
Alongside the political forces promoting inter-ethnic
reconciliation, democracy and respect for human
rights, there continue to exist forces that foment
anarchy and extremism. That is why, in the opinion of
my country, it is necessary, as a first step, to expand the
ranks of ISAF to improve security throughout the
country. That, in turn, will make it possible to create
solid national institutions.

The problem of drug production extends beyond
the area of public health. As in the case of drug
trafficking, this problem consists of a chain, the
financing of which corrupts society and promotes
violence and the illicit traffic in weapons. The problem
of drug trafficking has two main aspects: production
and consumption. The countries where consumption
has spread also have a responsibility to prevent the
chain of crime generated by the sale of heroin in the
big cities from condemning the rural population of
Afghanistan and other countries to being the victims of
the traffickers who encourage those illicit crops.

Our countries have formed a common front in the
appropriate forums to combat this global phenomenon.
In that context, the Council must take into account the
basic principles agreed on by the international
community for cooperation in the fight against drug
trafficking: a balance of focus on supply and demand, a
comprehensive treatment of the problem - our
common, shared responsibility - and respect for the
principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter
and of international law.

In particular, we must be mindful of the
international agreements that have been adopted, such
as the ministerial declaration of the forty-sixth session
of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs of last April, in
which the commitments in the global fight against
drugs were renewed, based on the outcome of the
twentieth special session of the General Assembly of
1998, held at the request by my country.

During the negotiations on that ministerial
declaration, there was an attempt to strengthen the
principles of shared responsibility, international
cooperation and the use of an overall focus in order to
treat supply and demand with equal emphasis. In that
context, the Council should recognize the work
accomplished by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs
and by the General Assembly in international
cooperation against drugs and should support the
commitments made in the ministerial declaration.

Mexico thanks France for its initiative in
convening the conference on drug routes from Central
Asia to Europe, held in Paris in May. Mexico expresses
its support for the content of the Paris Declaration.
Similarly, Mexico thanks the United Kingdom and
Germany for their efforts to support the fight against
drugs in Afghanistan.

Mexico wants to see an Afghanistan that is
democratic, respectful of human rights and, especially,
an Afghanistan with an economic future free from drug
trafficking. A strategic coalition has been created in
Afghanistan among donor countries, the United
Nations system, the Bretton Woods institutions and
non-governmental organizations in order to assist the
Afghan people in their search for lasting peace.

The international community must continue its
effort to strengthen the peace process and to lay the
bases for the sustainable economic development of a
democratic Afghanistan.

