The President: In accordance with the decision taken
by the Council at its 3811th meeting, I invite the
representative of Albania to take a seat at the Council table;
I invite the representatives of Denmark, Germany, Greece,
Italy, Luxembourg, Romania, Slovenia, Spain, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey to take the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kulla (Albania)
took a seat at the Council table. Mr. Molde
(Denmark), Mr. Eitel (Germany), Mr. Zacharakis
(Greece), Mr. Fulci (Italy), Mr. Wolzfeld
(Luxembourg), Mrs. Sandru (Romania), Mr. Tiirk
(Slovenia), Mr. Laclaustra (Spain), Mr. Calovski (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) and Mr.
Celem (Turkey) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now resume
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

Following consultations among members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the
eleventh and last report of the operation of the
multinational protection force in Albania of 11 August
1997 (S/1997/632), submitted pursuant to the
requirement set out in paragraph 9 of Security
Council resolution 1114 (1997).
"The Security Council notes with appreciation
that the mandate of the multinational protection
force, as set out in its resolutions 1101 (1997) and
1114 (1997), has been successfully fulfilled. The
presence of the multinational protection force has
contributed to the facilitation of safe and prompt
delivery of humanitarian assistance in Albania. Its
presence has also helped to create a secure
environment for the missions of international
organizations in Albania as part of the efforts of the
international community, particularly the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the European Union, to find a peaceful solution
to the crisis and to assist international organizations
in their role in the electoral process in close
cooperation with the Albanian authorities.

"The Security Council recognizes the role
played by the multinational protection force and the
Governments of the participating countries under
Italian leadership in the full discharge of the
mandate in assisting the Albanian authorities and the
international organizations involved.

"The Security Council is of the View that the
Albanian people and their authorities bear the
primary responsibility for the future of Albania and
for restoring normal conditions in the country. The
necessary international assistance will be conditional
upon Albania's own efforts at achieving
reconciliation, security, rehabilitation and economic
reform.

"In this respect, the Security Council
encourages the international community to assist and
support the economic, social and institutional
rehabilitation of Albania, and welcomes the steps
that have already been taken in this direction,
including the preparatory meetings for the
Ministerial Conference to be held in Rome in
autumn 1997."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1997/44.

The Security Council has thus concluded its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.35 pm.

