Mr. Cazeau (Haiti) (spoke in French): We are
pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over the Security
Council this month. We wish you every success and are
confident that, under your guidance, our debates will
be successful.

On behalf of the people and Government of Haiti,
I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his 29 February report (S/2012/ 128) on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
It must be acknowledged that, far from being a routine
exercise, the report is first and foremost an outline of
the progress that has in fact been made. However,
much remains to be done in a socio-economic
environment that continues to be somewhat precarious.
But our people, especially youth and women, are
demanding from the powers that be that they be able to
participate in public affairs.

Haiti very much appreciates the ongoing attention
to the situation in our country. That commitment was
reaffirmed by the recent field visit to Haiti by the
Security Council, when the Council was able to see for
itself what is taking place. The Council also heard a
briefing on its mission (see S/PV.6724) for Ambassador
Susan Rice, who led the mission. We thank her for the
dedication and insight.

I am hopeful that, thanks to her leadership and
that of the Security Council, Haiti will one day no
longer figure in United Nations reports and resolutions
as a "threat to international peace and security", as that
phrase strikes fear in investors. Haiti wants to move
from humanitarian assistance towards sustainable
development through investment, including foreign
direct investment. During his meeting with the
members of the Council's mission, President Michel
Joseph Martelly pointed out that Haiti was not a threat
to anyone.

The presence here today of Ambassador Mario
Fernandez, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Haiti and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, is a sign of the attention
focused on MINUSTAH's accomplishments and, above
all, on the state of the Haitian people, who are
determined to fashion a better future for their country,
which has been forced to choose between stability,
respect from human rights and sustainable
development. We thank him for having agreed to serve
in our country to help the Haitian Government and the
United Nations to coordinate efforts to find lasting
solutions to the situation of my brothers and sisters, in
a word, to change the country's image.

The political and security situation in Haiti has
remained on the Security Council's agenda for almost
eight years, which, to a certain degree, may seem like a
long time or serve as a source of discouragement. We
understand that tensions and the all too frequent
political crises are major obstacles to our country's
stability and development. The Prime Minister and the
members of the Cabinet recently resigned, but the
Government continues to function pending the
confirmation of a new Prime Minister. President
Martelly immediately took the necessary steps to
appoint a new Prime Minister, namely, Foreign
Minister Laurent Salvador Lamothe, He also submitted
Mr. Lamothe's candidature to the Parliament for
confirmation.

We have heard that members of Parliament,
aware of their responsibilities and the powers conferred
upon them as elected officials, are already at work
looking into the nomination of the Prime Minister. All
indications are that the confirmation process will be
treated as a matter of urgency and that Haiti will soon
have a new Prime Minister, provided that it meets the
demands of the Constitution and our country's laws.
We fully share the Secretary-General's observation that
it is up to Haiti's executive and legislative branches to
act in the broader interests of the Haitian people and
proceed expeditiously with the appointment of a new
Prime Minister.

There have been some recent improvements in
the security situation, thanks to better coordination
between the Haitian National Police (HNP) and
MINUSTAH. That does not mean that there are no
spoilers, on the contrary. Spoilers emerge from time to
time to undo the progress made to date in the security
sector. In that regard, bearing in mind that the troops
arrived in the country in the wake of the earthquake are
beginning to leave, it is appropriate to step up training
and capacity-building for the HNP in order that, in due
course, it is able to take on its responsibilities and be a
true agent for change and development, that is to say, a
professional police force.

With regard to the rule of law, in less than five
years, the Government has been able to complete the
Supreme Court.

The public is up in arms about the presence of
former demobilized members of the Haitian armed
forces who have returned to their former barracks, with
some even engaging in military training. They have yet
to return to their homes, despite repeated calls for them
to do so from President Martelly, who wants a
negotiated, peaceful solution to this situation, which
serves to stir up problems and is only fuelling tensions.

There are still approximately 500,000 people
living in tents. With the rainy season almost upon us,
the Government has decided to significantly lower that
number by June. The Council will understand that this
effort requires considerable financial recourses, for it is
not enough just to encourage people to leave their
tents. They must be helped financially to find housing,
as well as allowed to take the first steps in an
environment that is sometimes completely new. The
Haitian Government has made this situation one of its
priorities, which we continue to work on.

Allow me to pay well-deserved tribute to the
various national and international non-governmental
organizations and United Nations agencies that are
doing outstanding work on the ground. By June, some
of them, such as the World Food Programme, will face
disastrous economic situations that will force them to
downscale their activities in tent encampments and
school feeding centres, including considerable
reductions in the number of local personnel, thereby
increasing unemployment, which is already too high. I
take this opportunity to call on Haiti's friends and on
donors to think about those organizations, the
international community's valuable and talented
ambassadors on the ground in Haiti, and help them find
the necessary resources to provide a glimmer of hope
for the poorest: education and food.

Haiti is grateful for the assistance and support it
has received from United Nations staff who work for
peace, specifically MINUSTAH, whose plans for a
progressive and coordinated withdrawal from the
country are perhaps already in the works. Those plans
will be made known, in coordination with the Haitian
Government, once the international community sees
that the HNP and Haiti's judiciary are mature enough
to move the country forward.
I again wish to thank Ambassador Fernandez for
his comments today, as he is on the ground in Haiti on
a daily basis. I also welcome the comments made by
the members of the Council. Finally, I would like to
emphasize the courage of the national authorities of
two troop-contributing countries, to which I shall not
refer by name, who took a resolute decision to try in
their own courts members of their contingents accused
of sexually abusing Haitian minors. Their decision
should serve as an example of the implementation of a
zero-tolerance policy in cases of such allegations, in
Haiti as well as anywhere else in the world.

