Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): At the outset, let me
join others in thanking you, Sir, for organizing this
important and timely debate. My delegation aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Canada earlier today on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, but we also
wish to make a few points of our own.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/ 181), which again makes for rather disturbing
reading, and we commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and her Office for their highly dedicated work
on this topic.

We are very alarmed by a new UNESCO study
that reveals an escalating number of systematic and
deliberate attacks on students, teachers and school
buildings in conflict settings. State and non-State
actors alike are perpetrating such attacks. At the same
time, the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict has addressed the issue only in a small number
of conclusions issued between April 2009 and May
2010.

In our view, attacks on schools deserve a more
prominent position on the Working Group's agenda,
based on enhanced and verifiable information collected
through the monitoring and reporting mechanism. The
mechanism in turn needs appropriate resources to fulfil
its mandate. It is also worthwhile recalling that attacks
on schools violate the Hague Conventions and the
Geneva Conventions, including their Protocols, and are
also criminalized by the Rome Statute. We therefore
urge all States to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law in the prevention of
such crimes and to prosecute attacks on schools and
educational facilities as war crimes.

In accordance with resolution 1612 (2005), the
monitoring and reporting mechanism provides reliable
information on situations listed in annexes I and II of
the relevant reports of the Secretary-General. We
commend the Council for adopting resolution 1882
(2009), which expanded the trigger for the monitoring
and reporting mechanism to include, in addition to
parties that recruit and use children in armed conflicts,
parties that commit rape and other forms of grave
sexual violence, and/or parties responsible for the
killing and maiming of children. However, to ensure
the best possible protection of children, we still believe
that equal weight must be given to all six grave
violations as triggers for the mechanism.

The differential treatment of grave violations of
children's rights in various conflicts is difficult to
square with the universality and interdependence of
human rights and the principles of international
humanitarian law. We therefore encourage the Council
to continue to develop this mechanism and to consider,
as a next step, the expansion of the monitoring and
reporting trigger mechanism to attacks on schools.

Sixteen parties have been listed in the annexes of
the reports of the Secretary-General for more than five
years. We are of the view that these persistent violators
must be subject to the Council's strongest and most
urgent action. Measures taken by the Working Group in
response to persistent violators should be
complemented by effective enforcement measures such
as sanctions, including arms embargoes, bans on
military assistance, and the imposition of travel
restrictions. We call on the Council to include the
recruitment and use of child soldiers in the mandates of
relevant sanctions committees.

The first briefing of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
to the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is an important step in the right direction. In
this context, we support an approach that allows direct
contact between the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and relevant
non-State actors with a view to preparing an action
plan that could ultimately lead to the de-listing of some
conflict parties from the annex.

Finally, in addressing the issue of persistent
violators, the Security Council should also be mindful
of its competence to refer to the International Criminal
Court, for investigation and prosecution, situations
involving violations of the rights of children.

