Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I would like to
thank the members of the Security Council for giving
me this opportunity to brief them on the current
situation in Darfur and on the implementation of the
mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

Members will have seen the Secretary-General's
report on UNAMID (S/2011/814) dated 30 December
2011. In that connection, I should like to highlight
certain key points pertaining to the political, security
and humanitarian situation in Darfur.

On the political front, following the progress
outlined in the Secretary-General's report, the parties
have moved ahead on power sharing and the
implementation of provisions concerning security set
out in the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. On
18 December 2011, the President of the Sudan issued a
decree appointing Bahr Idriss Abu Garda, Secretary-
General of the Liberation and Justice Movement
(LJM), as Minister of State for Health. On
27 December, three additional presidential decrees
concerning the peace process were issued, which
dissolved the transitional regional authority for Darfur
and established the Darfur Regional Authority as the
main body responsible for the implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace in cooperation with the
Government of the Sudan. The decrees also appoint the
members of the Authority's governing body.

The appointments include, among others, seven
members of the Liberation and Justice Movement, in
accordance with the protocol on political participation.
They also include a member of the Sudan Liberation
Army (SLA)-Unity and a member of the Justice and
Equality Movement-Peace Wing, which are two
signatory organizations to the declaration of
commitment to the Doha Document for Peace in
12-20459
Darfur, a member of the National Congress Party and a
division general of the Sudanese Armed Forces as the
commissioner in charge of security arrangements. The
LJM. has accepted those appointments. The next phase
should include the establishment of the legislative
council, ministries and the departments of the Darfur
Regional Authority and the setting of priorities for the
implementation of those measures.

Yesterday, President Al-Bashir issued three
decrees appointing new governors to Darfur States,
including appointments for two newly created States.
That brings the number of States comprising Darfur to
five. The decrees also released certain governors from
their duties and appointed a presidential adviser.
Decree No. 1 stipulates that the governors of South
Darfur and West Darfur, Abdulhameed Musa Kasha
and J aafar Abdulhakam, saw their duties ended. Decree
No. 2 appoints new governors - Abdulhameed Musa
Kasha as Governor of East Darfur, Yousef Tibin Musa
Adam for Central Darfur, Hamad Ismail Hamad
Abdulkarim for South Darfur and Haider Galo Koma
Atim for West Darfur. Lastly, the third decree appoints
Mr. J aafar Abdulhakam presidential adviser.

East and Central Darfur are therefore two newly
established States. Zalingei, which is the place of
origin of the Fur ethnic group, will become the capital
of Central Darfur and includes a large part of Jebel
Marra. The town Ed Daein, which is home to certain
Arab tribes, will become the capital of East Darfur. It
is situated in the south-east of that region. All the
newly appointed governors belong to the National
Congress Party, with the exception of Mr. Haider Galo
Koma, appointed to West Darfur, who is a vice-
president of the Liberation and Justice Movement.

Also yesterday, 10 January, the Sudanese
Minister of Justice appointed Mr. Ahmed Abdel-
Motalib Ahmed as Public Procurator of the Special
Court for Darfur. That appointment is made in
accordance with the provisions of the Doha Document
on justice and reconciliation. The headquarters of the
Public Procurator of that Special Court will be in
El Fasher, in North Darfur, with branch offices, if I can
call them that, in Nyala and El Geneina.

Regarding the implementation of the security
provisions of the Doha Document following four
meetings of the Ceasefire Commission and the
inaugural meeting of the Joint Commission described
in the report, the LJM. has shared its list of staff for the
12-20459
observer post groups and the teams responsible for the
verification of forces. Moreover, that verification is
expected to begin in a few days.

With regard to the inclusiveness of the peace
process since the signing of the Doha Document on
14 July, the Government and the non-signatory
movements have not met. There was a window of three
months offered by the Government to the parties likely
to want to sign the Doha Document, and that window
expired in October without any move towards new
signatures. As noted in the Secretary-General's report,
the Joint Chief Mediator ad interim continued to put
pressure on the Government, the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM), the SLA-Minni Minawi and the
SLA-Abdul Wahid for them to resume negotiations.
However, a series of disagreements of the scope of the
negotiations, appeals by the Sudanese Revolutionary
Front and the fact that an alliance had been established
among the JEM, SLA-Minni Minawi and SLA-Abdul
Wahid with a view to overthrowing the Government
led by the National Congress Party all obstructed any
resumption of talks.

It is known that the leader of the JEM, Khalil
Ibrahim, is dead. The consequences of his death for the
peace process will in time become clear. However,
what can be said at this stage is that his death seems to
have reduced the chance of resuming talks between his
movement and the Government in the near future. In a
statement that it made shortly after Khalil's death, the
JEM. vowed to avenge him and declared that it would
continue to work to overthrow the Government of the
National Congress Party.

For its part, the Government of the Sudan called
on all armed groups in Darfur to lay down their
weapons and to rejoin the peace process on pain of
suffering the same fate as Khalil. We believe that the
JEM. is currently in the process of choosing a successor
to him.

As the report before the Council points out, the
Secretary-General is developing, in close cooperation
with the African Union, a road map for peace in Darfur.
That road map seeks to give the United Nations and the
African Union a framework to jointly facilitate talks
among the parties in three key areas: first, support for
the implementation of the Doha Document; secondly,
sustained engagement with the Government and the
non-signatory movements in order to promote
3
negotiations; and thirdly, support for internal dialogue
in Darfur.

(spoke in English)

As noted in the report, while a number of areas in
Darfur remain relatively free of military hostilities,
clashes between Government and movement forces in
areas along the Northern Darfur-Northern Kordofan
border, the Southern Darfur-Southern Kordofan border
and West J ebel Marra took place during the second half
of December. There were no reports of civilian
casualties or displacement recorded by UNAMID in
relation to those incidents

The security situation in Darfur relates not only
to military clashes, but also to threats to the physical
well-being and freedom of movement of civilians. In
that connection, we remain concerned about the
incidence of banditry, crime and sexual and gender-
based violence, as described in detail in the report.

Of particular concern is the situation in the
Zam Zam internally displaced persons (IDPs) camp.
Following the appointment in late October of a new
Central Reserve Police commander at the camp, the
security situation there deteriorated. The incidence of
shooting at night, looting and harassment of IDPs by
Central Reserve Police personnel gradually increased
following that appointment. On 29 November, an IDP
was shot dead and two were injured by Central Reserve
Police.

Many of the incidents were reported to
Government authorities, including through UNAMID,
but one must say that little reaction was observed.
UNAMID vigorously engaged state Government
officials and repeatedly drew their attention to the
reports of misconduct by Central Reserve Police
personnel. Following a determined demarche of
Government police officials by UNAMID on
18 December, the Central Reserve Police commander
was replaced. Tension within the camp has since eased
considerably.

UNAMID continues to monitor the situation
closely, to facilitate weekly coordination meetings
among IDP leaders, local security officials and
humanitarian agencies, and to work with Government
authorities to enhance security in the camp in an
appropriate manner.

The marked increase in manoeuvres and clashes
between Government and movement forces in recent
weeks was accompanied by a sharp increase in
restrictions of movement imposed on UNAMID by
Government authorities. That included restrictions on
flights and land patrols in the areas of conflict noted
earlier from mid-December to early January. The
restrictions were imposed on the basis of ongoing
Sudanese Armed Forces operations.

The denials of access have severely impeded
UNAMID's ability to implement its mandate and to
resupply team sites in affected areas. The Mission has
repeatedly called on the Government in an effort to
re-establish access. I myself have strongly urged
officials of the Government of the Sudan in my
meetings with them, starting with my visit to the Sudan
in October, to allow UNAMID unhindered access
throughout Darfur, emphasizing that UNAMID forces
are armed and therefore able to protect themselves
against security threats.

With regard to other operational issues, I am
pleased to inform the Council that all 447 containers
that had been at dock in Port Sudan since May 2011
waiting customs clearance were cleared on 9 January.
That development comes after repeated de'marches of
Government officials in Port Sudan and Khartoum by
UNAMID.

However, the number of outstanding visa requests
remains of concern. As of 10 January, the total number
of outstanding requests stood at 935 467 police, 172
military and 296 civilian personnel. UNAMID
continues meeting with Ministry for Foreign Affairs
officials on a weekly basis in relation to that issue and
has of course repeatedly provided to Government
officials, in addition to the initial visa applications
submitted, consolidated lists of outstanding requests.

 

With regard to the humanitarian situation, the
continued trend of internally displaced persons and
refugees voluntarily returning to their homes at a rate
of approximately 1,500 people per month was
encouraging. The total number of verified voluntary
returnees in Darfur from 1 January to 30 October 2011
was more than 85,000, as compared to 70,000 newly
displaced. Nevertheless, the World Food Programme
provided assistance to some 4 million people in Darfur
during the course of 2011. While most parts of Darfur
were accessible to humanitarian organizations, with a
UNAMID security escort needed outside the main
town centres, access to western Jebel Marra was
repeatedly denied, and intermittently restricted to the
greater J ebel Marra, Shangil Tobaya and Umbaru areas
and to the Zam Zam camp.

Regarding the safety and security of mission and
humanitarian personnel, the attacks on UNAMID
peacekeepers that occurred in Zam Zam on 10 October
and in Nyala on 6 November, resulting in the death of
four peacekeepers and injuries to seven, were of course
of serious concern. The Secretary-General has called
on the Government to cooperate fully with UNAMID
in investigating the incidents and to do all that it can to
hold the perpetrators accountable. In addition, we are
relieved that an aid worker who had been kidnapped in
Nyala on 14 August was released on 16 December.

The initial steps taken by the signatory parties in
the implementation of the Doha Document provide
reason for optimism. The parties should be supported
in that regard by the Council, and by the international
community more broadly, particularly with the
implementation of provisions that bring about tangible
improvements to the lives of Darfuris. In addition,
there remains a need to bring the Government and the
non-signatory movements to the negotiating table.
Their long-standing grievances can only be effectively
dealt with through peace talks that result in an
agreement to cease hostilities and to work together
towards peace. We shall continue to work with the
African Union towards that end.

Furthermore, we will continue to provide
protection to civilians, facilitate the delivery of aid and
assist voluntary returnees, with a view towards bring
relief to the people of Darfur during the search for a
comprehensive and lasting settlement to the conflict.

