Let me thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings today. We once again express our full support for their tireless work on Syria and commend the ongoing efforts of United Nations actors to address the needs of the Syrian people in dire circumstances on the ground. I am also grateful to the humanitarian co-penholders for the statement delivered by the Belgian Ambassador (annex III). I want to agree with him that we should ensure that we focus separately on the humanitarian situation going forward in our programme of work. Let me also, at the outset, express some concern about reports of a significant Russian air strike on opposition fighters in Idlib province yesterday. That appears to be the largest-single attack in Idlib since the 5 March ceasefire came into effect. We call on all parties, particularly the principal actors, to refrain from escalatory actions, which risk undermining the fragile ceasefire. This Friday, 30 October, marks one year since the Constitutional Committee first convened. When it was first launched, the Security Council expressed its determination in its presidential statement S/PRST/2019/12, of 8 October 2019, that this would be the beginning of the political process to end the conflict in line with resolution 2254 (2015) that met the legitimate aspirations of all Syrians. But since 30 October, the Committee has convened on only two further occasions - once in November 2019 and once in August this year. In that time, not only has no substantial progress been made, it appears that it remains difficult even to get the regime to agree to attend meetings. This month should have seen a further round of talks, and we regret that the regime's insistence on an agenda not in line with the Committee's mandate has meant that this has not happened. Without a new constitution, free and fair elections, with all Syrians, including members of the diaspora, eligible to participate, cannot take place, as envisaged in resolution 2254 (2015). Elections that do not meet those requirements will deny millions of Syrians the opportunity to take part in deciding the future of Syria and to share in ownership of the political process, as endorsed by the Council. Unfortunately, there appears to be an equal lack of progress on other aspects of resolution 2254 (2015). The release of arbitrarily detained persons has not happened in any meaningful number despite the continued calls of the Security Council and the United Nations. The conditions for the safe and voluntary return of refugees have not yet been met, not least because the regime continues to threaten the security of returnees. On that, I want to echo the remarks of my United States colleague and to say that the United Kingdom will not attend any conference, especially in a non-neutral location, such as Damascus, that intentionally ignores this fundamental requirement and that denies the participation of those whose return it purports to discuss. It is clear that humanitarian assistance still does not reach those in need. The Secretary-General's report of 14 October (S/2020/1031) makes clear that nearly two thirds of health-care facilities in north-eastern Syria, which depended on cross- border aid, have not been reached by cross-line aid in 2020. We commend the United Nations efforts in north-western Syria, including urgent road repairs and scaling up the Bab Al-Hawa operation, to help reduce the damage caused by the needless removal of Bab Al-Salam from the cross-border aid resolution. That aid access is desperately needed. Most of the almost | million people who fled the Russian-backed regime offensive on Idlib last winter are still displaced, living in squalid makeshift camps and, as November nears, the Secretary-General's report confirms that 3.1 million people require additional winterization support. News of fuel shortages, which delayed aid convoys in Homs and Hamah in September, are of grave concern as temperatures drop. We are also still deeply concerned about the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Syria. Water is urgently needed, including in Al-Bab, to enable the good hygiene that helps prevent the disease from spreading and health-care facilities are necessary to treat those affected. Some are already unable to absorb all suspected COVID-19 cases. The United Kingdom has committed £33 million - $43.1 million - in addition to address COVID-19 in Syria. But the 24 attacks this year affecting health care and killing 13 health workers only add to the pressure and worsen the humanitarian situation. Such attacks highlight again - if we needed it to be highlighted again - the need for a political settlement, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), to resolve the crisis. Let me therefore end by urging all those with influence in Damascus to press the regime to engage meaningfully.
