Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Mr. President, we wish to
associate ourselves with earlier speakers in offering
you our warmest congratulations and in saying how
gratified our delegation is to see you presiding over the
Security Council in this month of August 2002. We
believe that your intellectual skills and your diplomatic
talents, together with your lengthy experience of
international relations, will ensure the success of the
work of the Council this month.

We wish also to convey to your predecessor, Sir
Jeremy Greenstock of the United Kingdom, our warm
congratulations and our sincere thanks for having
guided the work of the Security Council with a great
deal of energy and skill last month.

We also wish thank you, Sir, for having convened
this important meeting of the Security Council on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which certainly once again has the merit of helping us
better to evaluate the peace process that is under way
and to welcome the recent and very significant
advances made to put an end to the war of aggression
that has been waged against my country for more than
four years now. We hope also that it will help to pave
the way towards lasting peace for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and for all the countries of the
region.

The Security Council has just heard a
comprehensive statement by Ms. Nkosazana Clarice
Dlamini Zuma, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
South Africa. The Minister has clearly and eloquently
described the Peace Agreement that was concluded at
Pretoria on 30 July between our Government and that
of the Republic of Rwanda, as well as the programme
for implementation covering the withdrawal of
Rwandese troops from the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the dismantling of the
former Rwandan army (ex-FAR) and Interahamwe
forces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Minister has described what is at stake in the
Peace Agreement and the prospects for success. We
fully share her vision, and - as our head of State,
Major-General Joseph Kabila, President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, stated at the
signing ceremony of the Agreement - the obligations
and commitments undertaken by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo pursuant to this
peace agreement will be scrupulously complied with.

Here we wish to extend our very sincere thanks to
President Thabo Mbeki, his Government and the
people of South Africa for their determination, and I
would even say their obstinacy, which took us from
Sun City to Pretoria by way of Durban, to ensure that
peace prevails once again in the Great Lakes region.

We wish also to pay tribute to our regional
organization, the African Union, which, through the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, was the first to
highlight the useless and senseless nature of this war of
aggression. The efforts of the interim Chairman of its
Commission, Mr. Amara Essy, has always been, and
remains, decisive in the quest to restore peace and calm
to our region.

May I lastly thank Mr. Kofi Annan, Secretary-
General of our universal Organization, for his
important statement. We are very grateful to him for
having lent his moral weight by endorsing the Pretoria
Agreement. We wish in this connection to express our
full appreciation for all of his endeavours, and
especially for his commitment to tirelessly exploring
all possibilities likely to bring about a successful and
prompt conclusion of the peace process that began at
Lusaka.

In order to settle the question of the war of
aggression once and for all, since last year our
Government has been in direct contact with the leaders
of countries whose forces are illegally occupying our
country, pursuant to the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, which call for the holding of such
meetings in order to establish the necessary relations of
trust in order to promote the cause of peace.

For his part, the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, has tirelessly committed himself to this
process, particularly in terms of organizing meetings
with the Rwandese party, the most recent of which, at
which he was present, took place in Durban, in parallel
with the OAU/African Union Summit.

The Pretoria Agreement, which is basically
bilateral and guaranteed by the third party, falls - as
the South African Minister said just now - within the
framework of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. In this
regard, the Pretoria Agreement is likely greatly to
facilitate and speed up the completion of the remaining
phases provided for in the timetable for the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement.

The Pretoria Agreement is also in conformity
with the provisions of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council calling for the orderly withdrawal of
all foreign troops and in particular resolution 1341
(2001), whereby the Council, for the first time, called
for, among other things, the elaboration of a plan and a
precise timetable which would lead to the finalization
of the total and orderly withdrawal of foreign troops, as
well as for disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR) programmes.

With respect to the DDRRR process, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo undertakes strictly
to comply with its obligations under this Agreement,
inter alia, by pursuing the process of the
demobilization and disarmament of Rwandese
combatants which began at Kamina and by extending it
to other areas of the country under foreign occupation
as the authority of the State is established there.

Moreover, we would like to express to the
international community as a whole our trust in the fact
that we will receive support from it in the simultaneous

process of the withdrawal of troops and repatriation,
reintegration and resettlement of combatants in their
countries of origin, in conformity with international
law.

With respect to the withdrawal of foreign troops,
it should be noted that the majority of the parties to the
conflict had already submitted their plans to the Joint
Military Commission and have commenced their
withdrawal.

Among the countries that came to the assistance
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in defending
its national sovereignty and its territorial integrity -
countries that we wish once again to thank on behalf of
the Republic for the sacrifice of their sons and
daughters to the noble cause of truth, justice and
dignity - Namibia has totally withdrawn, and Angola
and Zimbabwe have repatriated a large number of their
contingents.

As to the uninvited forces, withdrawal
movements have been observed only on the part of
Uganda and Burundi. Rwanda, for its part, has
considerably increased its forces and remains the only
country to be engaged in large-scale military operations
on Congolese soil.

There will be tremendous rejoicing when the
Congolese people, the third party and the international
community are officially informed, in a few hours, of
the withdrawal plan for Rwandese troops from the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
pursuant to the programme of implementation of the
Pretoria Agreement.

Another promising sign will be the beginning of
the demilitarization of the city of Kisangani, pursuant
to resolution 1304 (2000). This city, as we have stated
before, must no longer be the symbol of the martyrdom
of a whole nation. It must, rather, become the political
and physical symbol of renewal and return to dignity
for the whole of the Congolese people, the emblem of
the hope for a better life for present and future
generations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

At the same time, all illegal activities to exploit
the natural resources and other forms of wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which feed the
continued war of aggression, must end. Our
Government, which is fully cooperating with the group
of experts set up for that purpose, will ensure that this
is done.

The Agreement is certainly the most serious
opportunity for peace since the beginning of the war of
aggression on 2 August 1998. It provides a response -
which we hope is adequate - to Rwanda's security
concerns, although it is the Democratic Republic of the
Congo that has been experiencing total insecurity for
four years. The Agreement also envisages the
restoration of the national sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which was gravely imperilled by the Rwandan
presence. Finally, the Agreement embodies the
ingredients for a return to normality for the countries
and the peoples of the Great Lakes region.

We must succeed, but we must be helped to
succeed. The international community, which
welcomed the Pretoria Agreement, must invest in it
tangibly and unstintingly, on either the bilateral or the
multilateral level, to assist the two signatory parties
and the third parties in their determination to end a
conflict that has caused the deaths of more than 3
million people in four years.

For its part, the United Nations can help
immediately, especially by formulating for its Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo a new
concept of operations that would effectively activate
phase III of its deployment and would both support the
verification mechanism and enable it to participate in
the execution structure that the third party will put in
place, within the framework of the Pretoria Agreement.

Action is needed now. The situation - which
continues to be fragile, as demonstrated by recent
events in Kisangani and by the deadly skirmishes
between the Rwandese Patriotic Army and Congolese
combatants of Tutsi origin in the high plateaux of
Kivu- may worsen. That would augur ill for the
credibility of the United Nations as a whole. We must
avoid that at all costs.

The improvement in the prospects for peace in
the Great Lakes region enables us to look with more
serenity to the process of reconciliation and national
concord in our country. The political agreement for
consensual management of the transition in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, concluded at Sun
City, has made possible the reunification of more than
70 per cent of the national territory. Talks are now
under way, on the one hand, with the signatory parties
to the Sun City agreement and, on the other, with the
other armed component, its dissidents and the
components of society and the unarmed opposition, in
order to define the contours of an agreement that would
be more consensual and inclusive. The essential here is
that we must procrastinate no longer, but rather must
decide to make headway on this issue. In that regard,
we are convinced that the efforts of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Moustapha Niasse, will
meet with success.

Those working to advance the transition will
certainly be political leaders of all stripes, but also
leaders representing religious faiths, the academic
world, the media, private and public enterprise and
civil society. Leaders dedicated to the moral values of
governance, their greatest virtues remain disinterest
and love of country.

As Mrs. Mary Robinson, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, noted in her report to
the Council, impunity remains one of the principal
causes of human rights violations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Putting an end to such impunity
is a fundamental requirement for the return to a durable
peace in the region. The choice of transition leaders
should take that requirement into account. Such an
approach is in conformity with the recommendations in
the High Commissioner's report, namely, strengthening
the rule of law and the administration of justice, and
the creation of mechanisms whereby all those
responsible for human rights violations and for war
crimes must answer for their acts. The creation of a
truth and reconciliation commission on the South
African model could provide an element of response.

We must do justice for the millions of Congolese
dead, formulating concrete measures with a view to
putting an end to impunity, compensating victims and
preventing the resurgence of such acts.

The process of restoring peace and establishing
and consolidating relations of trust must continue and
be strengthened by increased credibility for the United
Nations and the Security Council, for there is a risk of
seeing crumble the whole edifice of the partnership that
the Council has patiently built with the parties bound
by the Lusaka Agreement.

The United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) needs to
review its operations, particularly with regard to the
protection of civilians under imminent threat of
physical violence, as the Council reaffirmed in
resolution 1417 (2002). The Council must redefine the
concept of MONUC's operations in order to enable it
to properly carry out the mission conferred on it by the
Pretoria Agreement.

MONUC must be given the means to enable it to
operate and have unhindered access to needy
populations. For example, it is indispensable that the
MONUC team be authorized without further delay to
have access to the locality of Minembwe in the high
plateaux. It is also imperative that the reopening of the
river network for humanitarian assistance and
commercial trade between Kinshasa and Kisangani
become a reality and that the city of Kisangani be
accessible once river traffic is opened to trade in the
reunified zones, pursuant to the Sun City agreement.

Here, I should like to pay tribute to our friends in
MONUC, under the leadership of Mr. Amos Namanga
Ngongi, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for the quality of the work that they have done
and for their total devotion to the cause of peace and
the restoration of dignity to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Their efforts deserve to be encouraged and
supported.
For their part, the States of the region must
supplement their efforts. First, it is urgent that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo conclude with the
Governments of Uganda and Burundi agreements
similar to the Pretoria Agreement. The Government of
Burundi has, in a timely manner, informed us of its
intention to do this. Contacts have already been made
at the highest level. We must translate into concrete
action the good will expressed on both sides. Then we
must sit down together and discuss our region's future.
The international conference for peace, stability,
security and development that we earnestly wish for
should lay the basis for a new order.

The international conference could help the
region's countries ensure the security of their States
and of their populations so that no element can
intervene to disrupt order and tranquillity, while at the
same time conceiving, defining and fostering the
creation and development of economic activities of
common interest and, lastly, promoting and
intensifying trade and the movement of persons and
goods.

A new order at the regional level presupposes a
new order at the national level. Processes of
democratic transition are under way in our country and
in Burundi. We remain certain that they will succeed.
Furthermore, we welcome the willingness expressed by
the Rwandese authorities to hold elections in their
country in the medium term. We ask the international
community to assist that country's efforts so that it can
restore internal peace and national concord.

In saying that, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo wishes to assure all its
partners - in particular our brothers in neighbouring
countries - f our fervent desire to live in perfect
harmony with the whole world, in a spirit of tolerance,
solidarity and frank cooperation. The Pretoria
Agreement is the very foundation for restoring the trust
that has been lost, on the basis of which we can
together renew the bonds of friendship and good-
neighbourliness that should govern our future relations.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo will never
serve as a channel to sow discord and desolation in any
country, in particular our neighbours. That is a sacred
principle of our diplomacy, which we have always
wished to be constructive and not subversive. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo looks forward to the
advent of a region where peace, security, justice and
prosperity prevail.

