Mr. Lavald (Norway): I shall limit my remarks,
and the full text of my statement will be circulated.

There is a need to recognize the critical
importance of gaining a coherent understanding of
recovery interventions and successful peacebuilding.
The United Nations, its Member States and other
international actors need to change their modes of
operation in order to address the special needs of
countries that are in, emerging from or affected by
conflict. That is all the more true as peacebuilding
becomes an integral part of our common United
Nations agenda.

I want to focus on three issues.

First, with respect to leadership, it is important to
remind ourselves that one of the key lessons from the
Brahimi report is that failure is inevitable when
peacekeeping becomes a substitute for facing painful
the political compromises that are needed from all
sides to achieve sustainable peace.
One of the findings from a project on
multidimensional and integrated peace operations that
Norway initiated in 2006 was the need to get a clear
view of what needs to be achieved politically. That
could assist in making the necessary distinction
between humanitarian assistance in emergencies and
the need for long-term recovery efforts. It requires the
Secretary-General to take on a stronger role in guiding
efforts inside the United Nations system, forging
incentives for better coherence and integration.

Peacebuilding is not a sequential process; it needs
to be looked at as a highly interlinked series of
simultaneous activities. It is also important to speed up
efforts in that regard, bringing on board all
stakeholders - including the international financial
institutions, donors and national counterparts to the
countries concerned - to make sure that all are aware
of what is to be expected, delivered, how it is to be
delivered and by whom.

It is critical to ensure that the senior United
Nations representative in the field has at her or his
disposal a clear and robust mandate. The United
Nations representative also needs to be backed by a
strong and integrated leadership team. Member States
need to adapt and change the current frameworks that
guide both the administrative and budgeting processes.
Today, success often depends on the personal
capabilities of senior United Nations mission leaders to
find ways of manoeuvring around the system, rather
than as a result of it.

There is a need to address how to ensure more
predictable and sustainable sources of funding. The
current system for financing multidimensional peace
operations does not allow for the adequate resourcing
of multidimensional mandates with strong
peacebuilding and recovery components. We need to
think about how to create more organic links between
assessed and voluntary funding sources.

Secondly, with respect to the peacebuilding
architecture, the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
in taking on an even stronger proactive and convening
role in promoting better system coherence and
integration should be examined. While the Commission
has had a great deal of success in the past year, we still
have a way to go to ensure effective coordination
within the United Nations and with other partners.
Norway, for its part, has been honoured to chair the
Commission's efforts regarding Burundi, a country in
need of even greater international attention and
support.

As more countries are included on the
Peacebuilding Commission's agenda, we will have to
take a closer look at its working methods. The focus
will increasingly have to be country-specific in each
particular case, relying on tailor-made approaches and
always focusing on policy impact.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the
evolution of the peacebuilding architecture constitutes
a significant innovation in the ability of the United
Nations to help countries in, emerging from or affected
by conflict. Thus we emphasize efforts to develop
country-specific strategies that bring on board all
stakeholders, including national partners, and define
responsibilities in line with both national and
international programming objectives. Those
frameworks are not academic exercises; they are
essential tools in providing added value.

Thirdly, on civilian capabilities, an existing
deficit of readily qualified and deployable civilian
capabilities should be addressed in greater depth as a
complement to increased emphasis on national
ownership. That requires putting in place conditions
and training systems that will sufficiently prepare them
for operating in a multidimensional and integrated
mission framework in countries that require robust
recovery efforts. It also requires taking advantage of
national rosters that can be rapidly deployed. But to
repeat, that must be done to empower national
authorities further, not to replace them.

There is a need to bridge the current security,
development and humanitarian planning frameworks in
order to effectively address the complex challenges at
hand. We believe that this meeting is a critical starting
point in providing the Secretary-General and the
United Nations system with an endorsement of
progress made so far, as well as providing the political
incentives to further strengthen the implementation of
the various reform initiatives in order to better assist
countries emerging from or affected by conflict and to
prevent a relapse by building sustainable peace.

