Mr. Johnston (United Kingdom): May I begin
my saying that the United Kingdom delegation aligns
itself with the statement which will be made later by
the representative of Germany on behalf of the
European Union.

I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting of the Security Council on
Timor-Leste. We also appreciate both the presence and
the presentations of the Prime Minister and of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
This debate underlines the international
community's interest in and commitment to Timor-
Leste. The United Nations Mission and the bilateral

support that Timor-Leste is receiving from a number of
countries are further evidence of this. Building
sustainable stability in Timor-Leste is therefore our
shared objective, and, in that context, the successful
conduct of elections in the course of this year is a
priority goal for all of us.

My delegation believes that free and fair
elections will help to consolidate the progress already
being made towards establishing a pluralistic political
system and the norms of democratic governance in
Timor-Leste. Therefore legislative, technical and
logistical preparations all need to be made, and we
should be ready to help with this.

But it is also important that the political leaders
themselves work together to create an atmosphere
conducive to the proper conduct of elections, so that,
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
said in his statement, elections can have a unifying
character.

We believe that there needs to be early agreement
on the dates of those elections and on the processes to
be followed. International norms should be the norm,
including in terms of electoral campaigning and in the
necessary separation of delivery of public services
from the political process of seeking to influence the
voting intentions of citizens.

The United Nations Mission has a key role to
play in public education, in the facilitation of political
dialogue and in assistance with electoral organization.
Transparency in all of this must be a key criterion, and
the Mission should therefore be ready to make clear to
the Council and to the Government of Timor-Leste
when it considers that the letter or the spirit of the
electoral provisions have been violated.

Given the tense security situation in Dili, it is
also important that progress be made on security sector
reform, and we welcome the emphasis that the Prime
Minister placed on that in his statement today. Reform
of the judicial sector is also crucial. In both cases, the
goal is to ensure that the elections take place within a
framework that provides for long-term stability. We
recognize the tension that the Prime Minister described
in that area between seeking to deliver short-term
results and the time needed to realize long-term
investments, but early progress - not least in the
context of the electoral preparations - is very
important.

Further work also needs to be done - as others

have recognized today - in reforming the police, the

army and other relevant ministries, including to ensure

that the security forces do not act politically, especially

during the campaigning and the elections, as well as
during the post-election period.

Progress also needs to be made in the areas of
human rights and judicial capacity, in parallel with
other efforts, in order to avoid creating potential
difficulties once the security sector is functioning
normally again.

In all of those efforts, the United Kingdom
remains committed to assisting the Government and the
people of Timor-Leste and to supporting the work of
the United Nations Mission in this critical year and
beyond as we face all of these challenges together.

