Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Ishould like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). We
would like also to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ngongi, for the additional
information he provided. We welcome also the
presence of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo at our meeting.

We have had the opportunity to study in detail the
suggestions contained in the report, and we would like
to comment on several aspects that we deem to be
relevant under current circumstances.

We note with satisfaction the progress that has
been made in the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The ceasefire on the
confrontation line, the disengagement of forces and
their redeployment to new defensive positions, and the
withdrawal of some foreign forces from the territory
are grounds for optimism.

We note also the fact that some difficulties
persist, particularly in the eastern region. Accordingly,
we join the other members of the international
community in appealing to the signatories of the
Lusaka Agreement to do their utmost to put an end to
these confrontations, which threaten to jeopardize an
effort in which the United Nations is actively
participating.

The difficulties that developed in the inter-
Congolese dialogue in Addis Ababa also deserve our
attention. The decision to postpone that meeting will
also postpone the pursuit of the fundamental goals of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, such as
national reconciliation, decisions on the nature of
governance in the country and relations with its
neighbours to the east and to the south and of relations
between the different communities in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo itself - issues referred to in
paragraph 96 of the report.

That obstacle, however, should not discourage us.
What is important is that the parties are aware that the
Security Council, troop-contributing countries and the
United Nations are making enormous efforts, which
should be properly responded to with substantive
progress in that dialogue and with true support for the
work of the facilitator. Success in that dialogue will, to
a great extent, define the sustainability of the political
process in that country in the long term.

Colombia supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that MONUC should be authorized
to embark on phase III of its deployment in the Congo,
in accordance with the conditions set out in the report.
The parties to the Lusaka Agreement should take that
as a sign of our intention to move forward despite the
difficulties. We trust that the message will be heeded
by all the interested parties and that the draft
presidential statement that we will adopt today will
contribute to opening the way for a constructive, high-
level dialogue between the parties to the Agreement
and the Security Council - and, perhaps, troop-
contributing countries - during the month of
November, under the presidency of Jamaica.
