The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Portugal and Spain, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nesho
(Albania), Mr. Monteiro (Portugal) and Mr. Ory
(Spain) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council decides to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Bernard Kouchner, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I welcome Mr. Kouchner and invite him to take a
seat at the Council table.

I wish also to welcome to the Chamber for this
important meeting a man who is universally respected,
Bishop Artemije, President of the Serb National
Council. Also present is a delegation of Serbs from
Kosovo, headed by Ms. Rada Trajkovic. I received that
delegation yesterday in my capacity as President of the
Council and I welcome them on behalf of the Council.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(S/2000/538). I am grateful to the Secretary-General
for being here with us this morning.

I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/2000/491, 497, 508, 525, 526, 527 and 553, letters
variously dated 26 and 30 May and l, 2 and 8 June
2000 from Yugoslavia; and S/2000/552, letter dated 8
June 2000 from the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia.

Members have also received photocopies of a
letter dated 7 June 2000 from Yugoslavia, which will
be issued as document S/2000/547.

At this meeting the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Bernard Kouchner, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. I
give Mr. Kouchner the floor.


