Mr. Inzko: A month ago the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina went to the polls for their seventh post-
war general elections. They did so just one year before
the twentieth anniversary of the signing of the Dayton
Peace Agreement and against the background of ever
deepening stagnation and socioeconomic hardship.
Whether one reads my report (S/2014/777, annex),
or the latest progress report of the European Union
(EU) or the reporting of Bosnian non-governmental
organizations monitoring the performance of the
Government * there are quite a few reports out - one
will nevertheless see that the results of the last four
years fell way short of the mark.

As if all that were not enough, only a few months
earlier we witnessed close to 1 million people being
affected by tragic and catastrophic floods, the like of
which cannot be recalled in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
that regard, I must pause for a moment to acknowledge
the tremendous role played by the United Nations and its
representatives on the ground in terms of coordination
and information-sharing throughout the course of the
flood relief efforts. The scenes I saw when I Visited
flood victims, days after the heavy rains that swept
across the country, were truly shocking. However, a ray
of hope in the disaster was the instinctive readiness of
local communities and thousands of ordinary people to
help each other regardless of ethnicity.

Regrettably, the parties, officials and institutions
governing the country at various levels have not
responded to the country's problems with the same
spontaneous urgency and creativity with which
everyday people responded to the floods. That is why
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been on a downward
trajectory since 2006. Eight years is a long time for any
country to be going the wrong way.

Not surprisingly, there is a plentiful supply
of disillusionment, anger and frustration. That is
particularly worrying among the youth, for whom
unemployment levels are above 57 per cent, among
the highest rates of unemployment for young people
in Europe. Those young people - the future of the
country - have been particularly let down.

The situation is not good, and it must be tackled
head-on. Clearly, therefore, the elections are not just
another round of general elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The elections are about a decisive four-
year period ahead for all of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
citizens, regardless of their ethnicity or in which part of
the country they live. There must now be a fundamental
change - the interests of the country and its citizens
must be put before those ofthe privileged political class.

The good news is that we have a chance to turn
a new page. The start of a new mandate provides us
with a timely opportunity to start afresh, a chance that
cannot be wasted, to take major strides towards the
lasting peace and stability that come With Euro-Atlantic
integration. The integration of the region, including
Bosnia and Herzegovina, into the European Union
is about so much more than prosperity and raising
standards. It is about healing the wounds of the past and
enabling the peoples of the region to once again live
together with their compatriots Without borders. That
is certainly my great wish for the peoples of the region,
and I know it is shared by many.

Political leaders should have no doubt whatsoever
that business as usual simply will not be acceptable. We
have expectations, and we expect to see complacency
replaced with a sense ofurgency. The citizens ofBosnia
and Herzegovina and the international community
are in full unity on one very simply point: we expect
a fundamental change in the way that politics is
conducted. Such a change of approach is absolutely
possible.

What do we need to see in Bosnia and Herzegovina
in the days and weeks and months ahead to move in that
direction? Overall, we expect the needs of citizens to
be tackled head-on and for the country to be put back
on track for Euro-Atlantic integration, the declared
strategic objective of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Steps
need to be taken urgently by the incoming authorities
to overhaul the business environment so that new jobs
can be created in the private sector. Let me take this
opportunity to say once again that I fully support the
European Union's Compact for Growth initiative.

Progress on Euro-Atlantic integration has to be
unblocked. In that regard, I welcome the initiative
announced last week by the United Kingdom and
Germany to define a road map of reform to strengthen
Bosnia and Herzegovina's institutions and accelerate
the country's progress towards the EU. I cannot stress
strongly enough - it is vitally important that the
incoming authorities seize this new opportunity.

From the parties that ran in the recent elections,
the first thing that we need to see now is the speedy
formation of Governments in a manner that is in
accordance with the law, unlike What we saw in 2010.
I have also challenged the authorities to appoint more
women and to seek out ministerial candidates and other
appointees who have the expertise, in particular in
economies, to deliver the progress that is required. That
can easily be done if there is a minimum of political
will.

Similarly, the effort that has been put into blocking
progress on issues, especially at the State level, must
now be directed at delivering the healthy compromises
needed to move the country forward. I expect, therefore,
to see a marked improvement in the performance of
State institutions in the next four years.

Next, there must be a recommitment to the rule
of law and the fight against corruption. Words are not
enough. We need to see hard results. Many verdicts
of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court,
which are "final and binding" under the terms of the
Peace Agreement, remain unimplemented. They must
now be implemented, including the decision on Mostar.
That town's citizens must regain the basic right to elect
their local officials.
Finally, challenges to Dayton and the sovereignty
of the State must stop. I am appalled that some leaders
still insult the intelligence of their own citizens,
believing that talk of secession, division and hatred will
hide their own failures to deliver a better life for people.

While they pursue a long-term strategy to drive the
country into the ground in order to justify breaking the
country apart - with all the risks that such a strategy
entails - young people are getting older without the
educational and professional opportunities that living
in a functional country would provide. As the calls for
a referendum on secession have been repeated time and
time again in recent months, I have had to respond by
reminding people of the facts: the entities do not have
the right to secede under the Peace Agreement. I would
like to make that clear once more: there will be no
redrawing of borders.

I hope, therefore, that we will see the incoming
authorities doing what is needed to get Bosnia and
Herzegovina back on track quickly. Is there an
alternative to this? Yes, there is. The political leaders
can go on doing what they have been doing over the last
eight years. If that is what they decide to do, they must
know that there Will almost certainly be consequences
and none of us will be able to claim that we have not
been warned. The February demonstrations were a
clear wake-up call for the political establishment in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also for the international
community. While nobody can predict exactly when
there will be another public backlash if the politics of
the last eight years continues, it will be just a matter of
time before it occurrs. That is in no one's interest.

I address Council members today not only as the
High Representative, but also as a true friend of Bosnia
and Herzegovina who wants the best for its people. I
am aware that I have been blunt today, but there are
times when the best thing you can do for a friend is
to speak frankly. And this is just such a time. Those
political leaders who choose to enter Government in the
coming weeks must now change their ways, and they
must once and for all break the vicious downward cycle
of spiteful tit-for-tat politics that has led us to this point.
Just as Bosnians and Herzegovinans must raise their
game, so must the international community, because
ourjob in Bosnia and Herzegovina has clearly not been
completed.

This is a time to reaffirm our commitment to a
united and reintegrated Bosnia and Herzegovina and
to be more united than ever as we seek to support the
delivery of the deep and sometimes painful changes
that are required for the country to be functional,
stable and prosperous. Those politicians and people
who want to work together in good faith to take the
country forward will have our full and active support.
Similarly, those who seek to advocate division and
secession must finally understand that the drawing of
borders in Bosnia and Herzegovina is behind us.

The future is not about dividing people. It is
about coming together to build a better tomorrow. As
I witnessed personally two days ago at the moving
ceremony marking the fall of the Berlin Wall, this is a
future ofbuilding a better tomorrow - not of dividing,
but of coming together.

