Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): It is a particular
pleasure for me and my delegation to take part in what
you, Mr. President, termed as the piece de resistance of
the Dutch presidency: this open debate on the item "No
exit without strategy". We thank you very much for
introducing the debate on issues relating to the
conclusion or termination of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. When we plan to start
anything well, we should also plan so that it ends well.
The question of transition from peacekeeping to peace-
building did not receive due attention in our
deliberations in the context of reform of peace
operations. Council resolution 1327 (2000) addresses
issues relating to authorizing peacekeeping operations
and defining their mandates. It does not cover
strategies or parameters for significant change or the
closing of an operation.

You are right, Mr. President, to point out that the
Brahimi report touches upon the matter only
marginally. This is possibly because of the overriding
consideration of the difficulties in mandating and
deploying peacekeeping operations.

The use of the term "exit", which bears a negative
connotation, is perhaps not exactly correct in this
context. More appropriately, we are concerned here
with the conclusion of peacekeeping operations and
their transition to the post-conflict peace-building
phase. We agree that peacekeeping missions should be
supportive of a peace process that has a clear political
objective. But the concerns over an exit strategy should
not result in an argument of "no entry without strategy"
or "no entry without an exit strategy".

The conclusion of a peacekeeping operation must
be linked to achievement of the mission's objectives.
The parameters for the conclusion should include an
objective assessment of a given situation in the
medium- to long-term perspective. Such an assessment
should take into consideration the political, military,
humanitarian and human rights aspects and the regional
dimension.

But the achievement of the objectives set out in
the initial mandate of a mission cannot be the only
criterion for drastic changes, withdrawal or termination
of a mission. A situation may seriously deteriorate
when parties to a conflict renounce the peace
agreement or resume all-out hostilities. In that case, the
situation would require withholding deployment or
partial or complete withdrawal, as the case may be.

But let us focus on the more usual cases of
transition from peacekeeping to peace-building. The
Council decision on the conclusion of peacekeeping
operations in general follows a pattern: assist
implementation of the ceasefire agreement through
monitoring the ceasefire, assisting in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, assisting
humanitarian assistance and supervising the electoral
process. The withdrawal is decided, on the basis of the
Secretary-General's report, following elections.

Three case studies have been presented in the
background paper by the presidency: Mozambique,
Liberia and Haiti.

Mozambique represents a success story, but much
of the success is attributed not to the United Nations
doing it right, but to a great extent to chances and
coincidences.

Liberia has emerged as a case of an
unaccomplished or half-accomplished mission,
although it followed the usual process of termination.
Two fundamental weaknesses are pointed out. The first
was the failure to provide sufficient assurances to the
Liberians to vote freely; the second was the failure to
address the regional dimension of the Liberian conflict.
The Liberians voted for Charles Taylor, it is argued,
out of fear that, if not elected, Taylor would unleash a
reign of terror. Given the experience of Sierra
Leoneans having their hands chopped off by
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) elements, such fear
cannot be ruled out. The question remains as to what
else or what more - the Council should or could have
done. Addressing the regional dimension, questions
remain about the possibilities of Council action beyond
the imposition of the arms embargo.

In the case of Haiti, the United Nations
peacekeeping operation appears to have left with a
mission half-accomplished. The Council decision, it is
implied, was not based on an objective assessment of
the situation. We are struck by the conclusion in
paragraph 13 of document S/2000/1072 that

"some key Council members pursued objectives
in their own perceived national interests at the
expense of making firmer commitments to
resolve the Haitian conflict."

This raises a very interesting area of debate:
harmonizing the objective of peacekeeping with the
perceived national interests of Security Council

members. The contrary situation - that is,
compromising national interests for the sake of the
objectives of peacekeeping mandates - would be an

idealistic proposition. The debate might sound
philosophical, but it is worth engaging in if we
seriously mean to do peacekeeping right.

The maintenance of international peace and
security is a continuous process. Peacekeeping is one
of the phases in the continuum that may also include
conflict prevention, peacemaking, peace enforcement
and peace-building. The continuity must be maintained
through appropriate and timely transition.

The smooth transition that we are seeking will
require closer coordination between the Security
Council and other organs of the United Nations - the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council - as well as the relevant funds and
programmes. The role of the Bretton Woods
institutions, of course, remains critically important. To
that end, we propose setting up an institutional
mechanism of consultation among all relevant actors
for elaborating such a comprehensive transition
strategy.

There are other extremely important actors that
share the peace and security mission of the United
Nations. I am speaking of the non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). Both humanitarian and
developmental NGOs are there long before United
Nations peacekeepers arrive, and they remain there
long after peacekeepers leave. They share a significant
part of the peacekeeping and peace-building job. The
Security Council should recognize their role and
contribution. The Council would do justice to its own
responsibility by setting up an institutional mechanism
for cooperation and coordination with the NGOs. Such
a mechanism will help the Council avoid many of the
mistakes of the past.

In deciding on the conclusion of a peacekeeping
operation, it would be extremely useful to keep the
experience of past peacekeeping operations in view. It
will be difficult to define general parameters for ending
peacekeeping operations. Each situation being unique
and having specific problems, Council decisions will,
of course, have to be based on evolving realities and
considerations. However, an objective assessment and
some advance planning would certainly be helpful in
taking the right decision at the right time. We shall
continue to pursue this common objective.

