Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan
Salame, for his briefing and Ambassador Skoog for
his report, in his capacity as the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya. We strongly support
the Special Representative's continued diplomatic
endeavours to facilitate an end to the Libyan crisis. In
particular, we highly appreciate his efforts to mediate
between the various Libyan actors, which produced
a ceasefire agreement signed yesterday to end all
hostilities and to protect civilians and civilian facilities.

While we welcome the agreement reached
under the auspices of the Special Representative, we
condemn the recent violence in Tripoli, particularly the
indiscriminate shelling - as noted by the Secretary-
General in his 2 September statement - by armed
groups in neighbourhood areas, which caused civilian
deaths and injuries. We express our condolences and
solidarity to the people of Libya, particularly to those
who lost their loved ones.

While the people of Libya, who have suffered a
lot, have been raising their united voices in favour of
of an end to the protracted transition through political
means, the violence in the capital has no justification.
It only poses a serious threat to the country's stability,
undermining efforts to fully implement the United
Nations action plan. The violence has also jeopardized
the safety of all vulnerable groups, including internally
displaced persons, migrants and refugees. We join
others in calling on all parties to fully implement
the ceasefire agreement by immediately ceasing
hostilities and engaging constructively with the

Special Representative.

While expressing our support for the legitimate
authorities of Libya, we underscore that political
objectives should be pursued only through dialogue,
not violence. All parties should also cooperate with
United Nations humanitarian workers to provide aid for
all in need, particularly those trapped in the fighting.
It is also important to ensure safe, unhindered and
sustained humanitarian access to affected areas.

The use of violence by armed groups to control State
institutions and the widespread violations of human
rights with a sense of impunity are major impediments
to resolving the multifaceted crisis in Libya. For now, it
is obvious that halting the violence and restoring calm
to Tripoli should be the priority. At the same time, we
underline that the full and timely implementation of
the United Nations action plan remains the only way
to find a long-term and comprehensive solution to the
violence in Libya.

We reiterate that only a comprehensive, Libyan-led
and -owned political process facilitated by the United
Nations can return Libya to the path of peace and
stability. While it is critical to hold elections according
to the United Nations action plan, we concur with the
Secretary-General who stresses in his latest report
(S/2018/780) on the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) that it is equally important that
the proper conditions be in place for credible and
successful elections. Therefore, all Libyan political
actors should honour their commitments to holding
peaceful and legitimate elections that are acceptable to
all Libyans. Furthermore, all required security, legal
and administrative conditions should be fulfilled.

Bringing a peaceful end to the transition in Libya
will also require unifying armed and police institutions.
As the report of the Secretary-General underlines, "[t]
here is a clear need to build professional, accountable
and unified security institutions throughout the
country" (5/2018/780; para. 79), both to ensure the
State's monopoly on the legitimate use of force, as well
as to find a sustainable solution to the issue of armed
groups. In addition, promoting national reconciliation,
as has been repeatedly stated by the African Union,
is essential to restoring trust and social bonds among
communities. Besides, as the people of Libya have been
affirming through the national conference process,
addressing economic difficulties and delivering public
services by protecting national wealth and improving

the distribution of resources remains critical.

At this critical juncture, restoring stability to the
capital and implementing the United Nations action plan
will require the strong commitment and cooperation
of all Libyan actors. In that regard, all Libyan actors
should engage meaningfully and constructively with
the Special Representative to support his continuous
and tireless efforts to fully operationalize the United
Nations action plan. Neighbouring countries and
relevant regional organizations should also continue to
coordinate their work in support of the efforts of the
United Nations.

The Security Council should continue to speak
with one voice and extend strong support to Special
Representative Salame. The Council should also provide
backing to UNSMIL, which has been continuously
and gradually increasing its presence in Tripoli and
elsewhere in Libya. While UNSMIL should continue to
intensify its engagement as security conditions allow,
we appreciate its efforts thus far under the leadership of
the Special Representative in support of the country's
endeavours to end its transition.

As Libya continues to face multiple challenges,
including stabilizing the capital city, we hope that the
Council will have a constructive and positive dialogue
that will renew the UNSMIL mandate and enable it to
continue to play a key role in realizing the legitimate
aspirations of all Libyans.
