Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank the Mexican delegation for organizing
today's meeting, which I believe to be very useful and
timely. We have been delighted to welcome the
Secretary-General and the Presidents of the General
Assembly and of the Economic and Social Council.
They have made important contributions to our
discussion.

As I am honoured to speak rather late in this
discussion, I will not reiterate some very relevant
points raised and comments made on the details of the
United Nations experience in this very important area.
I am reluctant to outline general principles because I
can only echo, less eloquently, the Secretary-General's
outstanding opening statement to this meeting. The
priorities he outlined and what he said about Iraq
deserve our full attention, and I endorse his remarks.

At this stage in our discussion, I would like to
make a few comments. First, on the evolution over
time of the Council's work, I note that the Council's
increasing involvement in recent years in the
management of conflicts has been accompanied by a
double awareness: of both the pre-conflict and post-
conflict situations.
In pre-conflict situations, our Organization has
gradually become convinced by the facts on the ground
that it is necessary to work on conflict prevention. I
recall that the Council's debate on conflict prevention
started some 10 years ago, and I can observe today that
much progress has been made in this area. First, there
is the ongoing concern - even if it needs to be further
developed - to identify the early warning signs,
possible causes and triggers of potential conflicts so
that we can try to intervene in time. Secondly, I
observe a concern to take measures to prevent as far as
possible conflicts from breaking out. I think that the
Organization has made a great effort in recent years in
that respect, as attested to by the dispatch of Permanent
Representatives, the missions of Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and Council
missions to the field, as well as the various early
warning mechanisms that have been put in place.

What I find interesting is that in recent years
there has been a growing awareness, as reflected in
today's discussion, of what needs to be done at the
post-conflict stage. At that stage, too, the effective
management of situations teaches us two things. First,
most often, countries emerging from conflict are left
exhausted by the experience. Sometimes there is real
potential, but economic, social, political and
humanitarian conditions are deeply affected by the
crisis. More often than not, we have to deal with
societies that have been traumatized. In those
situations, not to establish a robust post-conflict policy
would mean a failure to react in the face of the risk of
an inevitable relapse, new chaos and new injustice, and
hence in the face of the renewal or exacerbation of the
conflict that has just been resolved. In other words, we
risk facing a renewal of conflict unless we have a good
post-conflict policy in place. We have collectively had
that kind of experience. We have had situations of real
success, but we must acknowledge that they have had
certain limitations. We have seen that - and this has
been said repeatedly today, including by you,
Mr. President - in Sierra Leone, in Kosovo, to a
certain extent in Bosnia, in Timor-Leste and, of course,
in Afghanistan, where Mr. Brahimi has played a
historic role, as well as in other cases.

I believe that the question before us is very
simple: what lessons can we draw for the future? I note
three. The first lesson is that, despite everything, the
overall record of the United Nations in managing post-
conflict situations is in fact rather outstanding. Of
course, it always tempting to emphasize the defects and
shortcomings of the interventions by international
institutions. But, if we stand back and look, the results
of what we have accomplished together in situations as
varied as those of Timor-Leste, Afghanistan, Sierra
Leone and Kosovo are impressive. Of course, we need
to improve our methods by taking into account the
lessons learned. But we must also be aware of the
astonishing - and, as I have just said, relatively
recent - success story of United Nations post-conflict
management.

The second lesson that I draw is that what the
various situations I have mentioned have in common is
that the key to success lies in the comprehensive nature
of the approach adopted, something seen to a different
degree in each case. What ensured success was the
coordination, within one overall strategy, of the
security, political, economic and social dimensions.
The humanitarian aspect in a way falls within a
different framework, but it too benefits from a coherent
approach in the other areas.

The third lesson is that there is no fixed model
that can be applied to all post-conflict situations. That
point was very well made by the Secretary-General in
his introductory statement. We know that each situation
requires a comprehensive approach. But we also know
that each situation requires a specific approach. So, we
must be careful in each case to implement the elements
that made other United Nations interventions
successful, adapting those elements in a precise and
thoughtful way to the specifics of a given situation.

I think those are some lessons that we can take
from our experience. Based on them, I would like to
draw three conclusions, given the challenges that now
lie ahead of us.

First, what the United Nations, representing the
international community, can contribute in a post-
conflict situation, is, first, the ability to establish the
legitimacy that is essential to restoring the social fabric
of a country whose structure has been damaged by
conflict and, secondly, to ensure that country's
reintegration into the regional and international
community.

Secondly, in a post-conflict situation, the United
Nations can also contribute expertise that is absolutely
unique given the diversity of the tasks performed by
the United Nations and its agencies and given the
experience that has been accumulated in theatres as
varied as they are complex.

The third conclusion is that in post-conflict
situations the United Nations, finally, is able to draw in
donor countries and international financial institutions.
I think that it is those various elements that the
heads of State and Government of the European Union
had in mind when they adopted the presidency's
statement on Iraq in Athens on 16 April. That
declaration sets out principles on a number of aspects
of the question of Iraq. It says in particular, that

"The United Nations must play a central
role including in the process leading towards self-
government for the Iraqi people, utilizing its
unique capacity and experience in post-conflict
nation building".

