Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to thank the delegation ofJapan for having convened this
open debate and also for the concept note (S/2016/586, annex). I wish also to thank the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Amina Mohamed and Ambassador Smail
Chergui for their respective statements today.

Uruguay deems it important to maintain the
momentum created by the resolutions on the review
of the peacebuilding architecture that were adopted
simultaneously by the Security Council and the
General Assembly - resolution 2282 (2016) and
General Assembly resolution 70/262, respectively - on
27 April last, so as to continue to be constructive in our
approach to peacebuilding architecture throughout the
United Nations system.
The intra-State nature of current conflict reflect
a new reality that increases pressure on national
Governments, which must face a number of challenges
with limited resources and capacities. This open debate
has been focused on a particularly interesting and
relevant issue, institution-building, which is one of the
priority areas for peacebuilding.

In the absence of a State system equipped with
strong and reliable institutions, peace can eventually be
reached but cannot be strengthened or sustained. There
are countries in which conflicts run so very deep that
there is not even a unity Government with which the
population identifies, and, as such, institution-building
would seem an alien concept.

In order to build peace, measures must be taken to
promote socioeconomic growth, promote and protect
human rights and strengthen institutions, so as to build
confidence between national Governments and their
people. Uruguay attaches particular importance to
the solidity of institutions as a factor in the stability
of all societies. As the concept note rightly states,
democracy, national security and law and order, local
governance, the public administration management
system, the economic and financial structure, the basic
social-service system and the system for dialogue
and reconciliation all must be stable, transparent and
reliable in order to ensure their effectiveness and so
that the entire population can reap the benefits of peace
equally.

Women, young people and children are of particular
importance, and the necessary measures need to be
taken to ensure their participation. In that regard,
we reiterate the need to ensure the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, highlighting the importance of strengthening
social inclusion as a means of ensuring that all segments
of society are taken into account.

There are no single models to achieve sustainable
development, and that is why Uruguay believes that the
design of strategies in that respect must focus on the
particular characteristics ofa given society. That is why
we must promote greater participation and coordination
among regional and subregional organizations, which
can play a crucial role in institution-building. They are
the ones who best understand the realities and needs of
their member countries.

The new African Peace and Security Architecture
Road Map for 2016-2020 is an excellent tool. It lays
out the role of all actors involved and sets out specific
indicators and goals in priority areas. Uruguay further
underscores the successful peacebuilding efforts of the
African Union, particularly as regards post-conflict
policies, reconstruction and development.

Uruguay believes that we must recognize the role
played by United Nations peacekeeping operations
in peacebuilding, particularly in consolidating peace
at the national level. On the other hand, it is worth
noting that, when a peacekeeping operation or when
a special political mission withdraws from the field,
there exists a shared responsibility between the host
State and the United Nations for peacebuilding. That
shared responsibility should always be borne in the
first instance by the host State, which must also lead
the peacebuilding process in its territory.

The United Nations acts as a complement to the
State authorities by supporting peacebuilding efforts.
But peacebuilding operations were not established to
be able to be resorted to in all situations in which the
countries concerned do not assume their responsibilities
as sovereign entities. For that reason, it very important
that the transition process to peacebuilding be led by the
leaders of the States concerned, and that they utilize all
the tools they have for institutional capacity-building.

Uruguay believes that it is by addressing the
structural and root causes of conflict that peace can be
achieved, and there can also be a successful effort to
prevent the recurrence of conflict in the region.

