Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today, the Security Council has adopted a
new resolution on Iraq that will become an important
milestone in that country's history. The Russian
Federation supported the adoption of this resolution in
the light of our commitment to a prompt political
settlement of the situation in Iraq under United Nations
auspices and in order to normalize the situation in the
entire region. During the complex process of
negotiating a text and in the intense diplomatic
contacts, we managed to work out a decision
culminating in the cessation of Iraq's military
occupation and the transfer of full sovereignty from the
coalition authorities to the Iraqi interim Government.
Now we have the prospect of enhancing the
contribution of the United Nations in promoting
organized civilian life and in developing the political
process in Iraq on a democratic basis.

The resolution unequivocally confirms the right
of the Iraqi people to determine their own political
future and to control their national resources. The
interim Government is endowed with full sovereignty
on matters of governance, including command over its
national army and its police.

We welcome the inclusion in the resolution of
provisions in support of reintegrating opposition
elements into Iraqi society and of the need for all
parties to comply with international humanitarian and
human rights norms. It is important that there be a
specific timeline for the political process. National
elections are scheduled to take place in Iraq by January
2005, following which a sovereign Transitional
Government will be formed.

International and regional assistance is of key
significance to the restoration process in Iraq. Given
the importance of lending legitimacy to Transitional
Government structures in Iraq, Russia, prior to the
adoption of this resolution, suggested that an
international conference be convened, with the
participation of all influential Iraqi political forces,
neighbouring States and members of the Security
Council.

Our proposal is still valid. We call on the
leadership of Iraq to take a very serious look at the
possibility of convening this type of meeting. It was an
important principle that all provisions of the resolution
should be adopted on the basis of relevant requests
made by the interim Government, in particular
concerning the deployment in the country of the
multinational force and international assistance for the
political process, with the United Nations playing a
leading role.

Under the resolution, the United Nations must
meet some serious challenges in Iraq. The Organization
must play an important role, for example, in providing
assistance to the new Iraqi authorities in the run-up to
the elections and in the drafting of a permanent
constitution.

Of course, the United Nations can meet the
challenges in that country only if an adequate level of
security is provided. One of the key elements in this
resolution is an agreement on the mandate of the
multinational forces remaining in Iraq at the request of
the interim Government. The mandate of those forces
is clearly linked to the political tasks of the transitional
period, and the length of their stay in the country could
be reduced upon the request of the Iraqi leadership. It
is clearly articulated that their presence in the country
is at the request of the interim Government of Iraq and
that their function is to provide security during the
transitional period.

It is important that a coordination mechanism be
developed between the new Iraqi leadership and the
command of the multinational force that will not
infringe on the sovereignty of the interim Government.
We believe that, as set forth in the letters from United
States Secretary of State Powell and from the Prime
Minister of the interim Government of Iraq, Mr.
Allawi, all the work of the multinational force should
be done with the agreement of the sovereign Iraqi
authorities.

The resolution calls for quarterly reports from the
United States, on behalf of the multinational force, in
conjunction with reports from the Secretary-General,
which will ensure ongoing oversight by the Security
Council over the process of political settlement and
restoration in Iraq.

The resolution confirms the need for a final
clarification of issues related to proscribed Iraqi
military programmes. Given the fact that the problem
of weapons of mass destruction was the reason for
starting the war against Iraq, it cannot be left
unattended. We expect that, in the very near future, the
Security Council will begin work on adapting the
mandates of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission and of the
International Atomic Energy Agency to these new
conditions. We hope that the interim Government will
actively cooperate with the international inspection
machinery.

The Security Council has also endowed the
interim Government with economic sovereignty within
the transitional period. In that context, we would like to
emphasize the need to ensure a transparent and
equitable approach to the use of monies from the
Development Fund for Iraq as well as strict compliance
by all parties with their obligations under prioritized
contracts, within the framework of the former
humanitarian programme of the United Nations.

Russia is continuing, in the current difficult
situation, to provide assistance for the rehabilitation of
the Iraqi economy, and we firmly intend to continue to
develop our economic cooperation with that country.
We take note of the statements made by influential
Iraqi leaders as well as by countries of the region in
support of the interim Government.

We believe that the Government will have an
opportunity to realize the hopes held for it both inside
and outside Iraq. Additionally, it is clear to us that only
time will tell if the adoption of this resolution will help
to achieve a turnaround in Iraq. The interim
Government will need to prove its ability to govern the
country independently and to establish a genuinely
representative political process. In that respect, much
will depend on whether the Iraqis themselves sense a
real transition from a military occupation to a
restoration of sovereignty and whether the interim
Government can win the trust of the people and enlist
the support of the international community, including
Iraq's neighbours.

This consensual resolution brings the question of
Iraq back into the political field of the United Nations.
It will help to ensure that the efforts of the international
community are pooled with a view to achieving a real
settlement of the situation in Iraq, which remains an
open wound in the Middle East and in world politics in
general.

It is our firm belief that the key to resolving this
problem lies in the collective efforts of States
throughout the world. The Iraqi situation has made
clear the universal and irreplaceable nature of the
United Nations, which epitomizes international
legitimacy. The task of organizing our joint efforts
under United Nations auspices by advancing
international relations is therefore more urgent now
than ever before.

