Mr. Apata (Nigeria): I wish to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the able manner in which you have
presided over the affairs of the Council in the month of
November.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the end of
the cold war, a landmark event that brought relief from
the tension which characterized the international political
system in that era. In spite of the benefit of that epochal
event, the decade has regrettably been marred by the
proliferation and intensification of intra-State conflicts.
These conflicts, although regional in character, have often
threatened international peace and security. The wanton
destruction of life, the acute refugee crises, the plight of
displaced persons and, above all, the destabilization of
regional peace and stability should compel all members of
the international community to seek appropriate tools to
respond adequately to these conflicts.

Nigeria regrets that Africa has a disproportionate
share of these conflicts. Yet the region's capacity to
effectively resolve these conflicts continues to be
undermined by lack of resources and inadequate support
from the international community.

The best efforts of the United Nations, which finds
itself challenged by the necessity to resolve these
conflicts, are usually hindered by lack of financial
resources and limited knowledge and familiarity with
local situations. The relative weaknesses of the United
Nations on this score should be an added reason for
enhanced cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, such as the Economic Community of West
African States and the Organization of African Unity.

 

Ideally, the concept of conflict prevention would be
the most efficacious approach for the maintenance of
international peace and security. In our increasingly
interdependent world and in the wake of the proliferation of
armed conflicts, it has become more necessary for the
Council to retool existing mechanisms and design
innovative early warning systems to nip in the bud
situations that would lead to a breach of international peace
and security. Experience has shown that the surest and
certainly the most cost-effective means of maintaining
international peace and security is through the vehicle of
preventive diplomacy. However, for the Security Council to
enhance its role in the prevention of armed conflicts, it is
imperative for the parties to a dispute to demonstrate the
necessary political will and for the Council to provide
adequate resources to enable the United Nations to respond
in a timely fashion with preventive action.

With the benefit of hindsight, we have learned,
regrettably, that when preventive action is not taken or is
delayed, a dispute leads to the outbreak of armed hostilities,
as in the cases of Rwanda, Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Kosovo. In this way the credibility of the United Nations is
dented, at a time when more is demanded and expected of
it.

Even from the point of view of relative human and
material cost, prevention proves to be the prudent strategy.
According to a recent estimate, the cost to the international
community of the seven major conflicts in this decade, the
decade of the 19905, excluding Kosovo and East Timor,
was $199 billion, in addition to the unacceptable scale of
human casualties. From this example alone, the dividend
from preventive diplomacy is self-evident, as it ensures
fewer conflicts and lesser humanitarian catastrophes.

Conflict prevention as a major component of the
maintenance of peace and security should be accorded the
highest priority in the light of the monumental costs of
peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building. This reality
further underscores the imperative necessity of developing
and fine-tuning common indicators for early warning and
joint training of staff in the field of conflict prevention.

In this light, the Nigerian delegation proposes that the
United Nations should establish a conflict prevention and
peace-building budget, similar to the peacekeeping budget.
Such a standby financial facility would ensure availability
of financial resources to promptly kick-start preventive and
peace-making activities.

This would be an improvement on the current
situation, in which an appeal for donations has to be made
before any significant progress can be recorded in the
implementation of peacemaking and peace-building
efforts. The current situation in Sierra Leone - where the
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration has to wait for a special appeal fund, which
was launched in Geneva on 23 November 1999 - is a
clear example. The amount so far contributed to the
special appeal fund, which is expected to provide the
necessary resources for the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, has not been very impressive.
If there were a budget in place for conflict prevention and
peacemaking, there would most likely be funds available
in that budget to enable the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process to get under way.

In conclusion, while Member States of the United
Nations must demonstrate greater political will in the area
of conflict prevention, the Security Council has a vital
role to play in giving preventive action the priority it
deserves as the Council discharges its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security.

