Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
welcoming the unanimous adoption of resolution 2356
(2017), which once again sends a strong and unified
message of the Security Council in response to the
repeated ballistic missile tests by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea.

The situation in the Korean peninsula has
indeed been a source of great concern. The ballistic
missile-related activities by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, in violation of Security Council
resolutions, seriously endanger regional and
international peace and security. Today's resolution
once again reaffirms the Council's unequivocal position
calling on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
to abandon all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear
programmes in a complete, verifiable and irreversible
manner and immediately to cease all related activities.
In our view, this is in the interests of everyone - the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's neighbours,
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea itself, the
Korean Peninsula as a whole and the international
community. There is a window of opportunity, as China
has said. We want to see a peaceful resolution of this
problem. Without a doubt, a further escalation of the
situation on the Korean Peninsula will have devastating
consequences for regional and international peace
and security.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea should
not be surprised to see people worried. It is therefore
very critical that the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea return to its international commitments on
de-nuclearization and fully comply with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council in order to
reduce the increased tension in the region. The full
implementation of the Security Council resolutions on
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, including
the resolution that we just adopted today, has become
all the more vital in the light of the prevailing situation.
For our part, we remain committed to carrying out
our obligations.

Finally, the need to find a peaceful, diplomatic
and political solution to this issue has never been
more urgent. We support all efforts in the search for a
peaceful and comprehensive solution through dialouge,
as reiterated by the resolution we adopted today.

