Let me begin by thanking all the briefers for their valuable presentations this morning. At the previous briefing to the Security Council, on March 12 (see S/PV.8745), Mr. Griffiths expressed his concern about the risks of a prolonged military escalation. Unfortunately, the situation as we have observed since mid-January, and again recently, with the fighting around Marib, the capture of the city of Al-Hazm and the clashes in Al-Hudaydah, have only confirmed our fears. The Niger condemns the military escalation and calls on the parties to respond favourably to the Secretary- General's appeal of 23 March and to the appeal of his five Special Envoys to the Middle East, issued on 11 April, for an immediate cessation of hostilities in all theatres of conflict in the region. We welcome the unilateral ceasefire decided by the coalition led by Saudi Arabia and call on the Houthis to follow suit without delay, in order to give relief to the Yemeni people, who have already been severely affected by this prolonged conflict. We call on the wisdom and responsibility of the parties in order for all hostilities to cease immediately. Today, more than ever, the parties in the Yemeni conflict must acknowledge that peace will be based on the understanding that military solutions to the conflicts in the region are not viable. My delegation calls on both parties to respect their commitments, to resume peace talks and to respect previous agreements, including those reached during the national dialogue, the Riyadh agreement and the Stockholm Agreement, which we continue to fully support. With regard to the humanitarian crisis, my country insists on the need to put an end to the recurrent restrictions on the movement of humanitarian agencies so that much-needed assistance can be delivered to affected populations. We urge all the parties to focus on the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which is our common enemy. Indeed, given the precarious health system in Yemen, which has been weakened by several years of war, the population's extreme poverty and the lack of infrastructure and medical personnel, the outbreak of coronavirus in the country could be particularly disastrous. In conclusion, we appeal to the international community and the Security Council to prevent a disaster caused by the COVID-19 pandemic situation, which is an exceptional and generalized threat to human life, health and subsistence.
