Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Thank
you, Mr. President for organizing this important
debate. I wish to extend my gratitude to Under-
Secretary-General Amos, Under-Secretary-General Le
Roy and Assistant Secretary-General Ivan Simonovic'
for their important, irreplaceable work and of course
for their valuable briefings at today's meeting.

The issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is one to which Bosnia and Herzegovina
attaches great importance. Unfortunately, serious and
constant violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law and deteriorating situations,
including systematic violence against civilian
populations, have continued during the reporting
period in many countries. Civilians are still, and too
often, targets in armed attacks and atrocities and are
victims of human rights abuses, in particular rape and
other sexual violence. It is the unfortunate and
unacceptable reality of our times that civilians continue
to be a main target for armed attacks and account for a
high number of casualties in conflicts.

Regrettably, in 2010 and during the first quarter
of 2011, we have witnessed a continuous and
significant increase in civilian casualties in a number
of countries, including Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia,
C6te d'Ivoire and Libya. The list certainly does not end
there. Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly condemns such
violence and finds it both appalling and unacceptable.

In response to some of the violations that
occurred in the most recent period, the Security
Council took concrete steps relating to the protection
of civilians, the first one being the adoption of
resolution 1973 (2011), which authorized all necessary
measures to protect civilians in Libya, and the second
being the adoption of resolution 1975 (2011), which
imposed sanctions on former Ivorian President Laurent
Gbagbo and his circle and authorized the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire to prevent the use
of heavy weapons against the civilian population.
When it comes to the situation in Libya, we are
gravely concerned over the references in the recent
report of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court to serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights in the country. We
condemn in the strongest possible terms artillery
shelling and sniper fire aimed at civilians and civilian
buildings. In this context, we reiterate that full
implementation of resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973
(2011) is of the utmost importance and that obligations
deriving from those resolutions are not optional.

With regard to the situation in the Ivory Coast,
we also reiterate our deep concern over the reported
serious violations of human rights and the use of
disproportionate force. We are alarmed by the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in the country,
where more than a million people have reportedly been
internally displaced and more than 100,000 had to flee
the country and find shelter in Liberia. We urge the
international community to redouble its efforts and
provide the much-needed humanitarian assistance.
Allegations of the existence of mass graves in the
country are worrisome and must be investigated. We
condemn the use of sexual violence as a means to
political ends and welcome the decision of the Human
Rights Council to establish an independent
international commission of inquiry.

We urge all parties to armed conflicts to fully
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law concerning the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. We particularly underline the need to
combat impunity for perpetrators of violence against
civilians. The struggle against impunity is an integral
element in the protection of civilians that cannot be
addressed seriously without prosecuting those
responsible for serious crimes. Sanctions and other
targeted measures play an important role in overall
efforts, as well as in initiatives to improve compliance
with the law by non-State armed groups. The Security
Council should take every opportunity to send a
message that crimes committed against civilians are
unacceptable and that all perpetrators of grave
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law will be brought to justice.

Conflicts remain the major cause behind the
increasing numbers of refugees and internally
displaced persons. In that context, we are deeply
concerned about the unsafe and too-often impeded
humanitarian access to populations affected by
conflict. We are also troubled by attacks against
humanitarian workers, which must be strongly
condemned. We believe that the Security Council
should take a more consistent and comprehensive
approach to addressing constraints on humanitarian
access and should ensure accountability for grave
instances of denial of access.

The challenges facing the Council with regard to
the protection of civilians call for greater international
cooperation and better coordination between the
Council and other United Nations bodies and agencies.
To that end, additional efforts should be made to
prevent conflicts and their recurrence and to promote
early-warning systems and effective responses to
situations that specifically threaten civilian
populations. Although the primary responsibility for
the protection of civilians lies with States and parties to
an armed conflict, the United Nations, with its
systematic approach to the protection of civilians, must
be, and is, at the helm of the global effort.

We believe that more comprehensive and detailed
information on the protection of civilians in country-
specific situations is needed. Measuring progress in the
implementation of peacekeeping mandates related to
the protection of civilians must be improved. We
support the recommendations of the Secretary-General
made in the most recent report asking for the
systematic application of the aide-memoire on the
protection of civilians and active use of the Council's
informal Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians to
discuss peacekeeping and other mission mandates.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that
Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches the utmost
importance to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

