Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
listened attentively to the briefing by Under-Secretary-
General Feltman and noted his positive evaluation of
the progress in the situation in Rakhine state and the
efforts of Myanmar and Bangladesh. China also took
note of the briefing by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Patten.

Since the violent attacks in Myanmar's Rakhine
state, China has made its position clear on many
occasions, expressing condemnation of the violent
attacks and support for Myanmar's efforts to maintain
stability. As a friendly neighbour of both Myanmar
and Bangladesh, China has provided emergency
humanitarian relief for the appropriate settlement of
displaced persons and, at the same time, worked with
them to push for dialogue and consultations in order to
find a solution.

Not long ago, Chinese Foreign Minister Wang
Yi visited Bangladesh and Myanmar and proposed
a three-stage approach to addressing the problem of
Rakhine state.

The first stage is to cease hostilities on the ground
and restore stability and order so that people can enjoy
calm and do not feel compelled to flee. At present, the
goal of this stage has largely been achieved. Massive
population flows have stopped. It is critical to prevent
a relapse of the situation, especially a recurrence
of conflict.

The second stage is for the international community
to encourage communication between the two countries
so that they can find practical ways to solve problems
through consultations on an equal footing. Now that
the two countries have signed a repatriation agreement,
it is essential to put it into practice and achieve
tangible results.

The third stage is to face squarely the root causes of
the problem and explore ways to address them. Poverty
is the source of turmoil and conflicts. We call on the
international community to increase support to Rakine
state to help it eradicate poverty, pursue development
through poverty reduction and realize stability
through development.

This proposal represents the greatest possible
consensus on all sides and has the full agreement of
both Myanmar and Bangladesh.

The problem in Myanmar's Rakhine state has a
complex historical, ethnic and religious background.
It cannot be solved overnight, but calls for a gradual
approach. At present, the situation on the ground has
been visibly eased. The vigorous humanitarian relief
operation continues. Myanmar and Bangladesh have
maintained dialogue and consultations, and are in the
process of following up on the repatriation agreement
they have signed. Both countries are engaged in
cooperation with the United Nations and other relevant
organizations. Myanmar is actively implementing the
report of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State.
China appreciate those efforts on the part of Myanmar
and Bangladesh and hopes that the international
community will view the difficulties and challenges
facing the Government of Myanmar objectively, remain
patient and provide support and help.

The Security Council adopted a presidential
statement on the question of Rakhine state at the
beginning of November (S/PRST/2017/22). Now the
situation in Rakhine state has shown positive changes.
It is the consistent view of China that the question of
a Rakhine state should be addressed appropriately by
Myanmar and Bangladesh through bilateral channels.
Only an agreement accepted by both countries
concerned can be implemented and sustained or win the
necessary understanding and support of various sectors
within the countries. Any solution reached under strong
external pressure may ease the situation temporarily
but will leave negative after effects.

China hopes that the two countries will continue to
implement the relevant measures and that the Council
and the international community will play a positive
and constructive role in that regard. China stands
ready to work with all the parties concerned to play
a constructive [RUN-ON]le in the restoration of order
and the realization of stability and development in
Rakhine state.

