I, too, would like to thank the Chairs for their briefings and for their leadership of the Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) over the past year. As others have said before, terrorist groups have never been more organized, while continuing their efforts to utilize radicalized individuals to commit deadly attacks in our countries. Da'esh, similar to Al-Qaida, is proving to be resilient and capable of adapting to clandestine operations. The pandemic makes the threat even more nebulous, in particular through the massive use of the Internet and social networks. Faced with a scourge that spares no country, more than ever before we must coordinate our efforts, including among the Security Council, its Committees and Groups of Experts. We demonstrated solidarity and coordination on resolution 2462 (2019), on preventing and combating the financing of terrorism, adopted at France's initiative. Resolution 2462 (2019) calls for coordinated action by the 1267 Committee and the CTC. In this regard, it is important that the joint meeting of the two Committees on trends and threats related to terrorist financing and the implementation of resolution 2462 (2019) be held as soon as health conditions allow. Such coordination and joint action are essential for enabling the normative framework established by the Council be fully effective. I would also like to underscore three points. First, the Counter-Terrorism Committee must continue its evaluation work, while finding ways to tailor visits in the current health context. Cooperation between the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Office of Counter- Terrorism must also continue. Secondly, the activities of the 1267 Committee show both the extent of the work to be undertaken to hamper the operational capabilities of terrorist groups and the ability of member States to cooperate and demonstrate unity in response to this common threat. This unity must absolutely be maintained, because the threat posed by Al-Qaida and Da'esh remains despite the end of the territorial hold of Da'esh in the Levant. It is essential that the fight against terrorism and radicalization be in full compliance with international humanitarian law and international human rights law, in accordance with Security Council resolutions, which are unequivocal on the matter. I would like to commend the work of the Ombudsperson of the 1267 Committee, who plays an essential role in matters relating to rights of the defence. I also applaud the contributions made by the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team. Thirdly, and lastly, the risk of radiological, biological, chemical and nuclear materials and delivery systems falling into the hands of terrorists remains acute, and proliferation channels are diversifying. Against that backdrop, the role of the 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts is ever more relevant, whether in securing sensitive materials and goods, strengthening border controls or establishing export control mechanisms. Cooperation among the 1540 Committee and the other Committees is essential for the effectiveness of our collective security system. France has a solid and unique national legal framework for the practical implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and will fully participate in the process of reviewing the resolution with the other members of the Security Council. In conclusion, France will continue to fully cooperate with the 1540 and 1267 Committees and the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
