Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo and Under-Secretary-
General, Mr. Ferreira de Serpa Soares, for their
briefings. I welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivica Daeie,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and thank him for his statement. I
also listened carefully to the statement of Ms. Citaku.

Resolution 1244 (1999) sets an important legal
basis for the settlement of the Kosovo issue. Our
position on the Kosovo issue is consistent and clear. We
believe that within the framework of relevant Security
Council resolutions, the parties concerned should reach
a mutually acceptable solution through dialogue. We
see that as the best way to resolve the Kosovo issue.

China respects Serbia's sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We understand its legitimate concerns with
regard to the Kosovo issue and commend its efforts to
find a political solution to it. Achieving accommodation,
reconciliation and harmonious coexistence across all
ethnicities in Kosovo is in the fundamental interest
of people from all ethnic backgrounds and would
meet their needs for development. We hope that all
the parties concerned will put the well-being of their
people first, refrain from any rhetoric or action that
could complicate or escalate the situation and build up
conditions for a proper solution to the Kosovo issue, so
as to jointly maintain peace, stability and development
in the Balkan region

As things currently stand, it is important for the
Security Council to remain seized of the Kosovo issue
and encourage the two parties to carry out genuine
dialogue with a view to facilitating a proper solution
to the Kosovo issue. China supports the leadership of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin
in ensuring the implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and constructive cooperation with
all parties.

Recently, UNMIK personnel were obstructed
in carrying out their mandated tasks. China is
deeply concerned in that regard and considers such
obstruction to be completely unacceptable. The
privileges, immunities, safety and security of United
Nations personnel must be fully respected. The parties
concerned should ensure the necessary conditions for
UNMIK to implement its mandate in line with the law.

