Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salame, and the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya for their briefings. I welcome the new Permanent Representative of Libya, Ambassador Elsonni, to this meeting. Libya has been in the grip of a protracted conflict for nine years so far. The conflict, which is a snapshot of the continued turbulence in Western Asia and North Africa, has inflicted ruinous disaster on the Libyan people and jeopardized the security and stability of neighbouring countries and of the entire region of Western Asia and North Africa. Spillover problems resulting from the Libyan situation, such as arms proliferation, refugees and terrorism, have posed serious challenges to neighbouring countries, the region and even the whole world. China has been closely following the developments in the country and appreciates the recent actions taken by the international community, which have been constructive in alleviating the Libyan situation. An international conference on the Libyan question was recently convened in Berlin, at the conclusion of which a communique was released, demonstrating the important consensus reached among the participants at the conference. China welcomes this process. Implementing the outcomes of the conference with concrete steps will require the concerted efforts of all Libyan parties, the relevant countries of the region and the international community as a whole. As for the Security Council's endorsement of the Berlin outcomes, we need not only to act with a sense of urgency, but also to try to accommodate the concerns of all sides. In so doing, we need to maintain the unity of the Council and make every effort to adopt an actionable draft resolution as early as possible. Let me elaborate on the following four main points. First, the current priority is to achieve a sustained ceasefire. The parties to the Libyan conflict should proceed from the desire to serve the overall interests of their country and people and seek an immediate ceasefire to ease tensions and return to the track of finding a solution through peaceful dialogue and consultations. Countries with influence should play an active role by exerting their influence, pushing the Libyan parties to bridge their differences, enhancing mutual trust and providing constructive assistancein bringing about a ceasefire and restoring political dialogue. China calls on the Joint Military Commission to convene 5 + 5 talks as soon as possible and strive towards making progress. Secondly, global synergies should be created. The international community should respect Libya's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity, support Special Representative Salame and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya in their good offices and mediation efforts, and remain committed to the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process within the United Nations framework. Given the fact that they are uniquely positioned to mediate the conflict among the parties, the African Union and the League of Arab States should be supported in playing their respective roles, and their efforts should be synergized with those of the United Nations. As the Libyan question is closely linked with the regional situation, any solution should address the legitimate concerns of the countries of the region. In this regard, the unique role of the relevant countries should be brought into play. Thirdly, unremitting efforts must be made to combat terrorism. Recently, terrorism within and around Libya seems to have been resurrected. Therefore, the international community must remain extremely vigilant with regard to this trend, strengthen coordination and cooperation, and work together to tackle challenges. It is imperative to combat all forms of terrorism across Libya and to prevent the cross- border movement of foreign terrorist fighters. We must never allow Libya to turn into a breeding ground for terrorism. Fourthly, sanctions must be used properly and effectively. China's consistent position is that sanctions are a means to an end, not an end in themselves, and should always serve the political settlement of relevant issues. Under the current circumstances, it is important to strictly enforce the arms embargo on Libya and refrain from a military intervention or any other action that could exacerbate the conflict. The year 2020 will be the year we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations. Yet we are pained that the Libyan people are still living through terrible suffering. The international community must firmly recommit to multilateralism, and Council members must be united to deliver on the mandate of maintaining international peace and security. As a permanent member of the Security Council, China will continue to support and facilitate the Libyan political-settlement process as well as the Libyan people's pursuit of peace and tranquillity. We will contribute to restoring peace and stability in Libya.
