Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): First of all, my delegation
wishes to express its profound appreciation to your
delegation, Sir, for convening this important debate
on United Nations multidimensional peacekeeping.
We thank your Government for allowing your Foreign
Secretary to preside over this debate. We also thank His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon for providing a briefing
on this important topic.

We have the honour to associate ourselves with
the statement delivered by the Egyptian delegation on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Peacekeeping is not only about separating warring
parties or enforcing a ceasefire; it is also about
strengthening State capacities to provide security and
meet development needs. Peacekeeping, therefore,
along with peacemaking and peacebuilding, is also
an investment in keeping millions of people alive, as
was rightly observed by former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan in his report entitled "In larger freedom:
towards development, security and human rights for
all" (A/59/2005).

As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
Nigeria shall continue to show an active interest in
all matters related to the maintenance of international
peace and security and to contribute to the endeavours
of the United Nations in that area.

Nigeria's peacekeeping contingents have served in
many lines and climes since our independence in 1960,
and have brought comfort and security to countless
numbers of innocent civilians in many countries. We
pledge to continue our constructive engagement with
the United Nations in upholding the Charter of the
United Nations and in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

We note that in recent years - especially given the
changing nature of conflicts and the complex demands
of peacekeeping, peacebuilding and post-conflict
national reconstruction 4 the traditional role of United
Nations peacekeeping, which had hitherto focused
on the strict observance of ceasefires, has given way
to much more complex and multitasked operations.
Today, peacekeeping has become a multidimensional
endeavour in which a variety of objectives are
pursued at the same time. No doubt, that has added
a huge burden to the United Nations and requires
considerable funding to operate successfully. Not only
that, peacekeeping contingents must now include a
variety of actors 4 from civilian advisers to police and
military personnel - who not only enforce the peace
but also undertake reconstruction, reconciliation and
the restoration of institutions. There is also no doubt
that that informed the wisdom behind the Security
Council's decision to include peacebuilding as part of
the overall mandate of peacekeeping operations.

It is our considered view that, as much as it has
become necessary 4 indeed essential 4 for the
international community to undertake peacekeeping
operations, it must still be our understanding that
conflicts and wars are unacceptable, and that they
should as much as possible be prevented from breaking
out in the first place. We would like to see the world's
resources, especially those of the United Nations,
focused on preventing conflicts from breaking out. We
believe that more resources should be dedicated to the
prevention, rather than the amelioration, of conflicts.
We also deem it important that the United Nations
develop full capacities to monitor all global hotspots
likely to degenerate into hostilities, take timely action
to prevent outbreaks. However, since peacekeeping
is still necessary, and indeed an indispensable factor
in the work of the United Nations, we believe that the
following issues should be noted in all such activities.

First is the establishment of interlocking systems
of peacekeeping capacities that will enable the United
Nations and regional organizations, such as the African
Union, to work together. Also, reserve capacities should
be created to be tapped by both the United Nations and
regional partners.

Secondly, we should increase the civilian
components in mandates ofall peacekeeping operations,
in order to enhance post-conflict reconstruction, a
deepening of security sector reform and the rebuilding
of civilian institutions.

Thirdly, we should increase both the monitoring
and oversight capacities of Member States and of the
Secretariat in all peacekeeping operations, to ensure
the observance of the rule of law and the rules of proper
conduct by members of contingents.

Fourthly, we should work to include local peace
resources, such as women's groups, youth and civil
society organizations, religious leaders, traditional
rulers and other community and grass-roots leaders,
among others, as integral parts of all peacekeeping
operations.

F ifthly, we should provide adequate resources to the
Secretariat to undertake better organized and results-
oriented integrated peacekeeping and peacebuilding
missions.

Finally, it is the View of my delegation that
troop-contributing countries with vast experience
should be considered for peacekeeping missions with
peacebuilding tasks in their mandates. The accumulated
expertise gathered in previous operations will make
them prepared to adequately face the challenges and
achieve the desired specific objectives of mandates. In
addition, such troop-contributing countries require little
or no predeployment training on the implementation of
enhanced mandates, thereby saving the United Nations
and the world at large a substantial amount of financial
and material resources.

