Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank the Belgian presidency for organizing this very important briefing today. We warmly welcome the presence of and statement delivered by His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany, and appreciate the German initiatives to promote support for the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) ahead of the upcoming Review Conference of the States Parties in May. We also thank High Representative Nakamitsu and Ambassador Zlauvinen for their informative briefings. After half a century and nine Review Conferences, the NPT remains the universal cornerstone of nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament. It provides a framework for preventing a nuclear war catastrophe, pursuing nuclear disarmament and _ promoting international cooperation on peaceful uses. Great achievements have been recorded in the field of peaceful applications of nuclear energy. Many efforts have been undertaken to strengthen and universalize the non-proliferation regime. I would like to commend the role and contributions of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in those two fields, and of the Security Council vis-a-vis non-proliferation. Nuclear disarmament has seen some progress, but it still falls far short of the expectations of the international community. Today, nuclear arsenals remain capable of destroying humankind hundreds of times over. Any use of nuclear weapons - by intention, by accident or by miscalculation - would threaten international peace and security. Fifty years later, what remains undiminished is the insecurity of non-nuclear States, especially those that have seriously implemented their non-proliferation obligations in good faith. Viet Nam reaffirms its strong support for the strict and balanced implementation of the NPT across all three pillars: nuclear non-proliferation, disarmament and peaceful uses. We have joined all international efforts on non-proliferation, including various universal and regional treaties; adhered to the IAEA's highest standards on safeguards; and continued to seriously implement the relevant Security Council resolutions. As we approach the fiftieth anniversary of the entry into force of the NPT, we would like to stress the following. First, confidence-building measures should be actively pursued, both among nuclear-weapon States and between them and non-nuclear-weapon States. Good relations, genuine intentions and concrete steps towards disarmament - even if small - among nuclear-weapon States can lower the risk of nuclear war. Negative security assurances, support for nuclear- weapon-free zones and assistance in peaceful uses from nuclear-weapon States can encourage stronger adherence tonon-proliferation bynon-nuclear- weapon States. Secondly, non-proliferation obligations under the NPT and the relevant Security Council resolutions should be implemented in a serious and consistent way. Stronger efforts should be made to ensure adherence to and the entry into force of all related international treaties, including the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test- Ban Treaty. Thirdly, nuclear disarmament efforts should be made by nuclear-weapon States, individually or collectively, as a tangible way to implement article VI of the NPT, including the possibility of joining the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in the future. Fourthly, the regime of nuclear-weapon-free zones should be strengthened through the effective implementation of related treaties and the adherence of nuclear-weapon States to existing ones, as well as the creation of new zones, including in the Middle East. Here, we call on the nuclear-weapon States to sign the Protocol to the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone. Fifthly, dialogue and negotiations should continue in good faith to resolve difficult issues, including those related to North-East Asia and the Middle East. To conclude, five out of the nine Review Conferences held so far have failed to reach consensus. On the twentieth anniversary of the entry into force of the NPT, the cause of peace and the spirit of humanity must prevail. Let us join hands and even the odds.
