The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.

I would like to welcome - this time in my
national capacity - the Secretary-General and
Presidents Tadie and Sejdiu.

I have to empathize with your predicament,
Mr. Secretary-General. I feel your pain. You have heard
opposition from some members to your reconfiguration
plan. Most members have endorsed your plan. Faced
with the dramatic developments in Kosovo that you
have described and a Security Council that has been
unable to react to those developments, I understand that
you had to act. I understand further that resolution 1244
(1999) gives you that discretion. Just as resolution 1244
(1999) was the basis for your predecessor's creation of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), it is the basis for your
reconfiguration of UNMIK to ensure that the United
Nations presence in Kosovo remains relevant and on
top of such dramatic changes on the ground.

Against that backdrop, the United States
appreciates the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/354) on the reconfiguration of the United
Nations presence in Kosovo. The issue before us is
whether the United Nations presence in Kosovo should
remain static and incapable of evolving to deal with the
reality on the ground, or whether it should adapt and
adjust appropriately to recent events and remain
relevant. I would like to make four points in response
to the Secretary-General's report.

First, the United States believes that the
Secretary-General has discretion to reconfigure
UNMIK. We support the initiative he has taken to do
so. As I will describe in a moment, the United States
has some concerns about that initiative; but, on
balance, that initiative may prove to be the most
practical way forward.

The Secretary-General's conclusion that the
United Nations must adapt to the evolving situation on
the ground should surprise no one. As far back as 2005,
the then United Nations envoy Kai Eide reported that
the Organization's leverage in Kosovo was declining
and that new international actors, in particular the
European Union (EU), would need to play a leading
international role. The United Nations administered
Kosovo for nine years, much longer than anyone
imagined when the Council adopted resolution 1244
(1999) in June 1999. As the years have passed, the
Secretary-General has continually adjusted the United
Nations presence in Kosovo and its relationship to
other international organizations. The fact that
Kosovo's democratic and multi-ethnic Government is
now ready to govern is a testament to the success of the
United Nations in institution-building.

The Secretary-General's continued cooperation
with international organizations, particularly the
European Union, will ensure that there is appropriate
oversight by the international community and that
Kosovo continues its progress in building a more stable
society.

My second point is that the United States finds
certain elements in the Secretary-General's report to be
troubling. The Secretary-General has proposed a new
round of United Nations dialogue with Belgrade to
discuss institutional arrangements within the State of
Kosovo. We believe that such dialogue should always
be encouraged, particularly if United Nations officials
can facilitate the support of the Government in
Belgrade for multi-ethnic institutions in Kosovo.
Nonetheless, any institutional arrangement for Kosovo
must be discussed with and agreed to by the
Government in Pristina. This dialogue must be
transparent with regard to both its agenda and its
objectives and must be thoroughly coordinated with the
major international stakeholders who will assume
responsibility for security and stability in Kosovo.

We understand the concern of President Tadie for
Kosovo Serbs, who of course remain Serb citizens
within Kosovo. I hope that it is that concern that
motivates him to engage in this dialogue on Kosovo's
institutions rather than a desire to undo or undermine
their reconfiguration.

I also note with concern language in the
Secretary-General's report that could be construed as
proposing a more robust and long-term United Nations
role in Kosovo than is warranted. Our view is that the
Secretary-General should have acknowledged more
explicitly that the United Nations can no longer play
such a major role in Kosovo under the present
circumstances.

Thirdly, I would note that the Council should be
encouraged by the rapid progress that Kosovo has
achieved since independence. That progress justifies
the Secretary-General's decision to reconfigure the
United Nations presence. We are pleased to see that
Kosovo's transition to independence has gone more
smoothly than some sceptics had expected. Kosovo's
multi-ethnic Government has enthusiastically begun to
implement the minority rights framework proposed by
former United Nations Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari.
The Kosovo Assembly has adopted key laws to
implement the Ahtisaari plan in areas such as
decentralization of local government and protection of
cultural heritage and the rights of ethnic communities
and their members. Kosovo's new constitution meets
the highest international human rights standards and
incorporates rights and protections contemplated in the
Ahtisaari plan.

Nevertheless, serious problems remain, and
Kosovo has much work to do to fight corruption,
implement market reforms and build better institutions.
But the political maturity shown by President Sedjiu
and other Kosovar leaders, particularly through their
words and actions to reach out to Kosovo's minorities,
demonstrates that Kosovo has a bright future.

My fourth and final point is that Belgrade's
efforts to promote ethnic separation in Kosovo threaten
to reverse the progress that the United Nations and the
people of Kosovo have achieved. The Secretary-
General's report correctly notes that Serbia will
continue to have a relationship with Kosovo Serbs.
Indeed, the Ahtisaari plan provided for that relationship
to continue and proposed a transparent mechanism for
Belgrade to support Kosovo Serb communities. But
Belgrade has openly decided to use that relationship to
discourage Kosovo Serbs from cooperating or even
talking with their Kosovo Albanian neighbours.

On 22 March, Serbia's Minister for Kosovo
publicly characterized Belgrade's plan as the functional
division of Serbs and Kosovo Albanians in Kosovo. To
implement that plan, Belgrade sponsored parallel
municipal elections in Kosovo, which the United
Nations correctly declared illegal and contrary to
resolution 1244 (1999). Belgrade also pressured Serbs
to withdraw from Kosovo's multi-ethnic institutions,
which were established under United Nations auspices.
Belgrade is now supporting a Serb parliamentary
assembly in Kosovo in an attempt to solidify parallel
institutions. Belgrade has also tried to extend indirect
control over northern Kosovo, where Serb-instigated
violence resulted in the death of a United Nations
police officer in March.

Such policies of ethnic partition and separation
run contrary to the principles of the United Nations
Charter and threaten to undermine nine years of efforts
by the international community to promote multi-ethnic
governance in Kosovo. The United States has long
believed that Serbia, a great nation and a regional
leader, has a bright and prosperous future in Euro-
Atlantic institutions. We therefore encourage Belgrade's
new Government to encourage Kosovo Serbs to
participate in multi-ethnic institutions in Kosovo.
In conclusion, as the period of United Nations
administration over Kosovo comes to a close, we look
forward to working with the Secretary-General to
protect the positive legacy of the United Nations of
peace and democracy in Kosovo. 1 want to end by
congratulating the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Zannier, and to thank
Mr. Riicker and all the men and women who work with
him for their service in Kosovo.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

The President of the Republic of Serbia, His
Excellency Mr. Boris Tadic', has asked to make a
statement, and I give him the floor.

