The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.

Russia is profoundly concerned at what is
happening. The information provided by Under-
Secretary-General Kieran Prendergast at today's
briefing during Council consultations pointed to gross
violations of the norms of international law in the
occupied Palestinian territories, a large number of
casualties among the civilian population and
impediments caused by Israel to the activities of
international humanitarian organizations. We have no
grounds not to believe the information provided by
Mr. Prendergast.

Holy sites in Palestinian territories are under
threat, including the Church of the Nativity in
Bethlehem, which for many days now has been
blockaded by Israeli forces. According to information
that reaches us, shooting is taking place around the
church and a fire has started in neighbouring buildings.

A comprehensive settlement in the region can be
achieved only through political dialogue. There can be
no military solution. We strongly call upon the Israeli
and Palestinian leaders to immediately implement all of
the provisions of resolutions 1397 (2002) and,
particularly, 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002), to urgently
declare a ceasefire, to immediately stop the incursion
by Israeli forces into Palestinian towns and to begin the
withdrawal of those forces.

It is essential to stop the destruction of the
structures of the Palestinian Authority and the isolation
of Chairman Arafat, who is the leader of the
Palestinian people. It is precisely he who should lead
Palestinian efforts to normalize the situation.

More and more, members of the international
community - and we were convinced about this at
today's briefing - are concluding that unless there is
an international presence in the occupied territories, it
will be impossible to reverse the current course of
events along military lines. We think that the Security
Council should be ready in the most serious manner
possible urgently to consider this question. The further
uncontrolled course of events would be extremely
dangerous and could lead to long-term undermining of
Palestinian-Israeli and Arab-Israeli relations.

A new pocket of tension is already growing
around the Blue Line. Therefore, at this stage, I stress
once again that it is essential to ensure the
implementation of resolution 1402 (2002). The
Security Council is united in this. It has called upon the
parties to fully cooperate to that end with the "quartet".
It will persist in seeking implementation of its
decisions.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I should like to inform Council members that I
have received letters from the representatives of
Lebanon, Mauritania, the Republic of Korea and the
United Arab Emirates in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda.

In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Diab

(Lebanon), Mr. Ould Deddach (Mauritania),

Mr. Sun Joun-yung (the Republic of Korea), and

Mr. Al-Shamsi (the United Arab Emirates) took

the seats reserved for them at the side of the

Council Chamber.

Moreover, I wish to inform Council members that
the Arab Group, in particular the delegation of Syria,
has asked to hold consultations today to introduce the
draft resolution. Since, in any case, we will have to
conclude our work by 7 pm, we will conclude this
official part of the meeting at 6.30 pm. and move to
the consultations room, so that the Syrian delegation
can then introduce the draft resolution. The
continuation of today's discussion will be resumed
tomorrow at 10.30 a.m.

We will now continue with our meeting. The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Tunisia. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.

