Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would first like to
join others in expressing my appreciation to Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix and Assistant Secretary-
General Gilmour for their comprehensive briefings. We
also thank the Secretary-General and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for their special
report on the strategic assessment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) (S/2019/445).

We have all said time and again that the overall
security situation in Darfur has remained relatively
stable. To borrow the language of paragraph 40 of the
special report, there has been "no strategic reversal
of the positive trajectory with regard to Darfur since
the previous mandate renewal". Indeed, the improving
security situation has enabled the start of the phased
withdrawal of UNAMID, including the handover of
two UNAMID sector headquarters in the past month.
My delegation is encouraged by the continued decline
in intercommunal conflicts made possible by the active
engagement of State and local authorities, supported by
UNAMID. However, we note with concern the recent
loss of innocent lives in the village of Deleij in Central
Darfur, and commend UNAMID's swift response in
dispatching an assessment mission. Today I would like
to make three important points.

First, we must ensure UNAMID's responsible
drawdown and exit. I would like to stress the word
"responsible". We concur that UNAMID'S exit should
not create a vacuum and expose the country's long-
suffering civilians to renewed risks. We regret that some
of the team sites that have been handed over are not
being used for civilian purposes, have been abandoned
or are becoming unusable. We also deplore the looting
of UNAMID sector headquarters in El Geneina during
its handover to the Sudanese authorities last month,
which is unacceptable and put United Nations personnel
at grave risk. The Sudanese authorities and UNAMID
must take measures to strengthen the protection of
UNAMID premises and personnel so as to prevent
similar incidents from occurring. We are nevertheless
pleased to learn that UNAMID's withdrawal from
areas previously under its control has had only
minimal adverse effects. The Council's deliberations
on UNAMID's further drawdown should be guided
by the options presented in the special report and take
into consideration the communique of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union (AU) of 13 June.

Secondly, addressing the persistent challenges in
Darfur is a huge undertaking and requires sustained
international engagement. The support of UNAMID, the
AU High-Level Implementation Panel and the Special
Envoy for the Horn of Africa is crucial to advancing
the Darfur peace process. All the parties on the ground
should end hostilities and direct their energies to the
negotiating table.

We note with concern that human rights
violations continue to occur across Darfur and tend
to be underreported. UNAMID should continue its
instrumental role in supporting capacity-building
and strengthening rule-of-law institutions. Greater
efforts must be made to ensure that the Government
is able to bear its primary responsibility to protect
civilians. Promoting socioeconomic development is
equally critical to prevent a relapse into conflict in
Darfur. Durable solutions are desperately needed for
the 1.8 million internally displaced persons in Darfur,
and the humanitarian actors must be given the space
to deliver assistance to those in need. Indonesia would
like to highlight the best practices of State liaison
functions in enabling UNAMID, the United Nations
country team and the Sudanese authorities to work
together on peacebuilding in Darfur. Support for State
liaison functions should be among the main focuses of
UNAMID's mandate in its final year.

That brings me to my third point. My delegation
continues to observe the developments in the Sudan and
their potential impact on the security situation in Darfur
very carefully. Indonesia reaffirms its principle of
non-interference and respect for Sudanese sovereignty.
We underline the primacy of African-led initiatives
in the quest for a lasting solution in the Sudan. My
delegation would also like to commend the role of the
Prime Minister of Ethiopia in assisting the Sudanese
stakeholders in resuming their talks. In the meantime,
we urge all stakeholders to exercise calm and maximum
restraint, and act in a way that supports a climate of
peace in the country and preserves the gains made so
far in Darfur.

We are now at a critical phase of UNAMID's
drawdown. Indonesia is proud to have been a troop- and
police-contributing country to UNAMID since 2008.
There is no doubt that its work has achieved a great deal
in Darfur. Some ongoing challenges remain, but there
is a limit to what the mission can do. For Indonesia, the
priorities now are to build on the work of UNAMID and
support the transition to peacebuilding. Indonesia was
a member of the Security Council during UNAMID's
creation in 2007, and in 2019 is proud to be a part of the
Council that will hopefully bring UNAMID's mandate
to an end. I also hope that the mission will be a success
story in the annals of the Council in bringing peace to
the people of the Sudan.

I would like to add that no military or police
personnel anywhere in the world want to be in a
conflict, but if need be they will put their lives in
harm's way for the cause of peace. As a diplomat, I for
one would be glad to bring our women and men home
safely from a mission that has done well. We therefore
hope once again that peace will continue in Darfur. I
would like to conclude by reaffirming our support for
our Sudanese brothers and sisters in taking ownership
of their destiny and in their quest to find a peaceful
solution for their country.

