Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me,
as previous delegations have done, to thank the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Petritsch,
for his comprehensive and instructive briefing on
developments in the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since mid-April 2000.

My delegation believes that despite the
difficulties encountered there has been real progress,
even if slow, in the implementation of the Dayton
Accord. My delegation would like to welcome and
support the commendable efforts made by Ambassador
Petritsch and his team.

My delegation welcomes the important political,
economic and social decisions made by the Peace
Implementation Council at its meeting on 23 and 24
May 2000 in Brussels. Also, my delegation welcomes
and encourages such positive steps as the establishment
of a new Council of Ministers and the approval of its
chairmanship, the adoption of an electoral law, the
holding of municipal elections on 8 April 2000, the
preparations for general elections in November and the
single passport, because they are consonant with the
idea of consolidating the foundations of democracy and
the multi-ethnic nature of the State.
My delegation strongly encourages the efforts to
reform the judiciary, which will strengthen State
institutions. My delegation believes that institutional
reforms must be accompanied by economic reforms
and that economic development is the best guarantee of
peace. In this respect, we invite the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to continue with the
macroeconomic reforms undertaken and to cooperate
fully with the international financial organizations.

My delegation is very pleased to note the massive
return of refugees. We believe that this trend should be
strongly encouraged by the international community,
and subsequent steps should be taken to that end.

Finally, my delegation strongly supports and
encourages the efforts of the international community,
which should spare no effort to ensure that the Dayton
peace process is irreversible and that it strengthens the
multi-ethnic nature of the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

