Mr. Priedkalns (Latvia): Allow me to share in the
condolences at the untimely passing of our esteemed
colleague, Mr. Blondin Beye, in the line of duty.

On behalf of the Government of Latvia, may I
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your leadership of this
important debate. It has often been said that a sign of a
civilized society is the caring way in which it deals with
those of its members least able to defend themselves.
Children are certainly among those who lack the political
and legal means to defend their rights. Thus it is our
strong conviction that support for the role of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General as an advocate
for the protection of children affected by armed conflict
be expressed in terms of specific proposals and
allocations.

There are various estimates, but they all refer not to
thousands but rather to millions of children affected by
war in the last decade. They have been killed in armed
conflict, seriously injured, orphaned or left homeless.
Many others have fallen victim to disease, deprivation or
sexual abuse. This is unacceptable; it is also partly
avoidable.

The rights of the child are primarily the
responsibility of States, but international efforts to protect
children must become more obvious and adequate
resources provided. In aligning with the proposals made
by the European Union, we wish to ensure demobilization
of child soldiers and promote their physical and

 

psychological recovery and social integration after the
conflict. We wish also to ensure that international human
rights standards and mechanisms be applied to children in
situations of armed conflict; that the Convention on the
Rights of the Child include reference to the prohibition of
children in armed conflict; and with regard to international
sanctions, that their effect on children be assessed.

The mandate of the Committee on the Rights of the
Child to monitor implementation of the Child Convention
in all States parties must be supported by Governments,
non-govemmental organizations and international bodies.
Public opinion must be mobilized to achieve that.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict must be supported by
Governments, by non-governmental organizations and by
international structures, and the work of the Special
Representative should be coordinated with other parts of the
United Nations system, such as the United Nations
Children's Fund, the High Commissioner for Refugees, and
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.

In caring for children, let us also not forget that a
dialogue between regional, national and international
authorities is essential for success in this area to be
attained. Let us also take note, therefore, of such local
societal traditions and values and such moral
responsibilities, highly esteemed by regional communities,
which are also consistent with the ideals of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child.

