Mr. Deng (South Sudan): I express my appreciation
to you, Madam President, for this opportunity to
address the Security Council once again. It was only
about one week ago that I addressed the Council on
Abyei (see S/PV.7276). I realize that the frequency
with which I am honoured to address the Council is a
manifestation of the compelling crises in our country.
As I have repeatedly said, while it is painful to listen
to accounts of what is going on in our country, I see no
value in being defensive or in denial.

My remarks today will be very brief and will
focus on a few salient points. I would first like to
express appreciation for the Secretary-General's report
(S/2014/708), which, though it paints a very disturbing
picture of the situation in our country, demonstrates his
characteristic compassion for our people's plight and
his determination to mobilize international support for
us.
I would also like to express our deep appreciation
for the work of the two ladies we have just heard,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, and Ms. Ellen Margrethe Laj, the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
South Sudan. I have had the pleasure of interacting
with both and have been impressed by the way they
balance credibility and compassion in their accounts
and assessment of the situation with sensitivity to the
perspective of the national leadership. I would like
to congratulate Ms. Bangura on her successful visit
to South Sudan and on signing with President Salva
Kiir a communique expressing the Government's
commitment to her mandate's objectives. And although
Ellen Loj modestly emphasizes how brief her time in
the country has been, she has already made a positive
impression on her interlocutors, especially in the way
she balances sensitivity and diplomacy with candour in
addressing the difficult issues. I believe that both have
adopted an approach that constructively engages the
authorities in a way that fosters productive cooperation.
It is my strong belief that candour in dialogue need not
conflict with a cooperative relationship.

Despite the devastation the conflict has wrought
in our country, the prompt and supportive response
of our subregional and regional organizations, and of
the United Nations and the international community
at large, is a commendable demonstration of shared
responsibility for peacemaking and the protection of
civilians from physical threats and humanitarian needs.
I had the honour of accompanying members of the
Security Council on their field visit to Malakal, where
we saw internally displaced persons (IDPs) in a dire
situation, living in wetlands and without sanitation.
Members of the Council were deeply and visibly moved
both by the conditions they saw and what the IDPs had
to say. The challenges are formidable for South Sudan,
a country that had already been devastated by war for
half a century before the latest outbreak of violence.
South Sudanese society has not only been shattered, it
has been heavily militarized by small but deadly arms
that have been spreading for decades. That cancer must
be urgently addressed.

It has been correctly noted that the current
conflict is primarily a political rather than an ethnic
one between Dinka and Nuer. However, its ethnic
character has increased, both in perception and where
there have been targeted killings, which have created
deep cleavages between groups that otherwise have a
great deal in common. Nevertheless, there are Dinkas
and Nuers living peacefully side by side, and there are
members of all groups in the national Government, as
there are also ethnic representatives on both sides of
the conflict.

In this conflict, leadership is of course critical to
restoring peace, unity and reconciliation, but a great
deal more must be done to sensitize the population
to the challenge and promote a broad-based healing
process leading to sustainable peace and national
reconciliation. The recent intra-party talks in Arusha
facilitated by President Jakaya Kikwete of the United
Republic of Tanzania are an encouraging step towards
putting South Sudan on the path to national healing,
justice and accountability. It is also a significant
complement to the peace process facilitated by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development.

As I have had occasion to listen to both Ms. Bangura
and Ms. Laj, I have said that sexual violence and
military exploitation of children are antithetical to our
cultural values. In the traditional society in which I
grew up and that I studied in depth, ifa man committed
any form of rape, he would have been so ostracized that
he would have been forced to leave the community and
migrate to an area where his background was unknown.
In battles, women and children could not be harmed.
Far from it - if a woman protected a wounded warrior,
that man could no longer be targeted. What we are
witnessing now is a breakdown of the traditional social
order and related cultural values. It is my opinion that
we must reorient our people so that they can appreciate
that current behaviour patterns in our country violate
not only international norms but their own cultural
values as well.

For historical reasons whose roots continue to feed
into their current internal and cross-border conflicts,
the Sudan and South Sudan are paradoxically bound
together by conflict. We call on the international
community to support the improving relations between
the two countries and help them resolve their internal
conflicts, since that is the only way their bilateral
relations can be substantially grounded on a sound and
constructive foundation.

On a different but related issue, while we appreciate
the reasons for reconsidering the priorities of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, we believe
that capacity-building remains critical to assisting the
country to live up to standards of good governance,
respect for human rights and civilian protection. In
particular, building the capacity of the police and
associated security elements is vital ifwe are to achieve
the objectives we would all like to see pursued.

Finally, while we recognize that there are many
challenging issues to be resolved in our relationship with
the United Nations and the international community,
we remain deeply appreciative of our joint cooperation
and would like to assure the Council of our willingness
to continue to improve it.

Once again, I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for giving me the opportunity to address the
Council on this issue ofvital importance to my country.

