Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
Since this is my first opportunity this month to address you,
Mr. President, allow me first to congratulate you on your
outstanding conduct of the Council's deliberations. The
delegation of Canada has greatly appreciated your effective
guidance of the Council's work this month.

I also wish to take this opportunity to congratulate the
Permanent Representative of China, Ambassador Qin
Huasun, and his delegation on the excellent manner in
which they led the work of the Council in May.

Canada is highly pleased by the Council's
consideration today of the draft resolution before it on the
situation in Haiti. We are happy to note that all Council
members remain committed to assisting the Haitian people
in its efforts to consolidate democracy and to rebuild the
economy of Haiti.

By its decision to establish the United Nations Support
Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH), the Council will clearly
demonstrate the international community' s determination to
pursue its commitment to consolidating democracy in Haiti.
The United Nations presence in Haiti has been an essential
complement to the Haitian people's efforts to build a
democratic, safe and fair society. It is therefore very
encouraging to see the Council today, on behalf of the
United Nations, proving that it is determined to continue
these efforts.

Before going into greater detail on the role of
UNSMIH, I cannot fail to recognize the contribution of the
men and women who participated in the United Nations
Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) and helped it to achieve the
goals that we established for its work in Haiti. Their
presence made it possible to establish a stable
environment throughout the country. It allowed the
training of thousands of Haitian police officers to go
forward. It also provided the Haitian people with the
opportunity to begin the social and economic
reconstruction of their country. They made an important
contribution, and I wish to convey the sincerest thanks of
the Canadian Government to Special Representatives
Brahimi and Ter Horst, to the police and military force
commanders and to the soldiers and police officers of
UNMIH for a job well done.

(spoke in English)

The end of UNMIH signals that a further important
step forward has been taken by the Government and the
people of Haiti. In recognition of this progress, the
Council will now establish a new Mission, one which is
significantly reduced in size and to which the Council has
given a new, leaner mandate. As the Haitian National
Police (HNP) develops its policing role and becomes
more effective, different and more specific tasks are
required of the United Nations Mission supporting it.
UNSMIH's mandate reflects this trend.

It is clear that a United Nations mission is still
required. President Preval made clear in his request to the
Secretary-General earlier this month that the Government
and the people of Haiti were counting on assistance
provided by the United Nations over the coming months
to strengthen Haiti's National Police force. He said very
clearly that the newly established HNP was not yet in a
position to assume sole responsibility for the maintenance
of order and security in his country. Haiti's Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Fritz Longchamp, reiterated this view
when the Friends met with him yesterday.

Fear continues to reign in some parts of Haiti, and
public order is maintained only with difficulty. Police
officers, newly graduated and deployed throughout the
country, are not yet able to control fully outbreaks of
violence nor, in all cases, to provide the necessary
guidance to beleaguered citizens. Some incidents in the
past few months indicate a disturbing trend of violence
specifically directed against Haitian National Police
officers; indeed, some acts of violence have been
committed by young, inexperienced officers themselves.
Clearly, an international presence is still required to

 

maintain a climate of stability and to provide moral and
material support to Haiti's fledgling police force.

UNSMIH will maintain UNMIH's civilian police
(CIVPOL) component at a level of 300 personnel, 100 of
these officers being from Canada. With police training as
one of the main functions of the United Nations Mission,
we welcome the fact that the Security Council will maintain
this vitally important CIVPOL commitment.

UNSMIH will also include a small United Nations
military force to be deployed in Port-au-Prince only. In
Canada's view - a view which was shared by other troop
contributors - it was essential that the United Nations
maintain a military presence in Haiti. Without this military
presence, the civilian police officers would not have been
able to continue to work as they have, unarmed and often
located in small numbers in remote and inaccessible rural
communities. An effective military back-up is indispensable
in providing logistical support for CIVPOL and in serving
as a deterrent to violence against its officers.

The report of the Secretary-General, based upon the
United Nations assessments of the situation in the field,
suggests that a military force of at least 1,200 military
personnel is required to perform this function at a level of
risk acceptable to all involved. In fact, our own careful
calculations lead us to believe that a force of 1,300, rather
than 1,200, will be required to carry out the mandate as laid
out in the Secretary-General's report. We believe that a
smaller force could imperil both military and civilian police
personnel and would undercut the successes achieved by
UNMIH.

A force of this size was, however, larger than what the
Security Council was prepared to authorize for this Mission.
As a result, following on our decision in February and on
our significant continuing commitment to the people of
Haiti, Canada will continue to provide on a voluntary basis
many of the additional troops that will be required to ensure
that a United Nations force of sufficient size to fulfil the
mandate is deployed in Haiti. Canadian soldiers will thus
form a majority of the military forces to be deployed in
Haiti over the next five months.

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the
courage and tenacity of the Haitian people in working to
achieve stability, democracy and the rule of law in their
country. Canada is proud to be part of the United Nations
mission which is assisting them in achieving that goal. We
have all invested a great deal in bringing hope and
democracy to Haiti.

The promise of a better life for the people of Haiti
is, however, far from fulfilled. Yet the predators have
been kept at bay and the freely chosen Government in
Port-au-Prince is well launched in its efforts to improve
the circumstances of its people.

This new mandate will give five more months in
which to allow the roots of freedom and democracy to
take hold. Canada remains committed to the long-term
development of Haiti. Haiti's needs remain considerable,
and we urge other countries, agencies and institutions to
join us in providing generous and timely assistance to the
Haitian Government and the Haitian people, to build a
viable and fully functioning economy. Without this,
stability and security will remain elusive.

