Mr. Sandoval Cojulun (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the delegation of Uruguay for
organizing today's open debate and the briefers for their
respective statements. We also welcome the concept
note circulated by the presidency to focus our debate
(S/20l6/22, annex).

The current humanitarian crises facing the
international community require the attention of us
all. The number of displaced persons and refugees
and the degree of human suffering recorded in recent
months are causing great consternation. We condemn
the violations of international humanitarian law and
of human rights by certain States and non-State armed
groups, as well as their impunity for these violations
and abuses. Humanitarian access should be provided to
meet the basic needs of civilian populations in conflict
in a timely manner and without any hindrance.

Our delegation, as a troop-contributing country,
echoes the remarks made by Mr. Eliasson and the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations. The protection of civilians in
armed conflict is a basic principle of international
humanitarian law, a fundamental task of the Security
Council and a moral responsibility of the United
Nations.

Peacekeeping operations have evolved, and
international protection has been strengthened through
the implementation of specific mandates. We believe that
this evolution has been positive, as it has given priority
to some aspects of the broad scope of the protection
of civilians, particularly the protection of children and
women in conflict situations. But the challenges are
multiple, and we therefore recognize that there should
be better coordination in order to strengthen the role
of the United Nations, particularly with regard to strict
compliance with the zero-tolerance policy for all forms
of sexual exploitation and abuse. In this regard, we
welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General to step
up the Organization's prevention, implementation and
troubleshooting activities in relation to all forms of
misconduct.

The protection of civilians is a legal obligation.
We must demand that members of the security
forces, local militias or other armed groups who have
committed violations of international humanitarian
law or human rights be held to account. We reaffirm
that it is the primary responsibility of the troop- and
police-contributing countries to investigate without
delay any allegations of sexual exploitation or abuse.

Women and girls are the ones who suffer the most
devastating impact of armed conflict, particularly due
to the increasingly widespread use of gender-based
violence. However, women should not be considered
only as victims of war. They are the ones who ensure the
family's survival in the midst of chaos and destruction.
They participate actively in the promotion of peace
within their communities. However, it is undeniable that
there is room for improvement in promoting women's
participation at the negotiating table and in their role as
mediators, negotiators and technical experts in peace
processes.

Moreover, it is a source of concern to witness the
emergence of new and more radical groups, which have
changed the landscape of armed conflict. That is why
we believe that the focus on the protection of civilians
must evolve according to changing circumstances.

It is vital to build the capacity ofpublic institutions,
which often are either dismantled or weakened
following conflict. That, in turn, requires, among other
things, guaranteeing that the practice of protection
be both more coherent and more effective, and also
providing training to such forces. United Nations troops
cannot substitute for the State in the discharge of its
responsibility to protect its civilian population. When
States are unable or unwilling to honour this basic
commitment, major humanitarian disasters ensue.

It is vital that all instruments available to the
Council be used coherently, that they be adapted to the
type of crime perpetrated and that they contain strong
elements of deterrence, accountability and justice, in
cooperation with, inter alia, the International Criminal
Court. The lessons learned from conflict, from the
worst failures to best practices, should serve as a useful
guide in that endeavour.

