Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this meeting. Allow me also to
convey my thanks to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ashraf Qazi, for his statement
earlier in the meeting.

We also thank Ambassador Jackie Sanders for her
statement on behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq.
I am likewise grateful to the members of the Council
for their statements.

The Secretary-General's report before us provides
as usual an overview of the major developments in Iraq
in the international and regional contexts over the past
three months. It also covers the role played by the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
in providing assistance in various fields under the
mandate established by Security Council resolution
1546 (2004). In that regard, I would express the
appreciation of the Government and people of Iraq to
Mr. Qazi and UNAMI for their efforts. We are also
grateful to the United Nations agencies, programmes
and funds for their assistance, in particular in providing
basic social services. We continue to look forward to
UNAMI's playing an important and vital role in the
coming phase, in particular in the development of
electoral institutions and the constitutional review
process, in a manner that will strengthen national
reconciliation and dialogue. That will, of course,
require a larger United Nations presence in Iraq in the
near future.

As the Secretary-General's report indicates, Iraq
has recently witnessed an increase in acts of violence,
terrorism and sectarian bloodshed, in addition to
abductions and kidnappings. The situation has
prompted those within and outside the United Nations
who are concerned about the situation in Iraq to issue
serious warnings of a potentially dangerous
deterioration of the situation to the very brink of civil
war. In that regard, the Government of Iraq is fully
aware of who is carrying out those acts and of their
objectives. My delegation has addressed this issue
repeatedly before the Security Council. Those who
carry out such attacks are Saddam loyalists, the Takfiri
(charge of unbelief) extremists and criminal gangs.
Their ultimate goals may differ, but they share the
immediate objective of undermining the entire political

process. The Government will deal very forcefully and
decisively with that challenge. The political process in
Iraq is the fruit of a democratic exercise in the context
of which the legislative elections and constitutional
referendum were held within the time frame set out in
Security Council resolution 1546 (2004). Thus, to
defend the political process in Iraq is to defend
international legitimacy and the will of the
international community.

We reiterate our previous statements to the
Council to the effect that the Iraqi people, which has
succeeded over the past three years in completing the
political and constitutional processes, will also emerge
victorious in its battle for national dialogue and
reconciliation, the defeat of the terrorists and the
preservation of its unity and territorial integrity.

One of the principal factors of success in
combating the cycle of violence, terrorism and crime is
the broadening of participation in our political process,
which seeks to guarantee the active involvement of all
political parties and communities in Iraq. To that end,
on 25 June 2006, the Iraqi Government adopted a
national programme based on national dialogue and
reconciliation. The programme is built around a
national vision that political consensus is the only way
to halt the deterioration of the security environment.
That vision was reaffirmed by Iraq's National Security
Council at its meeting of 23 and 24 November and by
the Prime Minister on 26 November, when he said that

"sectarian violence will stop only when the
politicians agree and understand that there are no
winners and no losers in this battle".

In order to strengthen the national reconciliation
initiative, the Prime Minister said on 5 December that

"we intend to convene a national conference of
political actors in the near future, to include
various Iraqi political organizations, parties and
individuals participating in the political process,
in order to strengthen national unity and agree on
a national charter that will proscribe sectarian
strife and create opportunities for cooperation
among the various components of the Iraqi
people".

Any appeal for an international or regional
conference with similar ambitions will be welcomed by
the people of Iraq. The Government of Iraq will seek to
ensure its success. However, if the purpose of calling
for such a meeting is to circumvent the democratic
gains made by the Iraqi people and to take the political
process back to square one, that will be unacceptable,
not only because it will dash the wishes and hopes of
the Iraqi people, but also because it runs counter to the
resolutions of international legality and the will of the
international community.

Parallel to the process of national reconciliation,
the Government of Iraq is working to increase its
security capacity in order to impose State authority and
enforce the law. Likewise, the Government of Iraq is
working with the Multinational Force to complete the
gradual transfer of responsibility for security to Iraqi
forces as soon as possible.

On that basis, and given the Government of Iraq's
awareness of the need for the presence of the
Multinational Force until Iraqi security forces are able
to shoulder responsibility for security, in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 11 November
2006 (S/2006/888, annex), Iraq's Prime Minister
requested an extension of the mandate of the
Multinational Force for an additional year, until
31 December 2007 - or until an earlier date should
the Iraqi Government so request. The Prime Minister
also underscored in his letter the question of
transferring responsibility for security to the competent
Iraqi authorities, especially as this relates to the
Government of Iraq's responsibility for the
recruitment, training, equipping and arming of its
security forces and for command and control of Iraqi
forces and responsibility for the security situation.

With regard to the situation of human rights in
Iraq, it cannot be viewed in isolation from the
deteriorating security situation. Those rights are daily
being violated as a result of the actions of terrorists,
violence-mongers and criminal gangs. Clearly, the
more the security situation improves, the better the
chances for protecting human rights. The Government
of Iraq is serious about addressing the situation, both
by confronting terrorists and criminal gangs and
through the work of Government bodies responsible for
justice, law enforcement and prosecuting those who
perpetrate human rights violations. But collateral
human rights violations resulting from confrontations
between Iraqi security forces and terrorists and
criminal gangs cannot be put on the same level as
deliberate violations of human rights, foremost among
which is the right to life, that are perpetrated by
terrorist elements and criminal gangs on a daily basis

in schools, universities, marketplaces and houses of
worship. Such acts take the lives of hundreds of
innocent people, including women and children. The
difference between the two situations is enormous. We
should therefore not confuse matters, so as to retain a
sense of reality and truth.

The challenges confronting Iraq are great, and not
only in the areas of improving the security situation
and addressing the spiral of violence, terrorism and
crime. There are also challenges in the areas of
reconstruction and rehabilitation. Without the
assistance of the international community, Iraq will be
unable to rebuild the infrastructure needed to launch
the development of its economy by using its human
and natural resources to build a prosperous future. This
brings to the fore the importance of the International
Compact with Iraq, an initiative launched by the Iraqi
Government and based on a mutual commitment
between Iraq and the international community that
aims at establishing a partnership based on a national
vision aimed at fulfilling the Iraqi people's aspirations
to put in place a democratic federal State and to build a
prosperous economy through which Iraq can play its
full role as an effective member of the international
community.

Once again, we would like to express our
gratitude to the United Nations for its efforts in that
regard, as a co-chair of the International Compact with
the Government of Iraq. Along with the Secretary-
General, we look forward to the formal launch of the
International Compact with Iraq, whose date and venue
are under consideration.

