Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting on United Nations policing. We also commend
the leadership of the Italian presidency in preparing
and negotiating resolution 2382 (2017), which we
just adopted.

I express gratitude to Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing. We
are particularly thankful to the Police Commissioners
who briefed us today.
As an active police- and troop-contributing country,
Ukraine fully supports efforts to enhance the efficiency
the United Nations policing in field operations. We note
that, despite the challenges faced by the uniformed
personnel of the United Nations, United Nations police
contingents have a solid record of achievements. For
instance, the police component of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) played an
important role in ensuring stability and security during
particularly difficult times for Haiti. Its contribution
to strengthening the capacity of State institutions, in
particular the Haitian National Police, is second to none.

The transition to the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) testifies
both to the successful completion of MINUSTAH's
mandate and the readiness to move towards to a new
form of the presence of the United Nations in the
country. MINUJUSTH should provide crucial support
in advancing those important transformations and
consolidating the progress achieved. We have full
confidence that the new Mission will effectively deliver
on the mandated tasks, including further support and
development of the Haitian National Police.

Challenges faced by United Nations police
components on the ground have evolved significantly
and warrant thorough consideration by the Council.
On the other side of the globe, asymmetrical threats in
Africa remain an issue ofparticular concern in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). September and October
were among the deadliest months for peacekeepers
serving in Mali. Ukraine strongly condemns the recent
terrorist attacks on MINUSMA personnel.

The ongoing instability in Mali remains one of
the main factors causing a spillover of violence into
neighbouring countries. In that regard, we remain of
the view that security sector reform and the deployment
of the Malian police, defence and security forces
throughout the country to combat violent extremists
and maintain law and order are urgently needed.
Given the fact that MINUSMA remains the primary
target of terrorist attacks, along with the growing
sophistication of such attacks, we are convinced that
enhancing the safety and security of police personnel
and peacekeepers should be among the top priority
tasks of the Secretariat.

United Nations police must be adequately prepared
to undertake complex tasks in preventing, mitigating
and resolving violent conflicts and contributing to
early peacebuilding and reconciliation. In that regard, I
would like to highlight several points that we consider
important to further improve the efficiency of United
Nations policing.

First, Ukraine supports the development of the
Strategic Guidance Framework for International Police
Peacekeeping, which should provide a solid foundation
for strengthening international cooperation on United
Nations policing. Further efforts to ensure the full
implementation of the Strategic Guidance Framework
by all United Nations police components on the ground
should be taken as a matter of priority.

Secondly, predeployment and in-mission training
for police personnel of United Nations peace operations
should be enhanced. The Police Peacekeeping
Training Centre in Ukraine, with its predeployment
course certified by the United Nations, is one of our
contributions to that endeavour.

Thirdly, peacekeeping operations (PKOs) should
be provided with resilient mandates and advanced
technologies, so as to effectively contribute to ensuring
security and public order, including stopping illegal
cross-border flows of weapons, criminal elements,
foreign terrorist fighters along with mercenaries.
PKOs must possess the appropriate means and
resources necessary for the effective monitoring and
verification of ceasefire agreements and other relevant
arrangements, including on disarmament.

Finally, it is important to remain dynamic
in registering formed police units' commitments
through the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness
System. Timely troop generation and deployment are
prerequisites for any mission's success. To that end,
triangular cooperation among police-contributing
countries, the Secretariat and the Council should be
maintained and further developed. Equally critical is
the maximum engagement of women in United Nations
peace activities, as was rightly mentioned by Police
Commissioner Makotose.

Let me conclude by commending the Police
Commissioners who are with us today and theirpersonnel
for their dedicated service to the United Nations.
