Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
cannot begin my intervention without expressing, on
behalf of the Chilean Government and on my own
behalf, our most sincere condolences on the passing
away of the Force Commander of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, Lieutenant General Jose
Luiz Jaborandy, Jr. - to the Government of Brazil,
to General Jaborandy's family and to the members of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. For those
of us who were privileged to know and work with the
General Jaborandy, we knew well of his leadership
and his commitment to peace and security in Haiti.
Yesterday we lost a great soldier of peace.

We congratulate you and your team, Madam
President, for the outstanding conduct of the work of
the Security Council during the month of August.

We appreciate this public wrap-up session, which
is an important practice to continue. I should like to
mention a few issues that we believe merit follow-up: the
use of the veto, the process of the selection of the next
Secretary-General, sexual and gender-based violence
in conflict, and the unity of the Security Council with
regard to the peace and non-proliferation agreements of
recent months.

Unfortunately, in the month of July, the exercise
of the right of the veto (see S/PV.7498) prevented the
Council from adopting a product relating to the crime
of genocide. We reiterate the call to the members of
the Council who hold veto power to refrain from
making use of it when it comes to war crimes, crimes
against humanity or genocide. We support the code of
conduct proposed by the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group to those ends, and we hope that
many other countries will join the initiative as well as
similar ones in that vein.

We value the informal discussion of the Council on
its working methods and the use of the veto - held
during the presidency of New Zealand - as well as
the consultations regarding the selection process of the
Secretary-General, whether that be a man or a woman.
With such openness and transparency, we expect that
the Council will contribute harmoniously to the the
taking of that decision within the General Assembly as
well.

Regarding sexual violence and gender-based
Violence in conflict, on August 24 the United States
of America and Chile co-chaired the first Security
Council Arria Formula meeting on targeted attacks by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant on lesbian, gay,
bisexual and transgender persons. That meeting allowed
for the gathering of first-hand information on issues of
peace and security, including combating terrorism and
protecting civilians belonging to vulnerable groups.
The meeting also set a precedent on the issue not only in
the Council but throughout the United Nations system,
as evidenced by the high level of participation on the
part of Member States and civil society.

The consultations we held with the Secretary-
General on allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
by troops from the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic served to highlight the need for contingents
to receive training in human rights and for ensuring
the strict enforcement of the zero-tolerance tolerance.
That should be done while also ensuring that those
responsible are brought to justice and that the victims
are compensated and reintegrated. The system should
adequately address that matter, with particular focus on
the challenges faced by troop-contributing countries.

In addition to the information provided by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zainab Hawa
Bangura on her visit to the Middle East, we have seen
that sexual and gender-based violence must be addressed
in the various reports of the Secretary-General to
the Council, as well as in consultations - whenever
necessary - and not solely in the framework of an open
debate on the subject. One might add, as an additional
thought, that gender advisers should be included in
missions as a preventive measure, among others, to
avoid the use of sexual Violence as a tactic of war or
terror.

The adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), on
non-proliferation, and of resolution 2235 (2015), on
chemical weapons in Syria - as well as the treatment of
South Sudan - shows that the Council can be effective
if it acts in a unified and timely manner. The joint
action exercised by the Council to decisively influence
the signing of the agreement putting an end to the
20-month period of armed conflict in South Sudan is
the most recent proof that, when there is willingness
and a great deal of flexibility, it is possible to find a
basis for agreement to deal with items on the agenda
of the Council, even when legitimate differences may
exist. That is the approach that we feel should be
used to deal with other cases. The spirit of working
constructively should prevail, so that the Council can
assume its responsibility flowing from the Charter of
the United Nations.

We feel that other issues dealt with over recent
months have inded been very useful. However, we
would like to suggest that "Other matters" should also
include dynamic dialogues with briefers as well as
penholders - before the expected product - in order
to favour receiving information or an additional product
over repetitive rhetoric.

Finally, we wish the Russian Federation every
success in its presidency in September, and we reiterate
our support and commitment to cooperate with the
presidency in a constructive manner.

