Mr. Marles (Australia): May I start by thanking
Germany for the opportunity to address the Council on
the security implications of climate change. May I also
say what an honour it is for me to follow, in addressing
the Council, my colleague and good friend, His
Excellency Mr. Marcus Stephen, President of Nauru.

Climate change is a global threat, not an abstract
concern. It is already seriously affecting the planet.
Carbon dioxide levels are at their highest point in more
than a million years. It is an existential threat to many
small island developing States and low-lying countries.
The effects of climate change could reshape the future
global security environment by affecting the political
and social stability and economic security of
vulnerable countries. Increased extreme weather events
could further worsen food and water security
challenges, undermine community development,
compromise critical infrastructure, weaken State
governance and strain social cohesion. All countries
will face the adverse impacts of climate change, but the
most vulnerable peoples worldwide, who are least
responsible for the global challenges we are now
facing, will suffer the most.

As the Australian Parliamentary Secretary for
Pacific Island Affairs, I have travelled to some of the
countries that will be most affected by climate change.
Indeed, 20 of Australia's 22 closest neighbours are
developing countries, most of them small island
developing States.

In our region, one of the most significant impacts
of climate change will likely be sea-level rise caused
by a thermal expansion of the world's oceans and
melting glaciers and ice caps. Sea levels may rise by up
to 1 metre by the end of this century, resulting in more
severe storm surges, coastal inundation and loss of

territory. Never before has the international community
had to grapple with the reality that islands and low-
lying territories might become uninhabitable as a result
of sea-level rise. For low-lying island States such as
the Marshall Islands, a l-metre rise in sea level could
result in the erosion and loss of as much as 80 per cent
of the nation's capital, the Marshall Islands Majuro
Atoll.

When one stands on Majuro as I have, with
nowhere else to go, and sees the sea on either side of
that thin and flat strip of land, there is a sense of the
intense vulnerability felt by those living on small
islands. The sea, which is everywhere and has long
been a source of food, sustenance and comfort, is being
transformed into a source of anxiety and threat. In the
short-to-medium term, a combination of sea-level rise,
storms of greater intensity and inundation will put
greater pressure on coastal settlements and may lead to
further local displacements of populations. In the
longer term, if internal resettlement is no longer an
option, climate change could cause destabilizing
population movements as peoples" lives and
livelihoods are increasingly subject to risk.

Vulnerability to climate change is not limited, of
course, to island countries. Drought, flooding and soil
erosion exacerbated by climate change pose significant
threats to agricultural productivity and food and water
security in Africa and elsewhere. Desertification has
already consumed significant areas of land and will
continue to reduce the amount of arable land as climate
change worsens.

The only way to tackle the global challenge of
climate change is through robust global cooperation
and strong domestic action. Both are indispensable.
Both are complementary. We know that there has been
some concern about where responsibility for
addressing climate change lies within the United
Nations system. First, let me reaffirm that, in
Australia's view, the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is the
primary intergovernmental instrument for addressing
climate change. Australia's commitment to that process
was demonstrated by our domestic policy reform
inspired by the UNFCCC. On 10 July, Australian Prime
Minister Gillard announced that we will legislate a
carbon price to take effect from 1 July 2012. This has
been a difficult political debate in Australia but a
fundamentally critical piece of public policy reform. In
2020, our carbon price will have reduced Australia's
carbon pollution by 160 million tons - the equivalent
of taking 45 million cars off the road by 2020.

Secondly, let me equally reaffirm our
commitment to the fundamental role of the General
Assembly. Its unique and indisputable legitimacy
reflects the voice of its 193 members. Our commitment
to that role of the General Assembly is why Australia
was such a strong proponent of its resolution 63/281 in
June 2009, which specifically stated that the
overarching responsibility for sustainable development
issues, including climate change, rests with the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. We
considered it right and essential that this matter be first
addressed by the General Assembly. It was the General
Assembly that then invited all the relevant organs of
the United Nations to intensify their efforts in order to
consider all aspects of climate change, including its
possible security implications.

In this process, it seems to us that the Security
Council has a role to play as the principal organ
directly responsible for maintaining international peace
and security. That role includes consideration of the
root causes of conflict and political and social crises.
The Council addresses those issues through many
topics, including, for example, poverty and HIV/AIDS.
A focus on the potential security implications of
climate change is therefore relevant to its mandate and
does not - and should not - compete with the
mandates of the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council or the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change.

But ultimately, the question as to where the
responsibility for the issue of climate change lies is an
easy one. The overwhelming nature of the challenge of
climate change means that the responsibility lies with
all of us, in every forum. Australia remains seriously
committed to helping developing countries tackle
climate change. Least developed countries, small
island developing States and Africa have been given
the highest priority in the allocation of Australia's fast-
start package because they need it most urgently. These
are not the countries most responsible for the current
crisis we face, but they are the countries that will bear
the greatest burden. Of our $599 million fast-start
funding commitment made at Copenhagen, Australia
has so far allocated $498 million, more than 80
per cent.

In conclusion, Australia recognizes that climate
change is a threat to the stability of individual
countries and regions and has broad implications for
future global security. That is why we have supported
this debate. We also support calls for a report from the
Secretary-General on the capacity of the United
Nations system to respond to those impacts and on how
that capacity can be improved. Failure to act now on
the potential security implications of climate change
will exacerbate risks in the future. Improving
resilience, integrating climate risk into vulnerable
sectors of our economies, and strengthening our
disaster management capabilities are just some of the
urgent responses we must make to address these
security challenges. No serious Member State can deny
that climate change is a primordial threat to our planet.
We owe it to ourselves, to future generations, and to
the future of the planet itself to anticipate and act to
reduce that threat.

