Mr. Osman (Somalia): It is an honour for me
to speak again before the Security Council today.
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your country's assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. I wish to
assure you of my delegation's full support during your
term in office.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Kuwait, for his outstanding work on his watch in the
month of February.

I appreciate the Council's invitation and am pleased
to be present here to witness the adoption of the very
important resolution 2408 (2018), which I believe
provides essential assistance to our Government and
facilitates its policy of developing Somalia in the
areas of political inclusiveness, governance, economic
development and security, among other things. We
welcome this unanimous adoption and appreciate
the support and constructive engagement of Council
members in committing to support Somalia and my
Government's efforts to tackle the many complex
challenges it is facing. Though there may be nuanced
differences in how Council members assess the current
situation, we are united in recognizing the important
role that the United Nations will continue to play in
promoting peace and stability in Somalia.

I believe that the resolution adopted this morning
will ensure that the support of the United Nations and
the Security Council, and in particular of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), for
Somalia will be truly effective. We are also confident
that the Security Council, the international community
as a whole and other partners in the development of
Somalia's future will adhere to the principle that it
clearly expresses, which is that the current national
reconstruction efforts in which we are engaged in the
Somali Republic must be Somali-driven and must be
seen to be so.

That said, we remain deeply concerned about
comments that have periodically been made by senior
UNSOM. officials at conferences containing statements
on political issues on Somalia that are sometimes
erroneous. We are further troubled by the negative
effects that these statements have in the Security
Council and in Somalia. Those actions should not
distract Council members from the challenges and
issues on the ground. Accordingly, we strongly urge the
UNSOM. leadership to remain committed to carrying
out its duties, as set out in the Mission's mandate, and to
refrain from sensationalizing political trends, which can
be harmful to our current efforts in the Government-
led political process, as well as to peace and political
stability in Somalia.

The Somali Government will continue to strive for
unity and work to enhance constructive dialogue in
order to settle the outstanding issues between the Federal
Government and all regional authorities. Nonetheless,
we cannot tolerate any unconstitutional decisions taken
by regional authorities, including that of the north-

western region of Somalia -Somaliland - since such
actions may undermine Somalia's unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity, which are all guaranteed under
our Constitution.

In that regard, with our sights set on preserving the
unity of Somalia's territory and people, our Parliament
voted to unanimously reject the United Arab Emirates-
based Dubai Ports World agreement with the north-
western regional authority of Somaliland and to
commit the Government of Somalia to taking measures
to secure Somalia's unity and sovereignty under article
1 of our Constitution. Besides that, two years ago,
the United Arab Emirates signed an agreement with
Somaliland regional authorities to establish a military
base in Berbera, without the consent of the Federal
Government of Somalia. The Monitoring Group on
Somalia and Eritrea confirms in its latest annual report
(S/2017/924) that construction of the new facilities
is under way. The Monitoring Group further states
that the establishment of a foreign military base in
Berbera, involving the transfer of military material to
the territory, would constitute a violation of the arms
embargo on Somalia.

These actions taken by the United Arab Emirates
in Somalia are in clear violation of international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of
international relations and international cooperation.
The Federal Government of Somalia therefore calls
on the Security Council to take the necessary steps, in
accordance with its mandate, to maintain international
peace and security, put an end to those actions and
ensure the implementation of its resolution on Somalia.
The Federal Government of Somalia strongly condemns
these blatant violations and reaffirms that it will take the
necessary measures to deal with them, deriving from
its primary responsibility to defend the inviolability
of the sovereignty and unity of Somalia in accordance
with the Somali Constitution and international law
and covenants.

I should not end my remarks without once again
expressing to the Council the gratitude of the people
and the Government of the Federal Republic of
Somalia for the continued support of the United
Nations in preserving the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of our country and guaranteeing its peace and
political stability.

The meeting rose at10.25 am.
