Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Before proceeding with
my statement, let me too begin by expressing our
condolences to the people and the Government of
Afghanistan following the brutal attack in Kabul,
which targeted an election rally in Parwan. Thus far,
the attack has claimed the lives of at least 38 people.
We condemn this attack in the strongest terms and hope
that its perpetrators will be brought to justice.

Like my German colleague, allow me to thank
the many delegations that supported Indonesia and
Germany throughout the drafting of resolution 2489
(2019). Afghanistan is at a critical juncture and we
want to make sure that the Council can best support
the people of Afghanistan through the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). It
is simply our core business to give UNAMA a solid
and clear mandate that fully respects Afghanistan's
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

During the debate on UNAMA on 10 September
(see S/PV.8613), many countries sent a signal. We have
listened to their positions very carefully. We have also
listened to the views of all Council members, as well
as to the calls of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on the Council. During the course of
several negotiations, including one that continued until
late last night, we tried to accommodate the positions
and interests of various countries, and indeed we tried
our best to strike a delicate balance.

The result is the current co-penholder text that we
have just adopted. This text is acceptable to all and,
most importantly, unifies the Council once again.
That is the message that we want to send, and we are
happy that Council members could join consensus in
unanimously adopting the resolution, which we can be
proud of. We have always believed that the unity of the
Council would send a strong message of support to the
people of Afghanistan and foster full confidence in the
work of UNAMA.

We would like once again to thank all Council
members for their flexibility, support and active
engagement, which resulted in the adoption of a
resolution that extends the UNAMA mandate for 12
months. We would also like to particularly thank our
Chinese brothers, who were constructive throughout
the process. The resolution is critically needed, bearing
in mind that UNAMA's mandate will expire tonight.
As witnessed, we are always at the last minute, but the
Council has proven, once again, that it is able to reach
a consensus decision. At this juncture, UNAMA's work
is of crucial importance for the people of Afghanistan,
as well as for the international community. Through the
resolution, UNAMA will be able to fully support the
Government of Afghanistan in holding the upcoming
election scheduled for next week, on 28 September. We
hope that the people ofAfghanistan will have a credible,
transparent and inclusive election. The international
community stands with the people of Afghanistan.

In conclusion, as my colleague Mr. Heusgen did
before me, I would like to thank all our experts and our
political coordinator for their excellent work. I am quite
sure that a promotion is in store for them. I would also
like to thank all the experts from the other missions
involved in the discussion. Once again, my thanks for
reaching a consensus resolution. We hope this marks a
new beginning.
