I extend my congratulations. Twenty years ago, the Security Council made history by acknowledging that the increased representation of women at all levels of decision-making was essential to preventing, managing and resolving conflicts. By adopting resolution 1325 (2000), the Council responded to the calls of women's rights defenders, who continue to be crucial actors in any progress on women's rights. Over the past two decades, significant progress has been made in empowering women and protecting their rights. Switzerland welcomes such developments and notes encouraging measures around the world. In Colombia, former female combatants engaged successfully with the authorities to include gender and reintegration commitments in development plans. In Mali, despite being severely underrepresented in the transitional Government, women leaders of all political persuasions play a key role in the pursuit of inclusive solutions. Finally, in the Sudan, women have assumed a central role and have worked tirelessly for peace in the ongoing political transition. However, more needs to be done. The coronavirus disease pandemic has revealed the fragility of the progress made over the past two decades. As the Secretary-General pointed out in the report that forms the basis for today's discussion (S/2020/946), gender equality is at risk of reversal. The Council can, and must, do more to maintain the women and peace and security agenda across the various items on its agenda. This agenda is a key driver for change on the ground, and the Council is its most positive enabler. We need resolute action to increase women's meaningful participation and leadership in decision-making, combat sexual and gender-based violence and promote women peacebuilders and human rights defenders. Among the priorities for our collective action in the coming years, Switzerland emphasizes the following. First, the Council should systematically address the issue of women's full, equal and meaningful participation in peace and security, not only in its thematic work but also in all the country situation-related items on its agenda. The Security Council must take a strong position on the importance of recognizing, supporting and protecting women in their work in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and the promotion of respect for human rights. The inclusion of civil society is essential both in the Council and in implementation on the ground. In 2007, Switzerland was one of the first countries to adopt a national action plan to implement the women and peace and security agenda. Over time, we have learned the importance of inclusive and participatory processes to strengthen this agenda. Women's groups and civil society have played an important role in improving our national action plan. We even have a group of Swiss parliamentarians who act as ambassadors for the agenda. They are all partners who are closely involved in the implementation of the national action plan. Secondly, the Council should use the tools at its disposal to strengthen measures to combat sexual violence. To end impunity, it should promote a culture of deterrence. Sexual violence is too often used as a weapon of war. The Council's decision to establish stand-alone designation criteria related to sexual violence in the sanctions regimes against the Central African Republic and South Sudan reflected a paradigm shift. The Council must use all the targeted measures at its disposal against recidivist perpetrators of sexual violence and ensure the protection of all survivors. Thirdly, we need more women in peace operations. Switzerland, for example, encourages the participation of female police officers in United Nations missions and supports them during their recruitment, training, deployment and return. We know that diversity makes peacekeeping through civilian and military measures more effective, allowing better access to communities. We welcome the Council's unanimous adoption of resolution 2538 (2020), on the role of women in peacekeeping, in August. We also welcome the efforts of the United Nations to increase the number of women in peacekeeping missions, especially in leadership positions. Next year, Switzerland will further strengthen its commitment by assuming the co-chairmanship of the Women and Peace and Security Focal Points Network. Switzerland will remain strongly committed to the women and peace and security agenda. It is our collective responsibility to always keep our shared vision alive, redouble our efforts and take concrete action to implement this ambitious but indispensable agenda.
