Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): My delegation
welcomes His Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange
Touadera, President of the Central African Republic,
to New York and thanks him for his very insightful
analysis of his country's trajectory of development. We
also thank today's briefers - Under-Secretary-General
Herve Ladsous and the Permanent Representative of

Morocco, Mr. Omar Hilale - for their substantive
updates. Let me give my delegation's observations
on the three main aspects - political, security and

humanitarian - of the situation.

Kazakhstan commends and supports the leadership
of President Touadera in facilitating inclusive political
dialogue, which commenced on 12 October 2016, by
bringing together various actors to the negotiating
table. It is the only way to bring peace to the country.
We welcome the decision of the anti-balaka group to
join the dialogue. We praise the national disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation strategy,
as well as the national programme for reconciliation
and social cohesion adopted in November 2016, which
should all be strictly adhered to.

Recently launched by the African Union, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
Angola, Congo and Chad, the initiative for peace and
reconciliation agreement between the Government
and all armed group in the Central African Republic
is another possible platform for negotiations. The
mediating role of the African Union in the process is
central and must be fully supported by the international
community. Those two political initiatives must
supplement and reinforce each other to optimally
accelerate the stabilization of the security situation on
the ground.

Secondly, ongoing clashes in many parts of the
country - especially the recent fight for Bambari
between the Union pour la paix en Centrafrique
and the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique - are presently making the security
situation in the Central African Republic very fragile.
We welcome the military action by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) to protect
the civilian population and take control of Bambari.

Kazakhstan strongly condemns attacks on United
Nations peacekeepers and convoys. Furthermore, such
armed groups run the risk of exposing themselves to
additional international sanctions, which must be
followed strictly. Regional structures and institutions
with influence are urged to do everything in their power
to end the armed groups' violence. Kazakhstan hopes
that the functioning of the Special Criminal Court
and the appointment of the new prosecutor, with the
support of MINUSCA, will help to combat impunity.
This new legal framework should serve as impetus for
the remaining armed groups to join the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation process.

We support the high level of cooperation between
the Government of the Central African Republic and
MINUSCA, which the Council must sustain on all fronts.
We also encourage the Government to own greater
responsibility and accountability for rehabilitating
the country, with the support of the United Nations
system and the country team. That should be achieved
in collaboration with regional organizations, financial
institutions and all stakeholders, supported by the
international community.

Thirdly, we commend President Touadera's efforts
to bring about economic recovery in his country. The
humanitarian situation continues to be complex. Almost
half of the population - approximately 2 million
people - depends on humanitarian aid. The number
of internally displaced persons has reached almost
60,000 since October of last year. Kazakhstan therefore
shares the opinion stated here by President Touadera
with regard of the need for greater strengthening of
the security/development nexus as the bedrock for
stabilization, reconciliation and the development of the
Central African Republic.

Hence it is very important that organizations and
Governments honour their commitment of more than
$2.2 billion in pledges made at the Brussels Conference
on 17 November 2016. Likewise, proper and vigilant
use of funds would greatly contribute to the five-year
National Plan for Recovery and Peacebuilding. The
recent African Union solidarity conference on post-
conflict reconstruction and development, as well we as
peacebuilding efforts in the Central African Republic
during the AU conference in Addis Ababa, are fine
examples to foster development and reconciliation. We
encourage the launching of similar initiatives to benefit
the country.

Let me conclude by reiterating our readiness to
join multilateral action to support President Touadera
and the Central African Republic in moving forward
towards stability, peace and progress.

