Mr. Ahsan (Bangladesh): We join others in
warmly welcoming to the Council Mr. Hens
Haekkerup, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). The job
of the Special Representative is by no means an easy
one. He has taken over at a time when many of the
gains achieved by his predecessor are at risk because of
increased political and security challenges that the
Mission is now facing. We deeply appreciate the
comprehensive briefing he provided to the Council on
the current situation in Kosovo and the priorities he has
set for the United Nations Mission there.

I would briefly mention some issues in Kosovo
that we feel demand urgent attention.

Organization of Kosovo-wide general elections
for provisional self-government is a distinct priority.
This includes agreeing on a legal framework which will
define the bodies for election and their mandates. We
are happy to know that the work for defining a
framework has already started. Only the elected
representatives in Kosovo, with full participation of all
communities, will have the mandate to take decisions
for the future of Kosovo. We believe that the
democratic changes in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia have opened up an opportunity for a
constructive and meaningful relationship with Belgrade
for progress.

It is unfortunate that the security situation in
Kosovo is worsening. It took considerable effort and
investment to achieve some stabilization. The Council
has strongly condemned the terrorist attack that
occurred last month on a convoy of buses carrying Serb
civilians. The incident must be properly investigated
and the perpetrators brought to justice.

At the same time, we also need to take a deeper
look at the causes of such desperation. Experience has
shown that the security situation hardly improves
unless the root causes are redressed.

We are concerned at the lingering inadequacy of
the local judiciary, particularly, the ethnic bias among
local judges. Alongside improving security, a very
important task is to ensure a properly functioning
judiciary. We believe the Special Representative will
continue his efforts in this area, including through
continuation of efforts to employ more international
judges to deal with sensitive cases.

There was probably no other way than to close
the ground safety zone between southern Serbia and
Kosovo, as it was increasingly being used for extremist
activities. The incidents in the Presevo Valley have
given rise to widespread concerns. However, the
closure of the buffer zone needs to be accompanied by
deployment of sufficient international monitors and by
confidence-building measures. About 100,000 civilians
reside in this belt. Their security and protection, as
well as that of those living in adjacent villages, could
be affected by hasty changes in the zone.

We welcome the Amnesty Law approved by the
Yugoslav Parliament on 27 February. This is a
significant step toward healing the wounds of war and
towards the building of confidence. All prisoners
covered under this law should be released without
undue delay. The rest of the detainees should also be
returned to Kosovo, or the process will remain
incomplete. We support Mr. Haekerrup's proposal that
the cases of those not covered by the Amnesty Law
should be processed through a judicial review
conducted under UNMIK supervision. An intense
effort should be made to find information about the
missing persons. The release of detainees is an
important measure for building confidence.

The progress already achieved in pursuing the
long-term goals in Kosovo by UNMIK is significant.
This includes the development of a functional
municipal administration through elections in October
2000, which now forms the basis of provincial self-
government. The political leaders in Kosovo should
demonstrate their willingness to live in an inclusive
and tolerant multi-ethnic society. The international
community also should continue to encourage and
assure all Kosovars that they are not looking for an exit
strategy, but are constructively involved with them in
finding a final settlement of all outstanding issues.

We are open to the idea of a Council follow-up
mission at an appropriate time. We believe this needs
further consultation. We wish to conclude by assuring
Mr. Haekkerup and his colleagues in UNMIK of our
continued support in their commendable endeavour.

