Mr. Tihic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in Bosnian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I
would like to reiterate the gratitude expressed by my
colleagues. The citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
will never forget the fact that 200 members of United
Nations forces lost their lives while carrying out a
peace mission in our country.

I should like to stress that, although the mandate
of the United Nations Mission will be completed on 31
December 2002, Bosnia and Herzegovina will need the
help of the United Nations in future as well.

We need support with respect to the return of
refugees, almost half of whom have not yet returned, or
have not been allowed to return, to their prewar homes.
This is true even today, seven years after the signing of
the Dayton Peace Accords. The return of refugees is a
precondition for lasting stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Those who have returned have very hard
lives, since they have no jobs and their property has
been damaged or destroyed. We therefore consider the
involvement of United Nations structures providing
support for the return of refugees as being very
important. The return of refugees means reversing
ethnic cleansing. It also sends a clear message that
anything created out of violence and crime will never
be legitimized.

The International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) will play a significant role
in creating lasting peace, justice and confidence among
ethnic groups. Unfortunately, the most notorious war
criminals in Europe since the Second World War,
Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, are still at large.
We therefore strongly support the work of the Tribunal.
We request the Security Council to provide its full
support to the Tribunal and to ensure that all parties
involved provide their unreserved cooperation to the
ICTY.

I must apologize, on this happy occasion, for
having to mention Srebrenica. However, I believe it is
my duty to do so - a duty I owe to both the victims
and the truth, as well as to the cause of ensuring that
the events at Srebrenica are never again repeated
anywhere in the world.

On his recent Visit to Sarajevo, Secretary-General
Kofi Annan said that the darkest chapter of the history
of the United Nations was written at Srebrenica, which
had been a United Nations safe haven. Srebrenica
became the site of the worst war crime in Europe since
the Second World War. The safe haven of Srebrenica
was not protected and, as a consequence, an act of
genocide took place that resulted in the murders of
7,000 to 10,000 people, mainly civilians. The
responsibility of the United Nations in that tragedy is
indisputable.
With regard to Srebrenica, I would also like to
remind the Council that the families of the victims of
Srebrenica have not yet returned to their homes.
Neither have the victims received proper burial, as
their remains are currently housed in morgues
throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. I appeal to the
United Nations to help the survivors of Srebrenica to
return to their homes and to assist them in burying the
remains of the victims with honour. We are also
working to build a memorial at Srebrenica.

I would like to join my colleagues in saying that
we View positively the work of the United Nations in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is thanks to United Nations
Mission that Bosnia is now a stable country on the road
to progress that is becoming a factor of stability in the
entire region.

I would also like to thank Secretary-General Kofi
Annan for the understanding he showed the victims of
Srebrenica and for his personal involvement. I believe
he will continue to do whatever he can to help
survivors return and ensure the proper burial of the
victims, as well as to see to it that the criminals
responsible are punished.

My particular gratitude goes out to Special
Representative Jacques Paul Klein for his personal
involvement in helping Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina will always
remember him. During his mandate Bosnia was able to
establish a single license plate, passport and customs
and border controls.

