Judge Robinson: It is an honour for me to appear
before the Council in my capacity as President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and to do so under the presidency
of Burkina Faso. I congratulate Burkina Faso on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and thank the President for the attention he has given
to matters pertaining to the Tribunal.

My remarks today will be brief, as the details of
the measures the Tribunal has undertaken to complete
its mandate are set out in my written biannual report
(S/2009/589), which has been duly submitted to the
Council.

Since my most recent presentation, the Tribunal
has continued to focus its energies on completing its
work as expeditiously as possible. Of the 161 accused
indicted by the Tribunal, only a single accused remains
in the pre-trial stage awaiting the commencement his
trial, and that trial will start on 17 December. A total of
24 accused are presently on trial in nine cases, and
another 13 have appeals pending. Five trials are
expected to be completed during the course of 2010
and three in the first half of 2011, while the remaining
case - that of Radovan Karadzic' - is currently
estimated to be completed in August or September
2012.

With the redeployment of resources to the
Appeals Chamber, we anticipate that all appeals will be
completed in 2013, except for the Karadzie appeal,
which is estimated at this time to be finished in
February 2014. This revised estimate for the Karadzic'
appeal results from the decision of the Trial Chamber
to assign counsel following the refusal of the self-
represented accused to attend the trial. The Trial
Chamber has given the assigned counsel five months to
prepare, and the trial will resume in March 2010.

The redeployment of resources from trials to
appeals is part of the Tribunal's overall downsizing
strategy, which has already commenced. While these
are our currently anticipated dates for completion, all
possible measures will be taken to speed up our
09-63003

proceedings and shorten these anticipated times. To
ensure that all possible measures are being taken to
expedite our proceedings, I have reconvened the
Working Group on Speeding up Trials. The
recommendations of that Group will be presented in
my next completion strategy report.

At my last briefing, I reported that contempt
proceedings were sapping the strength of the Tribunal
and diverting us from our main objective - the fair
and expeditious completion of our trials and appeals
for persons charged with serious violations of
international humanitarian law. I am happy to inform
the Council that we have made progress on this front,
rendering two contempt trial judgments and two
contempt appeal judgments. We have also amended the
rules of procedure and evidence to expedite contempt
proceedings.

As can be seen, our efforts to implement the
completion strategy are coning to fruition and the end
of all trials is in sight. But one serious hurdle remains.
I refer to the continued flight from justice of Ratko
Mladie and Goran Hadzic'. The failure to bring these
two men to justice will tarnish the Security Council's
historic contribution to peacebuilding in the former
Yugoslavia. I also wish to stress, as I have done before,
that their immediate arrest would obviate the need for a
residual trial function. It is not too late to arrest and try
these fugitives, and I hope that the Security Council
and Member States will act decisively to achieve that
goal.

The other major issue on which I request the
Council's assistance today is staff retention. It is a
matter that requires immediate attention. We are
currently losing, on average, about one staff member
per working day to more secure employment, often to
other judicial institutions in The Hague, such as the
International Criminal Court and the Special Tribunal
for Lebanon. In a recent survey of 451 staff members,
57 per cent stated that they were actively seeking
employment elsewhere. If we consider the results from
one specific group of critical staff members - the
legal support staff of the Office of the Prosecutor and
the Chambers - 70 per cent were actively seeking
employment elsewhere, 24 per cent stated that they felt
exhausted by their current work load, and close to
50 per cent stated that they felt they have to work too
fast. The reality of the situation is that there is a very
real threat to the Tribunal's ability to conduct its work
3
as expeditiously and fairly as possible during the
remaining years of its mandate.

I acknowledge the efforts made by the General
Assembly to assist the Tribunal through resolution
63/256 of 24 December 2008, which authorizes the
Tribunal to offer critical staff longer contracts, thereby
alleviating some of their job insecurity. But more needs
to be done, and there are two areas in which we could
really use the help of the Security Council.

First, the International Civil Service Commission
has recommended an end of service grant applicable to
those staff separating from the organization upon
completion of their contracts, provided they have
served continuously for 10 years. Many of our staff
have served over 10 years, and the end of service grant
would provide them with a concrete incentive to
remain until the completion of the Tribunal's work.
Secondly, of great benefit to our staff would be their
inclusion in the regime of continuing contracts.
Continuing appointments will offer some of the
stability that we sorely need, and I urge the Council to
ensure that this new regime, if adopted, is made
applicable to Tribunal staff.

However, the consultations I have had about
these matters have left me somewhat uneasy. But it
would be wrong - completely wrong - for a body
like the United Nations to abandon the staff members
of an institution that it had set up in a time of crisis to
assist in the restoration of justice, peace and
democracy in a troubled region, and which has, by any
reasonable assessment, rendered invaluable and
trailblazing service not only to that region, but to the
international community as a whole. And it would be
especially wrong for the United Nations to distance
itself from the needs of the staff of such an institution,
when it is in the final stages of its work, on formalistic
grounds based on the so-called separateness and
temporary character of that institution. That approach
would result in the kind of injustice and discrimination
that is antithetical not only to the lofty and noble
purposes of the United Nations itself, but also to the
inspiring objectives of that very institution. The staff of
the Tribunal should not be treated as though they were
staff of other nations. They are in fact staff of the
United Nations and should not be separated from the
benefits of United Nations staff by artificial
administrative barriers. And so I appeal to the
international community to exercise foresight by
assisting the tribunal with measures to retain its staff

and reduce the burden on the institution imposed by
constant staff recruitment.

As the Council is no doubt aware, during my
recent address to the General Assembly (A/64/PV.16), I
proposed the establishment of a claims commission to
compensate the victims of crimes committed during the
wars in the former Yugoslavia. Since I became
President of the Tribunal, I have had occasion to meet a
multitude of victims' groups, and they have expressed
anguish at the failure of the international community to
provide any kind of compensation for their suffering.
Indeed, they feel that they have been forgotten.
Currently, there is no effective mechanism by which
those victims can seek compensation for their injuries,
despite the fact that their right to such compensation is
firmly rooted in international law. And I refer to
instruments such as the General Assembly's 1985
Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims
of Crime and Abuse of Power and the Basic Principles
and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and
Reparation for Victims of Gross Violations of
International Human Rights Law and Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law.

Justice is not only about punishing perpetrators, it
is also about restoring dignity to victims by ensuring
that they have the concrete means to rebuild their lives.
Clause 13 of the General Assembly's Declaration itself
identifies sources of compensation, including the
offender or national funds. However, in circumstances
where the State is unable to compensate the victim, the
Declaration proposes that other funds be established
for this purpose. This was a matter that former Tribunal
President Jorda brought to the attention of the Security
Council in November 2000, recommending to the
Council and to the Secretary-General that methods of
compensating victims of crimes in the former
Yugoslavia, notably a claims commission, be
considered by the appropriate organs of the United
Nations. I therefore implore the Council to take official
steps to support the establishment of such a claims
commission as a means of complementing the
Tribunal's work.

I now wish to turn to another matter - that of the
work being done by the Tribunal in preparation for the
establishment of a residual mechanism. On 21 May
2009, the Secretary-General published his report on the
administrative and budgetary aspects of the options for
possible locations for the archives of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
seat of the residual mechanism(s) for the Tribunals
(S/2009/258). On 8 October 2009, the Secretary-
General advised the Tribunal of the Security Council's
endorsement of those recommendations and requested
that the Tribunal comply with recommendation (m) in
paragraph 259 and report in detail on the Tribunal's
implementation of the tasks identified therein.

In my written report, I have addressed each of
these tasks separately. But there is one task that I
wanted to bring to the Council's attention here today.
We have been asked to declassify, to the greatest extent
possible, all the records of the Tribunal. This is a
mammoth undertaking, which we have begun to tackle
in the comprehensive and organized declassification
project. This project will require significant resources
to be properly implemented. To give the Council an
idea of the work involved, the first case being
examined is that of Tadic'. All of the material has to be
examined to identify the confidential hearings,
witnesses, filings and exhibits. There are 1,304 pretrial
transcript pages, 9,300 trial pages, 682 appeal pages,
65 confidential filings and 126 protected witnesses. All
of those witnesses will need to be contacted to
determine whether they oppose the lifting of
confidential protection orders. Moreover, hundreds of
exhibits will need to be examined for confidential
information. While this is an onerous undertaking,
when it is considered that the Tribunal has completed
proceedings against 121 accused in 87 cases and still
has 10 cases to complete against 25 accused, it will be
appreciated that this task will greatly ease the judicial
workload of the residual mechanism. The more
material that is made public, the less need there will be
for national jurisdictions to petition the residual
mechanism for access to confidential material and for
judges to issue decisions on those requests.

While primarily focusing on its core business, the
Tribunal has also been diligently working towards the
strengthening of competent national judicial systems in
the former Yugoslavia in accordance with Security
Council resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004). I am
proud to report that the Tribunal recently published a
comprehensive report entitled "Supporting the
Transition Process: Lessons Learned and Best Practices
in Knowledge Transfer" evaluating the needs of the
domestic judiciaries in the region. This report was
prepared jointly with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the United Nations
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute and
has been very well received in important quarters as
groundbreaking.

Together with those institutions, we are now
preparing an ambitious project to guarantee that the
national justice systems in the region have the capacity
to deal with their growing war crimes caseload as the
Tribunal heads towards its final days. Generous
funding from the European Commission is expected for
this timely undertaking. I also urge the Security
Council to support the national jurisdictions in the
region as their capacity to continue our work is a key
aspect of the Tribunal's legacy in the former
Yugoslavia.

Inspired by broader United Nations efforts to
coordinate rule of law activities, the Tribunal will
convene a two-day conference at The Hague on 23 and
24 February 2010. The goals of the conference are to
consult with stakeholders and generate interest and
support for the Tribunal's legacy strategy in the former
Yugoslavia, to foster contacts and partnerships between
the Tribunal and different players, to share and gather
information on what is being done by different actors
in relation to capacity-building in the region, and to
promote the coordination and consolidation of all of
those efforts.

The conference will also provide an opportunity
for countries of the former Yugoslavia and the broader
international community to communicate to the
Tribunal their ideas and expectations of its legacy. That
dialogue will contribute to the work of the Tribunal in
developing its comprehensive legacy strategy. It is
anticipated that more than 200 persons will participate
in the conference, with representatives from the
Tribunal, the Security Council Working Group on the
ad hoc Tribunals, the Rule of Law Unit, national
jurisdictions in the former Yugoslavia, victims' groups,
organs of the European Union and many others. The
conference is being funded by voluntary pledges, and
invitations have been issued to all members of the
Security Council.

In closing, I would like to reiterate that we at the
Tribunal remain dedicated to completing the work
entrusted to us so that peace, justice and reconciliation
may prevail in the region of the former Yugoslavia. I
do emphasize, however, that a major obstacle to
completing that task is the continuing flight from
justice of Ratko Mladie and Goran Hadzie, and I urge
the Council to seek ways to facilitate their immediate
arrest.

The staff retention issue also remains critical to
the Tribunal's capacity to expedite its operations.
Again, we urge the Council to actively work with other
relevant organs of the United Nations for meaningful
retention measures as a matter of urgency and in the
two specific ways I have mentioned today.

