Mr. Salame: I would like to congratulate the United
States of America on its presidency of the Security
Council this month and thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to update the Council.

In each and every briefing I have given to the
Council, I have stated that the status quo in Libya is
untenable. The violence that consumed the capital
beginning on 26 August shattered the facade of calm
that had prevailed in Tripoli since May 2017. Tanks
and heavy artillery were deployed into residential
neighbourhoods. Sixty-one Libyans were killed and
159 injured. Many of those who died were civilians,
including children. Families were forced to flee their
homes. Looting and crime became commonplace as
gangs took to the streets. Hundreds of criminals broke
out of prison. Migrants were either trapped in detention
centres or turned onto the street. The city stood on the
brink of all-out war.

On4 September, the UnitedNations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) brokered a ceasefire between the
major parties to the conflict. That has effectively halted
the fighting and started the restoration of some order
to the city. The Mission is now working to protect that
fragile peace and enable it to take root. As a first step,
we are offering technical assistance and good offices
in support of the ceasefire. Groups that violate the
ceasefire must be held to account. The United Nations
and the international community are watching each and
every one of them. The time for impunity is behind us.
We will not allow a repeat of 2014.

This outbreak of violence is but the latest in a
series of crises that have engulfed Libya. The events
surrounding the oil crescent region in June and July
effectively threatened to split the country. In the past
few weeks, the nation has lurched from one emergency
to another.

On 10 August, armed groups forcibly evicted
displaced Tawerghan families from the Tariq
Al-Matar camp for internally displaced persons. Some
Tawerghans were killed and injured. Homes were
demolished and those Libyans were forced to flee,
leaving them homeless for a second time in seven years.
Despite the welcome return of several more families to
Tawergha - totalling approximately 100 families by
the end of August - basic infrastructure and services
are still lacking, making a dignified return very
difficult. We have warned all armed groups against
any repetition of that totally unlawful behaviour. The
forced displacement of people is unacceptable, and
of those already displaced, doubly so. That was made
clear to all those tempted by it.

After the horrendous attack on the High National
Electoral Commission of 2 May, on 23 August the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) claimed
responsibility for an attack near Zliten, which claimed
the lives of four police officers. ISIL presence and
operations in Libya are only spreading. I alert the
Council of the possibility that Libya may become a
shelter for terrorist groups of all persuasions and ask
the Council to help address with that looming threat.

In recent weeks, the Chadian Government and
Chadian opposition forces have been fighting one
another, operating from southern Libya. Over 1,000
fighters have been involved in the hostilities, risking the
south becoming a regional battleground and safe haven
for foreign armed groups. The recent agreement signed
between Chad, the Sudan, the Niger and Libya needs to
be implemented so that Libya does not also become an
alternative battleground for others. The signatories have
asked for support from the international community
for the implementation of those agreements, and I
hope that Council members will positively consider
their requests.

In the eastern city of Derna, sporadic clashes and
air raids continue. The United Nations is facilitating
humanitarian assistance to affected families in the city.
I reiterate my call upon all parties to exercise restraint
and protect the lives of innocent civilians.

Abuse and exploitation abound within prisons and
detention centres, which we continue to have great
difficulty accessing, both in the east and in the west.
Refugees and asylum seekers in detention centres have
resorted to hunger strikes as a means to resolve their
bleak living circumstances. That situation should,
however, not be used as an excuse for any armed group
to open the gates to terrorists and criminals interned or
to displace them to other locations.

All the while, the citizens of the country suffer
deteriorating standards of living, as they have
for the past years. Now, for many, every day is a
personal emergency.

We must not return to the status quo ante. In
crisis lies the opportunity to tackle the underlying
causes. To restore stability to Libya, there is an urgent
need to establish strong and unified civilian and
military institutions that work for the benefit of all
citizens. The Mission is now focusing its work in two
intertwined areas.

First, and in order to underpin the ceasefire, we are
working to revise the security arrangements in Tripoli
in order to reduce the influence of groups that use arms
to achieve their parochial goals. In the coming days,
UNSMIL will continue to hold broad consultations to
strengthen the ceasefire and assist in the establishment
of a monitoring mechanism. At the same time, we
will continue to work with our Libyan counterparts to
identify concrete steps towards reshaping security in the
capital and developing more sustainable arrangements.
UNSMIL will endeavour to facilitate that effort in an
inclusive and pragmatic fashion, laying the foundations

for longer-term efforts to stabilize the country through
the reunification of the security sector institutions.
The previous security configuration empowered
groups that acted in a predatory manner against
the residents of the capital, against the State and
against sovereign institutions. Indeed, members of
some armed groups, nominally acting under the
Ministry of the Interior, have kidnapped, tortured
and murdered employees of sovereign institutions,
including the National Oil Corporation and the Libyan
Investment Authority.

Our public criticism of the predatory behaviour of
armed groups in the capital was warmly welcomed by
Libyans, who are fed up with living on the poverty line
while their national resources are looted by gunmen
turned millionaires. Our stand has produced a salutary
impact in many cases. The State capture must end - not
to the benefit of other armed groups, but with the full
control of the legitimate authorities. The Council's
support on that is crucial.

The Mission's second priority is to address the
economic issues that underpin the crisis and erode
the daily lives of citizens across the country. I would
like to state plainly that if an end is not put to the
plundering, there is little chance that we can move
either the economic reforms or the political process.
We urge action on the agreed upon economic reforms,
which are essential and overdue. I call upon the Central
Bank of Libya and the Government of National Accord
to immediately move forward on currency exchange
rate and subsidy reforms. We are also committed to
advocating for a more equitable distribution of wealth
in Libya, focused not on appeasing groups based on
their military strength, but on providing for citizens
based on their need.

UNSMIL believes that the request of Prime
Minister Faiez Serraj for international support for
a financial review is a valuable opportunity to bring
transparency and accountability to how the country's
wealth is managed. In response to the Security
Council's request of 19 July to the Mission to provide
suggestions on the modalities of such a review, I have
been engaged with Libyan and international partners.
I convened the Governor of the internationally
recognized Central Bank of Libya in Tripoli and the
head of the parallel Central Bank in the east for a
meeting at the UNSMIL office to agree on the broad
parameters of the review. On 24 August, the Secretary-
General submitted to the Council my proposals for how
to proceed. That preliminary process has created hope,
with many Libyans welcoming the meeting of the two
officials - something that has not happened in the past
four years. That was a first step towards unifying the
Central Bank, which is a crucial step towards unifying
the country.

When the political process grinds to a halt, some
will believe that there is opportunity to force change
through the barrel of a gun. The Libyan public has
made a clear decision on how this change should come
to pass - peacefully and democratically through
elections. That was widely reflected during the national
conference consultations, a report on which is currently
being prepared.

It should come as no surprise that the Libyans want
change in their political leadership. The members of
the House of Representatives were elected over four
years ago by around 15 per cent of the population. The
members ofthe High Council of State, which represents
a fraction of the members of the General National
Congress, were elected six years ago. The members of
the Government of National Accord assumed their roles
not through elections but by appointment, and many of
them have been inactive for a long while.

If national elections are to take place, a number of
conditions must be met. They will require great effort to
achieve, but they are achievable. The United Nations is
working hard to put those conditions in place and thanks
the international community for its support. Time and
time again, the House of Representatives has promised
to produce referendum and election legislation. After
three sessions dedicated to the referendum law and
numerous delays, the House of Representatives has
failed to deliver that legislation. Those who have an
interest in maintaining the status quo have spared no
efforts to resist the needed change.

I will not mince words. Many members ofthe House
of Representatives are failing to do theirjob. They seek
to subvert the political process to their own ends, behind
the guise of procedure. It is clear that they simply have
no intention of relinquishing their positions. They have
put in place legal provisions to maintain their authority
in perpetuity. For the personal ambitions of a few, all
Libya's citizens have paid a steep price. I welcome any
rapprochement between the two Houses and take note
of their recent meetings in Tripoli, but that activity must

be directed towards advancing the political process, not
towards ensuring their longevity.

In line with instructions from the Secretary-
General, I have been exhausting the traditional avenues
to move the legislative process forward. So far, they
have either been blocked or designed to lead nowhere.
If legislation is not produced soon, we will close the
chapter on that approach. There are other ways to
achieve peaceful political change, and we will embrace
them with no hesitation but, indeed, with enthusiasm.

I am fully aware that the members of the Council are
not mere spectators to the Libyan's crisis; members want
it over as soon as possible. Their unified, determined
and vocal position is what the Libyans need to hear if
the citizens of that country are to enjoy the peace and
tranquility that they are desperately looking for.

