Mr. Holliday (United States of America): First of
all, I would like to express our delegation's thanks to
Minhea Motoc for the fine work that he did as
President of the Council during the month of July. We
would also like to welcome the Russian presidency; we
look forward to working with you, Sir.

We would like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Annabi for his briefing and welcome Minister
Loncar and his presence here on behalf of Serbia and
Montenegro.
We welcome the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Kosovo, Soren Jessen-
Petersen. He is taking up his post at a crucial time and
will have the strong support of the United States. The
violence in March was truly a wake-up call, and we
welcome the progress being made in reconstructing
damaged and destroyed property, rebuilding an inter-
ethnic dialogue and reforming local self-government; it
must continue.

Much work remains. Concrete accomplishments
are needed in the overall implementation of the
standards, security and the rights of all communities.
The mid-2005 review of progress in implementing the
standards for Kosovo is around the corner. It is time for
concrete action on implementing the standards. The
review mechanism established by the Council rightly
puts the emphasis on action, not words. The standards
process puts responsibility for Kosovo's progress in the
hands of Kosovo's leaders, who are, of course,
responsible for implementing those standards.

The international presence in Kosovo should
move increasingly to words a monitoring role and have
less of a governing role. We would not, of course,
support the wholesale transfer of reserved authority
that the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government of
Kosovo proposed last month, but the United Nations in
Kosovo can further shift additional competences to the
local authorities, or further share those competences
with them.

With regard to standards implementation, we look
forward to an assessment by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on progress in implementing
the standards, as called for in the presidential
statements that the Council issued earlier this year.

In order for Kosovo to move ahead it is also
essential for all of its communities to participate in the
October elections. A boycott by any community would
be a mistake. Participating in elections and acting
within the institution of representative government are
the best ways for a community to defend its interests.

We look to Prime Minister Kostunica, President
Tadic and the Serbian Government to send a clear
signal that Kosovo Serbs should, without precondition,
participate in the elections. We appreciate very much
Belgrade's participation in discussions on confidence-
building measures and its introduction of a plan for the
reform of local government.

We welcome and support the announced intention
of UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions to develop
more pilot projects. We call on the Government of
Serbia and Montenegro to encourage constructive
Kosovo Serb participation in this important process.
The process of restoring local government should be
substantial and include functions related to security
and justice. These pilot projects should mark only the
beginning of a long-term political process of designing
and implanting more effective local government in
Kosovo and should not exclude or prejudge any revised
or broader framework that might be agreed to in the
future. Nor should there be any preconditions attached
to the direct dialogue on technical issues between
Belgrade and Pristina. Those talks should resume
immediately. We have seen considerable progress in
recent weeks in dialogue between Serb and Albanian
leaders in Kosovo. We urge both sides to continue and
intensify this dialogue.

Let me close by saying that the treatment of
Kosovo's minorities and ensuring that all of Kosovo's
peoples can live in security will be the single most
important yardstick used to judge Kosovo's
development and its fulfilment of international
standards.

