Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We
should like to congratulate you, Sir, and your friendly
country, Benin, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. We congratulate
you also on your initiative to hold this debate on an
issue that affects the present and future of our African
continent and of its peoples, thousands of whom fall
victim to wars and conflicts that are exacerbated by the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. We also
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2005/69), which follows up on the
recommendations in his 2002 report on small arms and
light weapons (S/2002/1053).

The General Assembly has made progress in
considering and developing the conceptual framework
of its approach to the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons by adopting a number of resolutions and
by establishing several expert groups. That has led to
the holding of the United Nations conference on small
arms, which in turn led to the establishment of the
political framework governing the United Nations
approach to small arms, reflected in the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. The delegation of Egypt looks forward to
contributing to the implementation of international
commitments under the Programme of Action by
participating in the Second Biennial Meeting in 2005
and in the 2006 review conference.

The General Assembly's efforts to establish the
conceptual framework by which the United Nations
can address the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons were accompanied by a great effort on the
part of the Security Council to carry out its role and
responsibility to confront the new challenges to peace
and security by addressing the issues involved and
developing the means necessary to do so. Hence, the
Council's recognition of the gravity of the illicit trade
in and spread of small arms and light weapons and of
the humanitarian consequences in many regions,
particularly Africa.

In that context, the Security Council's principal
activities related to the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons are based on two main elements. The
first is reflected in the imposition of arms embargoes in
conflict areas. The delegation of Egypt supports the
Secretary-General's recommendation urging the
Council to attach greater importance to the
implementation of all provisions of resolutions that
impose arms embargoes on regions or countries
involved in or threatened by armed conflict, in
accordance with the provisions of the United Nations
Charter and in the light of the need to undertake
measures against countries that violate those
embargoes. We also support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the links between the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons and the illicit
exploitation of natural wealth and resources be
considered and identified. In addition, we stress the
importance of tracing the monetary transactions related
to that area.

The second element of the Security Council's
activities is related to the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and the clear provisions on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes
through specific measures to collect and eliminate
excess stocks of illicit small arms and light weapons
within a comprehensive framework allowing for a
factual assessment of peacekeeping operations once
they have concluded. In that regard, we should like to
highlight the importance of peacekeeping operations
considering how the United Nations could promote
efforts related to DDR programmes and providing
special allocations from peacekeeping operations
budget for that purpose. We also emphasize the
importance of continuity in providing the financing
needed to prevent the outbreak of conflict anew,
including in providing the necessary financial means
through the international financial institutions, relief
organizations and humanitarian and development
efforts in conflict areas.

In that connection, we support the Secretary-
General's proposal to improve the exchange of
information between the Security Council and the
General Assembly by coordinating the strategies of
both entities in the area of small arms and light
weapons, taking into account the distinction between
the mandate and role of the Security Council, on the
one hand, and the more comprehensive role of the
General Assembly, on the other. We believe that the
establishment of a committee to oversee that effort as
proposed by the Secretary-General, despite its great
importance, should be preceded by the steps necessary
to achieve the required transparency in the work of the
Security Council committees on arms embargoes
against particular regions.

As it plays its important role in the area of small
arms and light weapons in carrying out its
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security under Article 24 of the Charter, the Security
Council should also play a parallel role by enabling
countries - particularly peoples under foreign
occupation - to exercise their natural rights,
individually or collectively, to self-determination.

Finally, we wish to reaffirm the importance of
commitment by all parties in the international
community to implement the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
including an effective international instrument that
would enable States to identify and trace small arms
and light weapons and would guarantee the
participation of influential countries in carrying out its
provisions. That would also be an essential
contribution to achieving and affirming the political
commitment of the international community in dealing
with this issue.

