Mr. Motok: Allow me, Mr. President, to start by
expressing gratitude to you for arranging for this
special joint briefing by the Chairs of the three
Committees called upon to report to the Council.

I would like to salute the activities and
achievements of my colleagues the Permanent
Representatives of Argentina, Mr. Cesar Mayoral, and
of Denmark, Ms. Ellen Loj, Chairpersons, respectively,
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) and of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). Having been a member of the Council last year
too, I would also like to take this opportunity to
commend the dedicated work and leadership of
Ambassador Mufioz of Chile and Ambassador Denisov
of the Russian Federation, their predecessors at the
helm of those two landmark subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council.

Ambassador Lauro Baja of the Philippines does a
wonderful job in steering the working group
established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004) towards
its expected goals. A special word of appreciation also
goes to the Executive Director of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
Ambassador Javier Ruperez.

I have the honour to brief the Security Council on
the progress achieved by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in its work over the
past four months and to submit the Committee's first
programme of work covering the period 1 April to 30
June 2005. I would also like to introduce briefly the
elements of the first programme of work of the
Committee.

With regard to the examination of national
reports, since my previous report to the Council in
December last year, the Committee has concentrated its
work mainly on fine-tuning its methodology and tool
kit for considering national reports submitted by States
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Committee experts
have developed a matrix to be used as an internal tool
in the process of examining national reports. It is a
living document built upon the provisions of resolution
1540 (2004).

I am very pleased to report to the Council today
that the 1540 Committee has already entered the
substantive stage of its work and has begun examining
national reports, with a view to monitoring States'
efforts to implement resolution 1540 (2004). The
Committee believes that it needs additional
information from States in order to better determine
implementation efforts, and it will reach out to them,
with the support of its experts, both in New York and
in capitals.

We must pursue this process with the same sense
of urgency that contributed to the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004). The Committee has been given
a two-year mandate by the Security Council. The
Committee should consider at least 40 national reports
within each remaining trimestrial programme of work,
thus completing the processing of first national reports
by the end of 2005.

In one year's time, the Committee will need to
provide the Security Council with sufficient
information about States' implementation efforts to
enable the Council to assess the progress that States
have made in implementing the resolution. In
considering national reports, the Committee will start
examining possible sources of technical assistance for
States that have requested such assistance in order to
implement resolution 1540 (2004). Discussions on
where assistance is already being provided and on
facilitating necessary technical assistance will form
part of the examination process.

With respect to reporting, Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004) calls upon all States to present
to the Committee a first report, not later than 28
October 2004, on steps that they have taken or intend
to take to implement the resolution. The status of
reporting is presented on the web site of the
Committee, and is kept up to date.

As of today, 115 States and one organization have
submitted reports to the 1540 Committee. I would like
to use this opportunity to renew my call to States that
have yet to submit their first report as called for by the
Council in resolution 1540 (2004). Their reports will
enable the Committee to present to the Council, by the
end of its mandate, an objective picture of what has
been achieved in terms of implementation and of what
should be done going forward.

I assume that some countries may encounter
difficulties in drafting their national reports or in
enacting appropriate legislation to fulfil the
requirements of resolution 1540 (2004). Informing the
Committee of such difficulties will help it to identify
and respond to requests for assistance from those
States lacking the legal and regulatory infrastructure,
implementation experience or necessary resources.

In my capacity as Chairman of the 1540
Committee, I have continued to raise the issue of
further reporting through briefings with Member
States, informal contact at the United Nations with the
coordinators of regional groups and sending reminders
to those that have yet to report. I remain committed to
pursuing such endeavours in the future work of the
Committee, on its behalf. I am also very encouraged
that the issues of improving further reporting and late
submissions will be considered in a coordinated
manner by the various Committees.

On the interaction with international
organizations, I am pleased to report that, on 13 April
2005, the Committee was briefed in a formal meeting
by Mr. Rogelio Pfirter, Director General of the
Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and by Mr. Gustavo
Zlauvinen, Director of the International Atomic Energy
Agency Office at the United Nations, on ways in which
those organizations can support the work of the
Committee and contribute to the process of
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The
Committee has also received letters from other
organizations, such as the Nuclear Suppliers Group and
the Zangger Committee, expressing willingness to
assist in the work of the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).

As the process of examining national reports
evolves, the Committee will interact and cooperate, as
appropriate, with relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations in order to facilitate the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Working
relationships with such organizations will be
developed, as appropriate.

In the same vein, the Committee will maintain
close relations and cooperation with the CTC and the
Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions Committee, as provided for
in resolution 1566 (2004).

Transparency has been, and continues to be, an
important objective of the work of the 1540
Committee. The Chairman and the Vice-Chairmen will
reach out on a regular basis to Member States,
including through common briefings with the
Chairmen of the CTC and of the Committee dealing
with Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions. The 1540
Committee will keep its dedicated web site updated as
an additional source of information on issues related to
resolution 1540 (2004).

The Committee will also continue to inform
organizations outside the United Nations about our
work, through attendance at international, regional and
subregional meetings and conferences. I will also make
full use of such opportunities to continue to address the
issue of further reporting.

As a final point on transparency, I encourage
Member States to designate points of contact for
resolution 1540 (2004) and to make direct contact with
the Committee's members and its experts to seek any
necessary clarification on the issues covered in their
correspondence with the Committee or on matters
related to resolution 1540 (2004) in general. In
addition, the Committee, with the support of its
experts, may, when it is deemed appropriate, contact
States to seek further clarification from them on issues
arising from their reports.

In conclusion, on behalf of the Committee, I look
forward to the cooperation of all States as the
Committee goes forward with its work in the months
ahead. I also look forward to comments and queries
that colleagues in the Security Council and
representatives of other States Members of the United
Nations might have with regard to the briefing that I
have just given.
