Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to take part in this debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, in which
Austria and you, yourself, Mr. President, have invested
a great deal. As the Secretary-General pointed out this
morning, this debate, enriched by the learned briefings
of Mr. John Holmes and the Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights, shows that this topic,
which has been on the Security Council's agenda for
10 years, rightly continues to be among its priorities.

However, we must point out that, despite all the
efforts at the international level, civilian populations
continue to be the victims and the primary targets in
situations of armed conflict. Their rights are scorned
and violated in breach of international humanitarian
law and the main human rights instruments. That
disconnect between the norms and their
implementation on the ground arises, inter alia, from
the fact that the concept of the protection of civilians
brings into conflict fundamental principles of the
Charter, which are at the basis of international
relations, and puts at stake the primary responsibility
of States whose citizens need protection and the
responsibility of the international community, which
involves the obligation to assist and support the efforts
of the State, including in implementing the
demobilization and reconstruction process.

While the protection of civilians includes and
involves a number of national and international
governmental and non-governmental actors, the role of
the Security Council takes on particular importance,
given the Council's responsibilities recognized by the
Charter as the principal organ entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security. Thus,
the Council's consideration of the protection of
civilians should, in our view, be part of a
comprehensive approach to the integrated settlement of
conflict situations, taking into account their
characteristics, their environment and their underlying
causes.

Indeed, in most cases, intra-State armed conflicts

and armed insurgencies are the result of frustration

brought about by poverty, the poor distribution of

wealth and rivalries of all kinds. Such conflicts, fuelled

by trafficking in persons, arms and drugs, affect above

all women, the elderly and children, in addition to the

threats that they pose to regional and international
security.

The undeniable importance and urgency of
providing an appropriate response to serious attacks on
the physical integrity and security of civilian
populations should not allow us to forget the dual need
for the Council not only to make progress in the
political settlement of conflicts and disputes, but also
to act in advance and to take appropriate preventive
action to defuse potentially dangerous situations. For
that, a fundamental and essential condition must be met:
the positive cooperation of neighbouring States and the
entire region in order to, on the one hand, ease the plight
of civilian populations taken hostage by the dispute or the
conflict and, on the other, to shoulder the responsibility
arising from being a neighbour and from international
obligations under international humanitarian law and
refugee law.

Enhancing efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts
by peaceful means, as well as in peacebuilding, in
countries emerging from conflict are ultimately the
best way to prevent conflicts from worsening or
recurring and thus putting innocent civilians at risk.
Against that background, no one can deny that one
factor leading to the escalation of armed conflicts and
physical and psychological harm to civilian
populations, in particular their most vulnerable sectors,
is the proliferation of and illicit trade in light weapons.
The harmful effects of those arms require resolute
action by the international community to put them
beyond the law and to bring about their elimination.

