Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome your presence,
Sir, and the fact that you are presiding over the work
of the Security Council today. We would also like to
thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for his briefing. We support
him in the difficult work with which he is entrusted.

We must once again express our regret that this
conflict has continued for eight years and that we are
still witnessing the ongoing sieges and violence being
endured by the Syrian people, particularly women and
children. In addition to living with the psychological
consequences of the situation, they urgently need
humanitarian assistance. We unequivocally condemn
the ongoing bombardment of civilian infrastructure
such as hospitals and schools, and the military activities
in residential areas in the cities of Damascus, Afrin and
Idlib, as well as in eastern Ghouta. They have only led
to more civilians being killed, wounded and displaced.
According to the most recent report of the Secretary
General (S/2018/243), between December and February
alone, there were 385,000 internally displaced persons
and 2.3 million people living in besieged and hard-to-
reach areas.

We regret that so far there are still obstacles
preventing the full implementation of resolution
2401 (2018). We call on all parties involved to make
every effort to ensure the effective implementation of
the resolution throughout Syria in order to facilitate
the safe, sustained and unhindered delivery of
humanitarian aid and services, as well as to enable the
medical evacuation of those who are seriously ill or
injured. In addition, according to the same report, since
October 2017, 86,000 civilians have returned to the city
of Raqqa, of whom 20,000 arrived in February alone.
Regrettably, 130 civilians have died and 658 have been
seriously injured by explosive remnants of war and
anti-personnel mines. In that regard, we would like
to highlight the visit by the United Nations mission to
Raqqa last week. We reiterate that the work of clearing
anti-personnel mines and explosive remnants of war is
crucial to facilitating the safe return of the displaced.

While it does not reflect what has gone on throughout
Syrian territory, it is important to highlight the recent
delivery of humanitarian aid through convoys, of which
the first, on 5 March, was to Douma in eastern Ghouta,
bringing food for more than 27,000 people. We also
believe that cross-border assistance is an important part
of the response to the situation, and we highlight the
food assistance to 2 million people and the dispatch by
the United Nations to areas of northern and southern
Syria of 449 trucks carrying aid for 1 million people.

We welcome the efforts of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, all the
humanitarian agencies concerned and the Russian
Federation that have enabled humanitarian assistance
to be delivered to various populations, in particular in
eastern Ghouta, which three convoys recently entered.
We call for that assistance to continue as safely as
possible. In that regard, we believe it is important to
strengthen the dialogue and coordination among the
humanitarian agencies, the United Nations and the
Syrian Government in order to facilitate the entry of
convoys and humanitarian aid workers, as well as the
safe and dignified return of refugees and internally
displaced persons. We emphasize the dangerous work of
the personnel of the various agencies and humanitarian
assistance bodies, whose staff risk their own lives
in carrying out their dangerous work on the ground.
We therefore reiterate the importance of full respect
for international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

We want to take this opportunity to reiterate how
important it is to build on the political momentum
following the commitments made at the Syrian
National Dialogue Congress in Sochi. That should be
the channel for reinforcing the Geneva process, led by
the United Nations in the context of resolution 2254
(2016). We hope for the speedy implementation of the
Sochi outcome and, as a result, the establishment of
a constitutional committee that can facilitate a viable
political transition. In that regard, we support the
results of the latest Astana meeting, which enabled
the agreements establishing de-escalation zones to
be strengthened. We hope they will be reflected on
the ground so as to reduce the violence and meet the
urgent humanitarian needs. We condemn any attempt
to foment fragmentation or sectarianism in Syria and
believe that it is the Syrian people who must freely
decide their future and their political leadership in the
context of their sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Finally, we reiterate that the only way to resolve the
conflict is through an inclusive, negotiated and agreed
political process, led by and for the Syrian people, and
aimed at achieving sustainable peace on their territory
without foreign pressure of any kind.

