Mr. Msosa (Malawi): 1 have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) during this open
debate of the Security Council on the topic of new
trends in United Nations peacekeeping operations.

At the outset, let me express my appreciation
to the Russian presidency for selecting the topic at
hand. Indeed, this debate is not only timely but also of
critical importance, especially given the very complex,
multidimensional and dynamic nature of peacekeeping
operations today. In order to genuinely engage in the
debate on new trends facing the conduct of United
Nations peacekeeping today, it is imperative that we
establish the correct legal standing. The fact that the
Security Council is the body mandated by the Charter
of the United Nations to ensure the maintenance of
international peace and security is an obligation that
collectively binds us as a global membership, which we,
as SADC, support.

At the same time, we should not lose sight of the
fact that most current conflicts are intra-State, pitting
legitimately elected Governments against armed groups,
some of which may have clearly stated political goals,
while others have none, with some of their declared
leaders not able even to seek or recognize international
mediation efforts. However, what often remains
abundantly clear are the impunity of violence and the
untold deaths, suffering and general socioeconomic
deprivation that the majority of the innocent civilian
population continue to face under such circumstances.

To that end, it remains the Security Council's
responsibility to heed the plight of the innocent victims
and to assist the legitimate sovereign authority of the
country concerned in restoring peace, while, at the
same time, reaching out to and enabling the parties
to the conflict to resolve their disagreements through
negotiation. In addition, it must be ensured that such
efforts take place within the context ofthe need not only
for a lasting peace, but also for one that is sufficiently
comprehensive to enable the rebuilding of institutions
of governance, as well as the necessary resumption of
the socioeconomic development process.

All the points that I have mentioned are what we, the
United Nations membership, have proudly undertaken
for more than 60 years of the peacekeeping effort
and continue to do so. That is why peacekeeping has
justifiably become the flagship activity of the United
Nations. However, the Council, in cooperation with
the entire United Nations membership, needs to put
that same role into a clear perspective. In undertaking
the task, a number of issues require the serious
consideration of the Council and of the entire United
Nations membership. For timekeeping reasons, I will
mention only three of those issues.

First, if peacekeeping operations are to remain truly
relevant, the mandates given to peacekeeping missions
must be crystal clear with regard to both what they
are envisaged to achieve and the resources available
to implement them. In that vein, it remains imperative
that the allotted resources be commensurate with the
mandated tasks. That is critical in order to avoid the
fallacy of overexpectation of what a peacekeeping
mission can achieve and the local population's view of
the same. It is also a question of ensuring that United
Nations missions continue to have the cooperation and
support of the population whom they are deployed to
assist.

Secondly, given the extent of impunity for crimes
usually perpetrated against an innocent civilian
population by a multitude of increasingly criminal and
even terrorist-oriented armed groups, SADC believes
that it is not only logical but also imperative to keep
in mind the operational and strategic consideration
that troop- and police-contributing countries deploying
troops to missions should be necessarily versatile,
capable and sufficiently politically determined in both
posture and mindset to deter impunity, including by
using force where necessary when it is so mandated.
In the medium to long terms, such active positive
engagement will make would-be criminal elements
think twice before targeting peacekeepers and the
civilians whom the peacekeepers are deployed to protect
and will enhance, rather than diminish, the safety and
security of our peacekeepers.

Thirdly, to ensure the eventual resolution of
conflict dynamics, it is important for troop- and
police-contributing nations to bring their political
capital to bear on the situation in tandem with their
troop and police contingents. By the same token, out
of practicality and a meaningful unity of effort, it is
necessary that the United Nations strive to harness
both the political will and the joint cooperation of the
regional bloc to which the country in conflict belongs
and those of all neighbouring nations bordering the
country in conflict.

In observance of the above considerations, working
in tandem and in close cooperation with the Security
Council, SADC agreed to deploy the Force Intervention
Brigade to the Democratic Republic of Congo under the
aegis of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), as authorized by resolution 2098 (2013).
The Brigade's robust posture contributed not only to the
routing of the Mouvement du 23 mars, an illegal armed
group that had reached an intolerable level of impunity
by capturing a whole city within MONUSCO's area
of responsibility, but also to the restoration of the
population's confidence in MONUSCO.

We are proud of our continued active participation
in that regard, as a participating regional body, as
individual country signatories and as actors in the effort
to achieve lasting peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo through the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. We believe that it is a role that will continue
to be invaluable, given our new collective membership's
experience, in efforts to peacefully resolve conflicts
occurring in the region. SADC's collective conviction
is therefore that eventual resolution of the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will only come
about through a political settlement.

In closing, let me reiterate that SADC is committed
to a continued partnership with the United Nations to
enable the realization of sustainable peace and security
in our region. In that connection, SADC would like
to pay tribute to all of the men and women who have
served and those who are serving today in various field
missions under extremely difficult situations, sometimes
in a hostile environment, for their dedication, courage
and selfless sacrifice. In particular, we remember with
sadness but gratitude those colleagues and friends who

have made the ultimate sacrifice through their efforts
to contribute to the maintenance of peace and security.

