Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate on
countering narratives, as this is one way to counteract
the phenomenon of terrorism. This scourge is
particularly worrisome to Belgium, which was a target
of horrific attacks on 22 March, following those in
France, Lebanon, Pakistan, C6te d'Ivoire, Turkey and
many other countries in the recent past. I would like
to align in spirit with our debate all the victims of
these atrocities. These attacks are attacks against the
international community and against our values.
We know how a terrorist group like Da'esh makes
harmful use of social media and radical discourse.
They spread broad-based propaganda and they adapt it
to their audience by adopting the codes of youth and
of the regions concerned. Besides this widespread
propaganda, what makes Da'esh particularly effective
is the investment in time and resources dedicated to
each of the individuals they hope to recruit. Recruiters
are trained for this purpose and, by following a specific
procedure, they find the type of narrative that is
most likely to lead that particular individual to join
their ranks.

We will never be able to thwart this extremely
effective machine by using only standardized, banal
and negative discourse. We cannot simply produce
counter-narratives. We have to convince people that
there are better things to do than to give aid to Da'esh
and commit terrorist acts. We have to coordinate our
efforts at the international, regional, national and local
levels, right down to single neighbourhoods, and we
have to ensure the participation of civil society.

I would like to share some thoughts about the
conditions that can enable us to produce effective
counter-narratives. First, it is important to adapt a
narrative to its target audience. Every culture, population
sector and social group has its own sensitivities, which
is why it is so important for each State to design its
own strategy for countering the radicalization that
leads to terrorism and terrorist recruitment. That is
exactly what the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674) is promoting in
its call for the adoption of national plans. Its section on
strategic communication, the Internet and social media
(see paragraph 55), details the importance of adapting
narratives to the local context, encouraging research
on Internet use in a context of violent extremism,
promoting values of tolerance and freedom of opinion,
working with victims and protecting journalists.

Secondly, an effective counter-narrative must also
be based on knowledgeable analysis of the motives of
potential terrorists, which often vary greatly. In that
regard, the results of projects such as the returnees
interview programme developed by the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force could prove
very useful.

Thirdly, it seems probable that the most effective
type of narrative will be those with a positive message;
too often, the messages are negative, saying, for
example, "Do not go to Syria. They are lying and it
will not be what you think it is." A positive message
should convey through very concrete examples that
young people can play an active role in society that is
rewarding both for them and for the community as a
whole. In short, they can imagine a positive future for
themselves. That assumes, however, that all the key
actors around them - the public authorities, school,
the local community, businesses, culture and the
media - have the means to ensure that this hope can
become reality.

Lastly, and most importantly, the counter-narrative
most likely to change the direction an individual has
taken is face-to-face dialogue that makes it possible to
work with potential terrorists, giving them time and
personal attention. Such counter-narratives generally
rely on those close to such young people 4 their
families, friends and religious leaders. They are also the
hardest to implement, because they require resources
and expertise. The United Nations undoubtedly has a
role to play in that regard in capacity-building and in
providing and promoting the exchange of experiences.

Belgium has established several instruments
aimed at combating violent radicalization that I will
describe briefly.

First, scientific research has shown that building
resilience during the early stages of exposure to radical
ideas has a protective effect against radicalization,
which is what Belgium has sought to do through a
project named BOUNCE, aimed at young people and
those close to them. More than 100 local representatives
have been trained in the use of BOUNCE resilience
tools. The project has been positively assessed by the
European Commission and will be expanded to several
European cities.

Secondly, as part of a broad prevention and safety
programme, 19 Belgian cities and municipalities have
added the fight against violent radicalization to their
prevention and security plans, supported by a significant
supplement to their budgets allocated by the federal
Government. In that regard, the Belgian Ministry of
the Interior is also organizing quarterly coordination
meetings at which cities and municipalities are kept
informed about developments in radicalization and
share their local experiences.

Belgium, in cooperation with the United Kingdom,
has launched a project open to all European Union
member States and financed by the European
Commission: the Syria Strategic Communications
Advisory Team. It aims to develop and share best
practices in the area of strategic communications with
the goal of preventing and countering acts of terrorism
and violent extremism, especially those linked to foreign
terrorist fighters. The project includes a small team of
experts from European Union member States who have
developed successful communications strategies for
dealing with the issue of foreign terrorist fighters.

