Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): It is a great honour to take part in this debate
under your presidency, Sir. You fittingly represent a
country that has played a key role in the successful

 

achievement of peace in Central America and that has for
a long time been an example of good government for the
entire hemisphere.
Argentina participated in the Security Council's
adoption in 1995 of the first resolutions designed to
implement the General Framework Agreement for Peace,
which was initialled in Dayton on 21 November of that
year. In our view, any assessment of the process that began
there must take into account the contrast between the
prevailing scepticism of that time and today's relative
optimism.

It is true that much remains to be done. A fully
functioning central Government, the practice of good
government, the return of refugees and displaced persons to
their places of origin, the exercise of freedom of
expression, cooperation with the International Tribunal and
the holding of municipal elections are some of the matters
that must be addressed as soon as possible. The difficulties
they present should not be cause for discouragement, nor
should they justify delays that jeopardize areas of
agreement or long-term objectives.

We are encouraged by the description in the Secretary-
General's report of the progress made in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, especially as
regards the functioning of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and, specifically, the fulfilment of
the mandate of the International Police Task Force. The
United Nations and all the agencies mentioned by the
Secretary-General that are involved in implementing the
Peace Agreement deserve our fullest confidence so that
they can successfully continue their difficult task.

We fully support the initiative to extend the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We also hope that the International Police Task Force,
which is part of that Mission, will have the necessary
military support to carry out its functions during the period
of its mandate.

We would like to express our special appreciation for
the work being done by Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and by
Mr. Manfred Seitner, Commissioner of the International
Police Task Force. At the same time, allow me to express
my gratitude to all the countries that, in various ways, are
contributing to this delicate mission. Argentina is honoured
to have been part of the International Police Task Force
since its inception and will continue to participate as long
as is necessary.

Allow me to say, as we approach the conclusion in
this important debate, that what has happened in that
region and its consequences can be only partially rectified
by the tools available to this Council. We therefore
believe that every avenue of solidarity and assistance
must be pursued, in order to return as much hope as
possible to those who have suffered so much.

