Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by expressing my appreciation to you,
Mr. President, and to the Senegalese presidency for
convening this open debate. I also thank the briefers
for their inputs.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

My delegation, while emphasizing the importance
of the role of the United Nations in peacekeeping
operations, believes that peacekeeping operations
should not be used as an alternative to addressing the
root causes of conflict.

The establishment of any peacekeeping operation
or the extension of a mandate for existing operations
should strictly abide by the puropose and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. 1 refer to principles
such as the consent of the parties, the non-use of force
except in self-defence, impartiality and respect for the
principles of sovereign equality, political independence
and territorial integrity.

I would also like to underline the unique
and indispensable role of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34) as the only
intergovernmental forum mandated by the General
Assembly to comprehensively review the whole question
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. According
to principles and guidelines in the annual report of the
C-34 agreed upon by the General Assembly, all issues
relating to peacekeeping operations, including the
subject of today's debate, should be taken to the C-34
for deliberation.

In our efforts to overcome the problems emanating
from the complexity and asymmetrical nature of the
threats, the use of technology and intelligence cannot
be ignored. However, it is necessary that the concerns
of Member States, especially the host countries, be
fully taken into account. Furthermore, the legal aspects
of using modern technology and intelligence-gathering
should also be defined in appropriate intergovernmental
processes.

The protection of civilians is the primary
responsibility of the host countries, and, where they are
so mandated, peacekeeping operations should aim to
support the national efforts of host countries to protect
their civilians. Therefore, any military intervention by
the United Nations or other foreign forces under the
pretext of protecting civilians is not acceptable.

Regional organizations are important partners in
maintaining regional peace and security. The United
Nations can benefit from their cooperation in efforts
to surmount asymmetrical threats and the challenges
that peacekeeping missions face, when necessary,
as complementary means. However, the primary
responsibility rests with the United Nations. The role
of regional organizations in that regard should be in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

United Nations police can play an important role
in establishing order or re-establishing domestic police
services in order to create appropriate conditions for
sustainable peace and development. They should
support host State counterparts in their efforts to
develop community-orientated policing and mentors and
train host-State police officers or provide specialized
personnel for various types of investigations. United
Nations police capacity must be strengthened so as to
provide such useful services.

In conclusion, while paying tribute to the men
and women who serve under the flag of the United
Nations, especially those peacekeepers who lost their
lives in the cause of peace, I would like to express my
Government's readiness to contribute to United Nations
peacekeeping operations logistically and militarily,
by deploying troops and police to United Nations
peacekeeping missions.

