Mr. Blok (Netherlands): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting today. I would also
like to thank the three excellent briefers. Their
informative presentations highlight the ongoing need
for international involvement, even four years since
the start of the conflict. We have even seen a surge
in violence in recent weeks, with new casualties as a
result. That is why, Mr. President, I am so grateful for
your timely efforts to spotlight the situation in eastern
Ukraine again today. The conflict must not be allowed
to persist.

Four years of fighting in Donbas has inflicted a
heavy toll on many parties.

First, it has taken a heavy toll on the people of
Ukraine. More than 10,000 lives have been lost in
that time. Many innocent civilians have had their
daily lives disrupted; some lost their homes or became
displaced. In parts of Donetsk and Luhansk, civilian
infrastructure has been seriously damaged. The power
and water supplies are insecure. Unexploded ordnance
and mines are a daily threat.

Secondly, a toll is being taken on the young
Ukrainian democracy. We admire the steps taken by
the current Ukrainian Government towards reform, as
well as the positive role played by Ukraine's vibrant
civil society. But the conflict has put pressure on
that young democracy and its economy. We call on
the Government to continue its reforms, and we will
continue to support the Ukrainian Government in its
efforts bilaterally, through the European Union and in
other international institutions.

Thirdly, as I said in this same Chamber two weeks
ago, this conflict is taking a toll on the international
legal order (see S/PV.8262). In Ukraine, we find that
our international rulebook is in jeopardy. The illegal
annexation of Crimea and the active, destabilizing
role of Russia in Donbas go directly against Article 2,
paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United Nations: the
prohibition of the use of force against the territorial
integrity and political independence of any State. Like
others, I therefore reiterate our strong commitment
to the sovereignty, political independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Ukraine.

As the Council is well aware, it is not only the
people of Ukraine who have been affected by the
conflict. On 17 July 2014, 298 innocent people from 17
different countries were dragged into this conflict and
lost their lives. On that fateful day, a Malaysia Airlines
civilian airliner travelling from Amsterdam to Kuala
Lumpur was shot down over eastern Ukraine from a
location controlled by Russian-backed separatists. One
hundred and ninety-six of those victims were citizens
of the Netherlands - men, women and children from
my country.

The Security Council responded immediately,
with the unanimous adoption of resolution 2166 (2014),
proposed by Australia, which was one of the countries
most affected. I also want to remind the Council that
our efforts to establish an international tribunal under
Chapter VII, through the Council, were blocked by a
Russian veto.

My Government announced that it would not
rest before the truth was established and justice was
achieved, together with its international partners. Years
of painstaking, independent international investigations
followed. As a result, it has now been established that
the missile that downed Flight MH-l7 was launched
by a Buk TELAR that came from the Russian Army.
That conclusion was not taken lightly. It is the result of
intensive, in-depth study and analysis.

Last Thursday, the Joint Investigation Team
released additional findings - based on legally sound
and compelling evidence - that the Buk missile system
that downed Flight MH-l7 belonged to the fifty-third
anti-aircraft missile brigade of the Russian Army.

On that basis, and motivated by our desire to
establish the truth and achieve justice and accountability,
Australia and the Netherlands announced last Friday
that we hold the Russian Federation accountable for its
part in the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7.

As a consequence, the Netherlands and Australia
now call on the Russian Federation to engage seriously
and constructively with us in this matter and accept its
responsibility. Along with that, the Russian Federation
needs to start cooperating fully with the Joint
Investigation Team's ongoing criminal investigation.

That request is nothing new. Indeed, it is a clear
demand set out in resolution 2166 (2014), which I have
in front of me and which was unanimously adopted by
the Council almost four years ago. By voting for that
resolution, all 15 members of the Council, including
the Russian Federation, voted for justice. They voted
for those responsible to be held to account, and for
all States to cooperate fully with efforts to establish
accountability. Unfortunately, four years later,
those demands need to be repeated. I reiterate them
yet again today, supported by a massive amount of
irrefutable evidence.

When it comes to establishing truth and
accountability for what happened to Flight MH-17, no
State has the right to remain silent. Quite the contrary:
all States have a duty to cooperate constructively,
to shed light on the truth and not to obscure it with
continuous mist. I call on the Russian Federation to
take that responsibility.

For our part, we have kept the Council informed
of our efforts and findings on a regular basis, and we
will continue to do so. We are grateful for the broad
support that we have enjoued throughout from the vast
majority of the international community, including
from Australia, the United Nations Secretary-General,
the NATO Secretary General, all our European partners
and countries such as Canada, New Zealand, Ukraine,
Malaysia and the United States.

In conclusion, the downing of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 is a stark reminder of how an armed
conflict in any part of the world can impact any ofus, at
any time. That is another reason why the international
community cannot allow this conflict to persist. After
four years of devastation, Ukraine deserves peace,
lasting peace, on the basis of the Minsk agreements,
supported by all of its neighbours and in accordance
with international law. So too, do the victims of Flight
MH-17 deserve justice.

