Mr. Li Zhaoxing (China) (spoke in Chinese): A
few days ago, the Sudanese Government and the
Sudanese Liberation Movement signed the Darfur
peace agreement in Abuja. This represented significant
progress in the Abuja process and signified that the
peace process in the Sudan has arrived at a new
historical turning-point. China is deeply gratified at
this development and would like to express its sincere
congratulations to the Sudanese Government and to all
the Sudanese people. This development demonstrates
once again that, with the support of the international
community, African problems can be solved through
political negotiations by relying on the wisdom of the
Africans, using African ways and under African
leadership.

This achievement of peace has been difficult to
come by. The African Union (AU) has invested a
tremendous amount of energy and has made relentless
efforts to that end. At the last moment in the
negotiations, both the Sudanese Government and the
Sudanese Liberation Movement displayed great
flexibility. China highly appreciates their efforts and at
the same time would like to urge those factions that
have not yet signed the peace agreement to proceed on
the basis of the long-term fundamental interests of the
Darfur people and respond promptly to the
requirements set out by the AU.

The signing of the Darfur peace agreement is
only the first step in a thousand-mile march: there are
more important, more difficult and more complex
challenges ahead. Comprehensive, timely and faithful
implementation of the peace agreement requires not
only that the various Sudanese parties fulfil their
commitments and comply with the agreement, but also
that the international community provide effective
help. Due to constraints in the areas of personnel,
equipment and funding, the capacity of the African
Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) has been
extremely strained. In a few months' time, the
resources of AMIS might even be totally depleted.
Assisting AMIS is the consensus wish of all members
of the Security Council and the international
community. The top priority at this moment is to turn
that consensus into a reality and help strengthen the
capacity of AMIS, thus creating a good foundation for
the implementation of the Abuja agreement.

Transition from AMIS to a United Nations-led
operation is a decision in principle made by the AU,
and the United Nations Secretariat has carried out
relevant preparations for that purpose. China hopes and
trusts that the Sudanese Government and the various
factions in Darfur will seize, and make full use of, the
current momentum and will speed up consultations
with the Secretariat so that the relevant preparations
can be completed as early as possible.

I wish to take this opportunity to stress once
again that the sole purpose of a United Nations
operation in Darfur is to assist the Sudanese
Government and the various factions in Darfur in
implementing the Abuja agreement. Therefore, the
consent and cooperation of the Sudanese Government
are prerequisites for the deployment of a United
Nations operation.

China is deeply worried at the lack of
improvement in the security and humanitarian situation
in the Darfur region. We urge all parties concerned to
be faithful to their commitments and to ensure the
freedom of movement of humanitarian relief workers,
so that necessary humanitarian goods can be delivered
to all refugees and internally displaced persons in a
timely manner. Currently, the international community
is faced with the urgent problem of the serious
inadequacy of humanitarian relief funds and materials
in the Darfur region, which threatens many relief
agencies with the prospect of closing down and
withdrawing. It is imperative that the international
community provide assistance as soon as possible in
order to solve this burning problem.
As a member of the international community,
China is willing to work with all others and to try our
best to help the Sudan attain peace, stability, prosperity
and development and build a harmonious society in
which all factions coexist in peace and in which the
people enjoy security and well-being.

