Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Haekkerup, for his comprehensive briefing. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his detailed
report.

The Chinese position on the Kosovo question has
been reiterated on many occasions. I do not wish to
repeat it today. Rather, I would like to share our views
in connection with the Secretary-General's report.

First, the Kosovo-wide elections are drawing
closer and the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has done a lot of work to
prepare for them. We support UNMIK, especially Mr.
Haekkerup's efforts, in this regard. We believe that
during the further preparations for the elections,
UNMIK will fully take into consideration the views
and suggestions from all sides, so that the elections
will be successfully carried out in a fair and peaceful
atmosphere.

The second point I would like to raise concerns
security. In paragraphs 7 to 10 of his report, the
Secretary-General describes in detail the security
situation in Kosovo, including incidents of assault,
arson, murder and attacks on police forces that take
place in minority communities. The report predicts that
political violence might take place during the election.
We would like to see UNMIK take effective measures
to ensure the safe return of refugees and the rebuilding
of the minority communities. We believe that the
present security measures are insufficient.

The third point concerns confidence-building. We
have always maintained that promoting reconciliation
and tolerance among all nationalities in the area is an
important aim of the international community. It is the
only way to bring about a multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo. Confidence-building in Mitrovica is of vital
and particular importance. Formulating a
comprehensive strategy for Mitrovica was an important
goal of the Security Council mission to Kosovo in
June. However, there is very little progress in this area.
We believe that violence still exists in Kosovo.
Especially when the security of the minority
communities is not guaranteed, UNMIK should take
effective measures to increase trust among all
communities. In particular, it should take measures to
guarantee the safety of the Serbs.

Lastly, we can see from the Secretary-General's
report that UNMIK's communication with the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia has increased. We are pleased
with this. As was pointed out by other colleagues,
without the participation and cooperation of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, it is impossible to
handle the question of Kosovo properly. We hope to
see the further strengthening of cooperation between
UNMIK and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The
views of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia should be
fully respected.

Kosovo's situation is at a crucial juncture. The
Security Council should follow closely the
development of the situation. We will endorse the
presidential statement to be adopted after this meeting.
We hope that, with the cooperation of all sides,
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) will be fully
implemented.

