Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): We thank the Polish
presidency for organizing today's open debate and
providing the concept note (S/2018/444, annex). We
also thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2018/462) and its recommendations. We are also
grateful to Mr. Yves Daccord, Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and
the civil-society representative Ms. Hanaa Edwar for
their insightful briefings.

Today's debate is an opportunity for us to recommit
to international humanitarian law, and in particular to
full compliance with the Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols, without reservation, as a crucial
framework for the protection of civilians in all conflicts.

The report of the Secretary-General depicts the
bleak situation of civilians living in conflict-affected
areas through shocking statistics, with tens ofthousands
of fatalities in 2017 alone and many more injured. We
note the many alarming developments and threats
faced by civilians in the conflict areas mentioned in
the report. We share the view of the Secretary-General
that the gravity and scale of the current situation
must be matched by robust international protection
mechanisms. In too many parts of the world today, we
are seeing a rise in the ideology of hatred and racial
discrimination in situations where human beings' right
to life is increasingly threatened. Systematic and gross
violations of human rights, the use of force, economic
coercion and a lack of international protection are some
of the main factors fuelling the increase in such threats.
We strongly condemn violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law, including attacks on humanitarian and medical
personnel, as well as violence, threats and intimidation
aimed atjournalists and media workers. The perceptions
of the inevitability of civilian losses and civilian
suffering in armed conflicts are equally disturbing.

The principles of the humanity, impartiality,
neutrality and independence of humanitarian action
must be fully respected. Unimpeded humanitarian
access must be ensured in order to prevent the suffering
of civilians caught in conflict. Armenia's commitment
to promoting the importance of the safety of children
and students in armed conflict is also reflected in
its endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration.
Promoting the norms of international humanitarian law
and raising awareness in that regard is an important
element in Armenia's security-sector governance.
International humanitarian law is incorporated into
the curricula of military educational institutions
in Armenia. We also greatly appreciate the ICRC's
cooperation in implementing training projects and
reaching out to people affected by conflicts who are in
need of humanitarian assistance.

The civilian population of Nagorno Karabakh
and the regions of Armenia bordering it have been
consistently exposed to serious humanitarian risks.
Azerbaijan's military aggression against Nagorno
Karabakh in April 2016 not only violated the ceasefire
agreement signed in 1994 and the 1995 trilateral
agreement consolidating the ceasefire, it also resulted in
grave violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights law, including barbaric acts equivalent to
war crimes and crimes against humanity. It inflicted
losses on the civilian population, including women,
children and the elderly. Moreover, in clear violation
of humanitarian law, the Azerbaijan authorities have
placed military installations in civilian settlements and
used them as a launch pad for shelling along the line of
contact with Nagorno Karabakh.

By pursuing a policy criminalizing those who
visit Nagorno Karabakh, including journalists
and parliamentarians from all over the world, the
Government of Azerbaijan has shown that it is prepared
to conduct unprecedented mass atrocities in the region.
It is a well-known fact that the perpetrators of crimes
try to limit the flow of information and freedom of
movement in order to better conceal their ongoing
and planned misdeeds. It is also alarming that the
leadership of Azerbaijan continues to incite hatred
against Armenians, a fact that has been affirmed and
condemned by many human rights organizations and
bodies, including the United Nations Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination in its concluding
observations on the 2016 reports of Azerbaijan
(CERD/C/AZE/CO/7-9).

Protecting the civilian population requires full
and unhindered access for the ICRC, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and United Nations treaty bodies to conflict areas,
including to places of detention, as well as ensuring
the monitoring of conditions of captives in conflict
situations. The Nagorno Karabakh authorities have
cooperated fully with the ICRC mission in Stepanakert,
which has regular access and the ability to verify the
humanitarian situation on the ground. The principles of
humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence in
humanitarian action must be fully respected. Attempts
to politicize a purely humanitarian issue and refusals to
cooperate with regard to missing persons at the level of
the relevant authorities demonstrate a clear intention to
deliberately impede progress in that area.

An international presence in conflict areas and
monitoring and verification mechanisms are crucial to
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. Armenia
and Nagorno Karabakh fully support establishing an
investigative mechanism on the ceasefire violations
and expanding the monitoring capacities of the Office
of the Personal Representative of the Chairperson-in-
Office ofthe Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe. The implementation of those clear-cut
agreements would enable the international community
to investigate and verify all cases of ceasefire
violations and human casualties, as well as to identify
the party responsible.

Placing human life above malicious political
manipulations requires genuine will, free from hatred
and intolerance, which are regrettably currently lacking
in certain places. We firmly believe that, in order to
effectively protect civilians, priority should be given to
early action on warning signs of deteriorating situations
that could potentially result in conflicts or a resumption
of hostilities. It is imperative to recognize and combat
the extremist and fundamentalist ideologies emanating
from certain countries and terrorist or other criminal
groups that encourage hatred and discriminatory
attitudes towards their neighbours, minorities or simply
those with different identities.

