Mr. De Alba (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico commends the delegation of South Africa for
convening this important and timely debate. We also
thank the Secretary-General for presenting his report
(S/2011/634*), as well as for his personal interest in
the matter we are debating.

Mexico recognizes the importance that the
concept of the rule of law has acquired through a
number of Security Council resolutions, in particular
when it comes to establishing mechanisms for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, the attention
that has been given to the justice and security needs of
women and children, and the promotion of gender
equality in access to justice.

In the same vein, we welcome the transitional
justice initiatives that have advanced accountability,
respect for human rights and the creation of
institutional capacity, because they have generated
trust among citizens in their institutions and have
encouraged reforms to the rule of law. For that reason,
we believe that it is critical for Security Council
decisions to adhere to the principles of the rule of law
in order to guarantee the legitimacy of its actions, as
the President himself stated few moments ago in his
national capacity. It is imperative for the Council to
comply with and ensure compliance with international
law. We acknowledge that the Council has made
progress in that area, but a great deal remains to be
done in order to guarantee that all actions that this
organ decides to take are in every case based on and
guided by international law.

As the Secretary-General's report emphasizes,
Mexico believes that the Organization should play a
leading role in the efforts to combat impunity for the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes with
international importance. In that respect, the
establishment of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals will ensure the effective
conclusion of the important mandates granted by the
Council to the Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. On its part, the growing role
that the Council has played in the referral of situations
to the International Criminal Court, as was the case
with the situations in Darfur and, more recently, in
Libya, is a positive contribution to efforts by the
international community to ensure that such crimes do
not go unpunished when a State lacks the will or the
ability to prosecute them.

While the Secretary-General's report addresses
the status of the rule of law in societies faced with
conflict or the aftermath of conflict, it also makes clear
that the promotion and strengthening of the rule of law
are not simply a remedy for societies faced with such
situations. Rather, it also constitutes a guide for
behaviour to which all States are obligated, regardless
of their level of economic or social development or
their political or military power. Similarly, the
principles of the rule of law apply to all international
organizations, including their subsidiary organs.

In that context, my delegation believes that the
Secretary-General's proposal to fast-track the
implementation of indicators for the rule of law is a
positive step. However, it should be kept in mind that
quantitative indicators alone are not sufficient for
evaluating results. It is therefore important to include
qualitative criteria, such as equal access to justice, the
effectiveness of judicial systems and the fight against
impunity. In addition, it should be recalled that the
indicators used to measure respect for and compliance
with the rule of law should be applied to all Member
States.

Mexico reiterates its conviction that the rule of
law is indispensable for peacekeeping and international
security, as well as a precondition for ensuring the
comprehensive development of the international
community on the political, economic and social
levels.

Mexico supports the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2012/l) that the President has just read out, in
order that the Council promote the strengthening of the
rule of law in its decisions and underscore the
importance of respect for international conventions and
treaties as a first step towards preventing conflicts.

Finally, my delegation would like to stress that
the upcoming high-level meeting on the rule of law at
the national and international levels, to be held as part
of the General Assembly on 24 September, represents
an opportunity to better address this issue from a more
cross-cutting, balanced, better-coordinated and longer-
term perspective.

