Mr. Oshima: I would like first of all to thank the
members of the Council for their support, particularly
the kind, encouraging words said about the work of my
Office, the United Nations agencies and partners and
generally the humanitarian community active in
Angola. This has been very encouraging.

I think that some of the questions raised could
perhaps be better answered by the representative of
Angola. But I will try to answer them to the extent that
I have been able to see things and hear things after
being on the ground.

First of all, on the question of access, as I have
mentioned, generally, it has considerably improved.
There is no doubt about it. The Government has been
cooperative in ensuring maximum possible access to
populations in need. As for the family quartering areas,
out of the 35 or 36 areas that have been established by
the Government pursuant to the Memorandum of
Understanding, the humanitarian communities have
been able to access 31. The multisectoral operations
are under way in those areas. I think that that is quite
an improvement.

Access restrictions derive not as much from
general insecurity - there is a problem of insecurity,
of course - as from mine infestation, to which many
representatives of the Council have alluded. Angola is
one of the most heavily mined countries in the world
and has one of the highest rates of landmine injuries
per capita. One thing that is clear is that neither the
Government nor UNITA has any need for landmines in
today's Angola. As mentioned by many delegations,
the Government is to be congratulated for recently
ratifying the Ottawa Convention. The problem is that
mines have been laid over a 30-year period by many
different actors.

There is also a problem of coordination with the
Government that needs to be addressed. Strengthened
coordination at the national and provincial levels is
necessary, and additional Government funding will be
welcome. A national mines survey is needed. I
understand that the United States has committed $1
million to a landmine impact study that could start later
this year.

As far as the United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) funding request is
concerned, in the 2002 Consolidated Appeal process,
we have requested $6.3 million to address landmine
issues relating to humanitarian operations. But no
contributions have so far been received. NGOs
separately report problems with funding. This is one
area in which we clearly need urgent support from the
international community to expand mine action and
reorient current activities towards mine-risk education
for returning populations. At least 7 provinces, which
account for approximately 40 per cent of the
countryside, are heavily mined. This is indeed a very
serious impediment to the promotion of return and
resettlement of the displaced population.

Concerning some of the practical issues that we
have raised with the Government, such as the repair of
roads and bridges, infrastructure, air strips and so forth,
these are issues that United Nations agencies have
raised over the past years with the Angolan
Government. We continue to raise them so that the
most serious effort is made to address these very
practical issues.

Angola is a vast country. The infrastructure is
generally in appalling condition in many parts of the
country. Therefore, a lot of humanitarian operations are
carried out by air, which comes at a high cost. I believe
approximately 60 per cent of humanitarian delivery of
assistance is by air, so it is one of the largest
humanitarian operations in the world and also the
costliest. Repair of roads, bridges and other airstrips -
particularly roads and bridges - would therefore be
crucial in order to make more resources available for
the actual procurement of goods rather than spending
resources on air transportation costs.

I raised these issues once again in my meeting
with the ministries concerned. We submitted to those
ministries a list of high-priority infrastructure repairs,
and I think they have taken good note of our concerns
as well as of the high-priority repairs that we would
like to see take place soon.

As to the question about resettlement
programmes, I think it could be better answered by the
representative of Angola.

With regard to the demobilization and
resettlement of ex-combatant soldiers, we understand
that the Government has a plan to complete the
demobilization of nearly 80,000 soldiers by 20 July,
and that 5,000 of them will be integrated into the
Angolan armed forces. In addition, the Angolan
Government has requested the World Bank and other
actors to develop a demobilization and reintegration
programme. So that is very much under consideration,
and the Government is actively engaged in planning for
it, with support from international organizations such
as the World Bank.

As far as the United Nations is concerned, the
Organization provides support, as requested by the
Government. Thus far, the Government has requested
the Organization to assist the families of ex-
combatants, and agencies are currently providing
emergency assistance in several family areas.

With respect to the time frame for resettlement,
we asked that question, but we were not provided with
a clear idea as to how the time frame and the details of
the resettlement of internally displaced persons are
being considered within the Government. I get the
impression that very active planning is under way.

Concerning refugees, Angola, as mentioned
earlier, has a refugee population of slightly less than
half a million in the neighbouring countries. As far as I
am aware, the conditions are not yet in place for the
organized voluntary return of refugees, although
spontaneous repatriation movement has apparently
begun in some locations. I understand that the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is
preparing for the return of refugees from neighbouring
countries to Angola.

The guidelines for internally displaced persons
that the Angolan Government has adopted in its
national legislation are commendable, as I mentioned,
but it is important that they be actively implemented.
To the extent that we are aware, the Government has
been cooperative with the United Nations agencies -
and, particularly, with my Office, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs - in
implementing these principles, not only at the national
level but also at the provincial level. So there is an
intention to implement them, but clearly, much more
needs to be done, given the magnitude of the problems
involved.

