Mr. Mukerji (India): We should like to congratulate
China on its presidency of the Security Council for this
month. We appreciate the briefing given to us today by
the Secretary-General. We encourage the Secretary-
General to elaborate the briefing into a report that can
be given to world leaders when they meet later this year
for the seventieth anniversary summit on the founding
of the United Nations. We acknowledge the very useful
concept note (S/2015/87, annex) circulated by the
Chinese delegation for today's open debate.

First, the Security Council has taken the lead in
referring to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations while attempting to maintain
international peace and security. It is a matter of concern
for those ofus who are not privileged to sit permanently
in the Council that the Council's invocation of those
purposes and principles appears selective, to suit the
national interests of powerful Member States. The
Council's decisions on issues not directly linked with
maintaining international peace and security cannot
encroach upon thejurisdiction ofthe General Assembly,
where all of us are equally represented.

Secondly, we endorse tackling global challenges
together in a cooperative manner, especially to
implement our development agenda. The very nature of
those challenges, which are increasingly transboundary
in nature, requires concerted action. Terrorism is a
good example - it directly threatens development,
especially in many developing countries. However,
concerted action by the Council to implement its
landmark decisions, including resolution 1373 (2001),
which imposes counter-terrorism obligations on all
Member States, is absent. Counter-terrorism sanctions
regimes, especially set out under resolution 1267
(1999), are administered ambivalently and opaquely by
the Council. The listing of the perpetrators of the most
heinous of terrorist crimes is subject to the whims of
powerful Member States. Even brazen public violations
of the sanctions regime by listed individuals and entities,
far from attracting punitive measures, do not even elicit
the Council's mildest censure. That inaction is a serious
deviation from the responsibilities given to the Council
by the Charter, with dangerous consequences.

Thirdly, we are glad to see the concept note
acknowledge the need to take into account the views
of troop-contributing countries while formulating
peacekeeping mandates. We deeply regret that the
Council has so far repeatedly violated, and in fact
diluted, the clear provisions of Article 44 of the
Charter, which explicitly requires the Council to invite
the Member States contributing troops that are not
members of the Council to participate in the decisions
of the Council. That has seriously compromised the
objectives of peacekeeping.

Fourthly, we endorse the call to give priority to
the peaceful settlement of disputes while using the
provisions of Chapter VI of the Charter. The festering
situations in Africa, West Asia and, lately, Europe
are vivid illustrations of the Council's inability or
disinclination to use those provisions. We are convinced
that only through an inclusive political dialogue process
can any lasting peace and security be sustained. The
Council must invest more time, energy and resources
into implementing Chapter VI of the Charter.

Finally, it is ironic that calls for democracy
and the rule of law are being made in a Council that
itself embodies the undemocratic stranglehold of
the privileges of a few, forged by a wartime alliance
that no longer exists. The logic of democracy and the
anguished faces of human suffering across the world
call for urgent action to reform the Council. We must
do so this year if we are to learn the right lessons of
history.

