Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): I thank you and
your delegation, Mr. President, for convening this debate
on peace and justice and the roles of the International
Criminal Court and the Security Council. I also thank
you for your presence here today, which is an indication
of the importance that your country attaches to the rule
of law.

I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, President
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) Judge Sang-
Hyun Song and Mr. Phasiko Mochochoko, who was
speaking on behalf of the ICC Prosecutor, for their
briefings this morning.

This debate comes at a time when the United Nations
is focusing on the rule of law. Less than a month ago,
heads of State and Government gathered at the United
Nations for the High-level Meeting on the Rule of Law
at the National and International Levels, where they
adopted a declaration on the matter (General Assembly Resolution 67/1). In January, during the South African
presidency, the Security Council held an open debate
on the rule of law in the maintenance of international
peace and security (see S/PV.6705) and adopted a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/l). This debate is
therefore timely.

I also thank you, Mr. President, for the
comprehensive concept note (S/2012/731, annex), which
touches on key elements relating to the fight against
impunity. The relationship between the International
Criminal Court and the Security Council needs to be on
the agenda. Nonetheless, allow me first to make some
observations on the general aspects ofpeace andjustice
touched upon in the concept note.

Peace and justice are inextricably connected. One
without the other is, at best, short term and, at worst,
futile. That empirical statement is normatively validated
in both the Charter of the United Nations and the Rome
Statute. Article 1, paragraph 1, of the Charter provides
that one of the purposes of the United Nations is to take
action in conformity with the principles ofjustice and
international law in order to maintain international
peace and security.

The relationship between peace and justice is
reflected most starkly in article 16 of the Rome
Statue, which provides for the Council to defer ICC
investigations in the exercise of its primary mandate
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Therefore, applying the provisions of the Charter,
a deferral should only be granted if the Council
determines that the deferral would contribute to the
maintenance or restoration of peace in a given situation.

While there is the view that that is a situation of
potential conflict between peace andjustice, in our View
it reflects a dynamic relationship. That is particularly
true since, as observed in the concept note, article 16
does not deprive the Council of jurisdiction, nor does it
grant any amnesty.

As a State party to the ICC, we recognize the
important role that the Court plays in fighting impunity
and in promoting the rule of law. That is the primary
mandate of the ICC and we trust that, as we head towards
the ICC's second decade of existence, the importance
of that mandate will become clearer to those that are
still on the outside looking in. We are of course also a
Member of the United Nations, which has the primary
mandate for the maintenance of international peace and
security.

The United Nations and the ICC therefore represent
opposite sides of the peace and justice coin. The
dynamism of the relationship between peace andjustice
is reflected in the fact that each organization also has
a role to play in the mandate of the other. No one could
dispute that the search for peace is irrelevant to the ICC,
just as it cannot be asserted thatjustice is not important
to the United Nations.

Nonetheless, it is important to emphasize that the
United Nations and the ICC, while they are closely
related and both are institutionally normative, are
independent organizations with independent mandates.
In that respect, it should be recalled that article 2 of the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations
and the ICC provides that each organization must
respect the other's mandate. Similarly, while, as the
concept note explains, article 3 does provide for close
cooperation between the two bodies, that cooperation is
intended to ensure that their respective responsibilities
are discharged effectively and in conformity with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and the Statute.

I have emphasized these points to caution against
any interpretation of either the peace-and-justice
relationship or the cooperative relationship of the ICC
and the United Nations as suggesting that one or other
organization should sacrifice the pursuit of its own
mandate to help achieve the mandate of the other.

The relationship between the Security Council
and the ICC must be based on mutual respect for their
respective mandates. The Council should therefore
avoid undermining the ICC, just as the ICC should not
undermine the Council. In that regard, I wish to raise
four issues relating to Council practices that could have
the effect of undermining the Court.

First, to date, the Security Council's referrals
of situations to the ICC have not obliged all Member
States, as is the norm with Chapter VII resolutions, to
cooperate with the Court. Under resolutions 1593 (2005)
and 1970 (2011), the Council obliges only the situation
countries to cooperate. As we all know, the reason for
this is to exempt some permanent members from their
duty to cooperate. Secondly, both resolutions grant
exemptions from ICC jurisdiction for nationals of some
States for alleged ICC crimes in the situation countries.
Thirdly, both resolutions preclude the possibility of
United Nations funding for related ICC investigations
and prosecutions, notwithstanding the fact that when
the Council acts under Chapter VII, it does so on behalf
of the United Nations. Finally, when there have been
instances of non-cooperation, the Council has not
followed up, behaving as if referral was an end in itself.

Collectively, this pattern raises a question about the
seriousness with which the Council takes the ICC as a
dispenser ofjustice. How can it appear to be supportive
of the ICC if it is unwilling to subject its members
to the duty to cooperate, to fund the activities of the
Court that flow from referrals, or to act when there is
non-cooperation? How can the Council begin to trust
the Court and, consequently, expect others to trust it,
when it is unwilling to subject nationals of its member
countries to the scrutiny of the ICC?

In a way, the relationship between the ICC and
the Security Council embodies the relationship
between peace and justice. If the Council behaves in
a manner that undermines the ICC, it undermines this
relationship, too. We hope this debate will contribute
to an honest stocktaking within the Council of how to
better manage that relationship.

