Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the United States for convening
today's meeting and congratulate it on its presidency in
December. We also thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen
for his update on the political process in the Syrian
Arab Republic. We renew once again our highest
consideration for his admirable efforts as facilitator of
the Constitutional Committee. We also thank Ms. Rajaa
Altalli for her briefing.

With regard to the work of the Constitutional
Committee in Geneva, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea regrets the lack of progress made since the
first round of discussions and encourages the various
delegations to overcome the divergences that made it
impossible to adopt the agenda of the second meeting
at the end of November. In this context, the convening
of a third round of negotiations is indispensable for the
achievement of positive and tangible results that serve
the interests and aspirations of the Syrian people.

The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is optimistic and hopes that common ground
can be found to bridge the gap between the parties
and that they will participate objectively in the work
of the Committee. We recall the need for there to be
no external interference, as this is a fully sovereign
and Syrian process that must be guided by the search
for consensus exclusively among the national parties
meeting in Geneva. If the political process is to move
forward decisively, there must be no forces that seek to
undermine the process of reconciling the Syrian people
and amending their Constitution.

We agree that the threat of external interference
clearly contradicts resolution 2254 (2015). In this
regard, my Government continues to rely on the good
offices and leadership of the United Nations to support
this process, putting an end to attempts to block the
work of the Committee. We reiterate once again that
the national sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic must be fully respected
throughout this process. We welcome thejoint statement
of the fourteenth round of consultations of the Astana
guarantors in their determination to support the work of
the Committee and other key issues that could restore
peace and stability in Syria.

We must remain cognizant of the need for the
Committee to work constructively, which requires
action by all to prevent tensions in the north-west from
hindering its efforts. Furthermore, we again emphasize
the importance of confidence-building measures as a
means to energize the political process. As we have
been reiterating, large-scale reciprocal releases of
detainees and abductees could certainly serve as an
important step in this regard.

On a different note, and following my colleagues
who have spoken before me, from this month's
programme of work, I understand that this is the last
regular meeting in which the delegation of the Republic
oquuatorial Guinea is participating as a non-permanent
member of this great body. In this regard, we would
like to thank the delegations of the French Republic, the
United Kingdom, the People's Republic of China, the
Russian Federation and the United States of America
for their continued dedication to maintaining the
active role of the Security Council in the promotion
of international peace and security assigned to it by
the Charter of the United Nations. We also thank all
our fellow non-permanent members, including those
we are leaving behind, for having intentionally and
constructively contributed and continuing to contribute
to the fulfilment by the permanent members their
great task.

To the new non-permanent members that will
assume their mandates on 1 January, we wish them
success in their respective terms. We leave the Council
with the hope that it will continue to work in a spirit of
consensus and wisdom to resolve the heated conflicts
and threats that our beloved world is currently facing.

We thank everyone, including the staff of the
Secretariat and ofthe Security Council Affairs Division,
as well as the interpreters and conference technicians,
for providing us all with the necessary support and for
having taught us a great deal. I would be remiss ifI did
not also thank the diplomatic staff and the personal and
local experts of the Permanent Mission of Equatorial
Guinea for the work, contributions and sacrifices they
have undertaken for our country here in New York,
especially given that Equatorial Guinea had never
before served a term on the Council. We are very proud
of them all.

Finally, I would like to say that as we approach
the end of our term on the Security Council, over the
past two years Equatorial Guinea has tried with great
pride, willingness and determination to live up to the
trust that everyone has placed in us, to serve and be
useful to the world and humankind in our quest for
lasting peace and security and to contribute to efforts
to the peaceful resolution and settlement of conflicts
and disputes in order to make the world a better place
for all of us. All of that is inspired by the peaceful
and supportive nature and devotion of the people and
institutions of Equatorial Guinea, and above all by the
political will and political philosophy of His Excellency
Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, President of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea, on behalf of whom I once again
convey our thanks to all departments of the United
Nations for their cooperation.

