Mr. De Laiglesia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to start by thanking China, as President of
the Security Council for this month, for having
organized this open debate on a comprehensive
strategy for achieving peace and security in Somalia
and for the concept note (S/2011/114, annex) prepared
to guide our debate. I also wish to thank the Secretary-
General for his presentation and welcome the
statements by the Prime Minister of the Transitional
Federal Government of Somalia and the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia. I would also like to join
others in paying tribute to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Mahiga, for
his work.

Spain fully aligns itself with the European Union
statement made this afternoon and would like to share,
in our national capacity, the following thoughts.

In our opinion, this debate is appropriately
focused on responding to the complex challenges
currently facing Somalia. Spain is strongly committed
to Somalia. We are contributing €6 million to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). In
2010, we were the first humanitarian donor in the
country, and during the meeting of the International
Contact Group on Somalia held in Madrid last
September we committed €3 million in direct
budgetary support to the Transitional Federal
Government, 2 million of which have already been
disbursed.

In this context, and in view of the end of the
transitional period in August, we believe it to be a
matter of urgency that the authorities of the
Transitional Federal Government make progress in the
drafting of a new constitution that obtains broad
consensus. They must promote an inclusive political
dialogue that makes it possible to address the root
causes of conflict. They need to focus on security
sector reform with the support of the international
community, and they must work actively to improve
the living conditions of the population.

Spain shares the international community's
concern about the escalation of piracy in the Indian
Ocean waters. Spain's commitment to the fight against
piracy is unequivocal. My country is participating with
two vessels - a frigate and a patrol boat - and two
aircraft - a helicopter and a maritime patrol aircraft -
in the European Union's Operation Atalanta, which is
currently under Spanish command. It supports the
Ocean Shield Operation of the Atlantic Alliance and
has offered to continue collaborating in escorting ships
of the World Food Programme heading for Somalia.
Spain also leads the European Union Somalia Training
Mission, which provides training to Somali security
forces in Uganda, in which 38 troops are stationed.

However, the commendable work of the naval
forces in the prevention and prosecution of acts of
piracy contrasts with a degree of impunity enjoyed by
those arrested for acts of piracy that seriously
undermines the effectiveness of the international
efforts. Although the causes of piracy are numerous
and complex - and we all agree that they should be
addressed in a holistic manner - we deem it essential
and urgent to resolve this paradox by strengthening the
legal, jurisdictional and correctional spheres as
measures necessary to cut down on impunity.

The report by Mr. Lang, the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Legal Issues related to
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia (S/2011/30, annex),
provides us with valuable proposals that deserve to be
revisited. We agree with the assessment that it is
essential to develop and strengthen the institutional
capacities of the countries of the region in the legal,
jurisdictional and correctional spheres if we wish to
reverse the trend that favours the spread and
continuation of acts of piracy. Legal initiatives should
be aimed against not only the actual perpetrators, but
also those who plan, lead and make a profit from those
activities. This will require improving the collection
and production of evidence, as well as the further
involvement of all the countries taking part in this
endeavour.

The aforementioned measures - in particular,
those of a jurisdictional nature - would be better
implemented through the adoption of a new Security
Council resolution as soon as possible.
Notwithstanding the fact that such a resolution could
address a wide range of the many necessary elements
of an approach to piracy, in Spain's opinion it should
focus on the legal aspects and contain at least the
following three main elements: an encouragement of
the strengthened collection and production of evidence;
a guarantee of treatment in accordance with
international humanitarian law for those detained,
prosecuted and found guilty for crimes of piracy; and a
decision to urgently establish Somali courts to hear
piracy cases in Somaliland, Puntland and in any of the
neighbouring countries. Such courts could be also open
to staff from third countries.

With regard to the drafting and adoption of such a
resolution, the Security Council can count on the full
support and cooperation of Spain, since we are
convinced that it would contribute to addressing the
current significant legal loopholes. That is an essential
element in the international effort coordinated by the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and
requires maximum effectiveness with respect to
prevention and deterrence.

Despite the complexity and ongoing escalation of
piracy, Spain is convinced that the situation can still be
reversed. We should act above all with resolve and
without delay to strengthen our counter-piracy tools,
since its continuation presents a difficult obstacle to
overcome as we build a Somalia with solid and capable
institutions that can work for the security and
development of the Somali people. We all hope that
such a scenario will be a reality in the near future.

