Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to thank the High Representative,
Mr. Petritsch, for his very comprehensive briefing on
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Permanent Representative of Sweden will
speak later on behalf of the European Union. My
delegation naturally endorses his statement, and I
should simply like to emphasize a few specific points
at this time.

The recent formation of the Government of
Mr. Matic as a result of the general elections held on 11
November reflects the new atmosphere in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as just indicated by the High
Representative. After five years of nationalist
domination following the signing of the Dayton
Accords, the changeover to a coalition of pluri-ethnic,
democratic and modern parties has become a reality.
Every effort must be made to ensure that the hopes
raised in those elections are not dashed. It was this
spirit that Minister Ve'drine travelled to Sarajevo on 9
March to take stock of the changes that have occurred
since the recent elections and to encourage the new
authorities to undertake reforms and to encourage
coexistence among their communities.

Indeed, it is crucial that all necessary assistance
be provided to the new Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina so that it can meet the challenges before
it.

The most recent and important of those
challenges was the dissidence of the leaders of the
Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ), who chose to
violate the Dayton Accords. France supported the
decision taken by the High Representative to remove
the Bosnian Croat member of the joint presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Ante Jelavic, as
Mr. Petritsch has just recalled. That step was necessary.
Given the delicate institutional balances in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, it is particularly necessary to make clear
to all that the framework defined by the Peace
Agreement must not be deviated from. Bosnian citizens
of Croatian origin, as well as other nationals of the
country, have no other option except to engage in a
democratic dialogue in the framework of legal
institutions.

It is pivotal now for the new authorities to
consolidate their country and to undertake the
necessary economic and social reforms.

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the economic
situation is a priority. The economy will be decisive in
the coming general elections, to be held in the fall of
2002. The Bosnian authorities must be given support as
they tackle the indispensable reforms set out in
Brussels, at the ministerial meeting of the Peace
Implementation Council in May 2000, and in the Road
Map of the European Union. The fight against
corruption must be at the forefront of these reforms. In
more general terms, every effort must be made to
improve the economic environment. Confidence-
building is necessary in order for investors to put their
faith in the future of the country.

Reforms are first and foremost the responsibility
of the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
encourage them to continue with determination on the
course they have charted. The international community
must provide support in this process. In this respect,
Europe has a major role to play in the process to
improve the situation.

The European Union is undertaking efforts in this
respect, in particular in the framework of the process of
stabilization and association. The pace of the
rapprochement of Bosnia and Herzegovina with the
European Union, in the framework of the process of
stabilization and association, will depend on the
progress made in ensuring that the criteria set forth by
the European Union are respected. France therefore
calls on the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
continue their efforts, building on the foundation of the
progress that has already been achieved.

The democratic changes that have taken place in
Croatia and in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia have
strengthened the opportunities for reconciliation and
cooperation among the States of the western Balkans,
despite the persistence of hotbeds of tension. In this
context, Bosnia and Herzegovina has entered into
diplomatic relations with its all of neighbours.
Simultaneously, the entities themselves have also
entered into special relationships with neighbouring
States, in conformity with the Dayton Accords.

