Mr. Nesho (Albania): Albania strongly supports the
resolution before the Security Council today. We would like
to express special thanks to the delegations of Bahrain and
Malaysia as the initiators of this resolution, as well as to
the other sponsors.

Albanians take a great interest in this resolution, as
we greatly appreciate all the efforts of the international
community to stop a humanitarian catastrophe in the
making. This catastrophe is the largest in Europe since
the Second World War. Approximately 500,000 deportees
have entered Albania up to this point, after their hopeless
effort to remain in their ethnic lands and home. Thus the
number of deportees has been increased to 1 million
people since the beginning of the ethnic-cleansing policy
and the genocide in Kosovo.

These people were pushed to leave Kosovo as a
result of the monstrous crimes of the Serbian criminal
regime of Belgrade, which is following a systematic
policy of torture, killing, massacre, mutilation, rape,
deliberate destruction of property and livestock, and other
despicable crimes against humanity. We do not know
about the fate of more than 100,000 Albanians, while
thousands and thousands are separated from their families
or are being used as human shields or blood pools for the
Serbian war thugs. Endless trains full of hopeless
deportees are emptying the Albanian territories, which are
now literarily burnt and full of mass graves. This is the
fate of the hundreds of thousands of Albanians from
Kosovo, deported by force to Albania, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and
Bosnia. Their only hope is that the international
community will stop their endless suffering.

The Albanian Government has already received the
Albanian deportees and is giving them continuous
assistance. Albania is currently cooperating with all those
who are providing assistance and highly appreciates their
help. We would like to particularly thank the United
States Government; the Governments of all the member
States of the European Union, as well as the European
Union itself; the Australian, Turkish, Pakistani,
Norwegian and Japanese Governments; and the
Governments of Arab countries for their great assistance
to the efforts to relieve the suffering of the deportees. We
attach great importance to the work of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees as the
lead agency in the relief efforts. My Government
reiterates its willingness to cooperate with all the United
Nations agencies in order to accomplish the enormous
work that lies ahead.

As of now the Albanian people in Albania have
shown great support for the plight of their brothers and

 

sisters from Kosovo. More than 70 per cent of the
deportees are being taken care of by simple Albanian
families, and we believe that they deserve great recognition
and support.

It is quite unfortunate that the international community
and the United Nations are now having to make an
enormous effort to heal a new wound that stems from an
old crime that started 10 years ago in the Balkans. To the
humanitarian catastrophe in Bosnia, where hundreds of
thousands lost their lives and more than 2 million refugees
left their homes, is now being added an additional chapter
of Albanian suffering, with 1 million deportees and
thousands of deaths. At the same time as the Security
Council was adopting resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998)
and 1203 (1998), a country that pretends to be a member of
the United Nations was responding with ethnic cleansing
and genocide and requesting that its sovereignty be
respected by the United Nations. As if the expulsion of
Albanians were not enough, artillery shells are being fired
from Serbia towards the territory of another sovereign
country.
We heard today that some returning refugees have
been killed. We do not know where some of the members
have gotten this information, but to this day no refugee -
I repeat, not one refugee - has returned to Kosovo. It may
be that some Albanians have been killed by mistake;
however, Albanians are deeply convinced that this tragedy
and plague cannot be stopped without the assistance of the
civilized world, which is protecting human values.

The Albanian people strongly believe in the value of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) mission
and actions. NATO is today saving exactly the same values
that the United Nations was created to defend, and the
Albanian people regret that the United Nations is not able
to deliver the same message due to the hypocrisy and the
obstacles created by some of its Members.

Albania welcomes any initiative of the international
community that could solve the crisis of Kosovo, that could
stop the humanitarian catastrophe and that respects the
freedom of the people who believe so much in the
principles of this Organization.

