Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Nestor Popolizio Bardales to New York. I
congratulate you, Sir, on Peru's presidency of the
Security Council and on convening today's important
meeting, which enables us to share our views about the
implications of the report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2018/43) on the
work of the Council.

I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres; State Secretary for Regional
Affairs and Multilateral Global Affairs in the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs of Romania, as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Mr. Dan Neculaescu; and
the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, Mr. Smail Chergui, for their briefings on the
status of the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, pursuant to General Assembly resolution
70/262 and resolution 2282 (2016).

Global peacekeeping efforts must be redesigned in
order to respond to twenty-first century conflicts and
address their root causes. The complexity and protracted
nature of current conflicts, as well as their links to
violent extremism, terrorism and organized crime,
make it essential to invest in revamping the United
Nations architecture in order to support countries'
peacebuilding efforts. In that regard, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea thanks Secretary-General Guterres
for his efforts to ensure the political and operational
coherence ofplans to improve leadership, accountability
and the ability of the United Nations to support that
important agenda.

We agree in particular that investing in inclusive
and sustainable global development is the best tool
for preventing violent conflicts. For that reason, we
welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General to ensure
the implementation of United Nations development
system reform. As the Secretary-General states in his
report, peacebuilding is above all the responsibility of
Member States. We therefore welcome the efforts and
unique role ofthe Peacebuilding Commission in support
of such processes throughout the world, in particular the
African Solidarity Initiative, the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security and the memorandum of
understanding between the African Union Commission
and the Peacebuilding Support Office, while promoting
gender equality and always respecting the principle of
national sovereignty.

According to the report under consideration today,
investing in conflict prevention could save conflict-
afflicted countries and the international community
between $5 billion and $70 billion per year. The efforts
of the Secretary-General in the areas of development,
management reform and the review of the United
Nations architecture are constrained by a decrease
in official development assistance to $41 billion,
and, by extension, a lower percentage earmarked for
peacebuilding in conflict-afflicted countries. Conflict-
affected countries, in which more than half of the
world's abject poor live, contributed $153 billion to the
global economy in 2016.

Equatorial Guinea would like to voice its concern
about the implications ofthat capital flight for some ofthe
world's poorest countries and communities, which are
affected by conflicts and extreme poverty. I would like
to encourage the disbursement of the funds required to
boost South-South and triangular cooperation, diversify
the sources of resources and promote partnerships to
ensure predictable funding for peacebuilding efforts, in
particular the Peacebuilding Fund.

Equatorial Guinea welcomes presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/27 and proposes that it be used to support
the reform of the peacebuilding architecture. We
also proposes that the statement be used to support
the important advisory role of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Support Office
and that the relevant United Nations bodies conduct
an in-depth study into the practical implications of
proposals for the purpose of prioritizing the use of
existing funds. In that regard, I would like to reiterate
the support of Equatorial Guinea for substantive
dialogue on the implementation of the twin resolutions
and the proposals outlined in the report ofthe Secretary-
General, which are above and beyond the briefings to
which we are restricted. Investing in peacebuilding and
sustainable development is the most effective way to
prevent and end the root causes of conflicts and achieve
peace and security for all.

In conclusion, for the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, its Government and Head of State, His
Excellency Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, peace has
no price. It must continue to be cultivated despite the
external adversities that may threaten it at times. It is
that sustainable peace, with which Equatorial Guinea
and its people live, that has enabled every corner of
our country to achieve economic, social and political
development, through the implementation of our
Horizon 2020 agenda, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and African Union's Agenda 2063.

