Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Mr. Jan Kubis for his informative briefing.
Let me also express our most sincere gratitude for
his outstanding service and enormous contribution to
peace and stability in Iraq. We look forward to closely
working with Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert. Let me
also reiterate our appreciation for the tremendous work
that the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) is doing in assisting the Iraqi authorities.

Let me begin by commending Iraq for the completion
of the electoral process within the constitutional time
frame and by welcoming the election of Mr. Barham
Salih as President of the Republic of Iraq and of
Mr. Mohammed al-Halbousi as the Speaker of the
Council ofRepresentatives. As pointed out by Mr. Kubis,
it was an exemplary, democratic and peaceful transfer
of power. We also welcome the partial formation of a
new Government by Prime Minister Adil Abdul-Mahdi
and the adoption of the Government programme by
the new Council of Representatives. We are confident
that the appointment of the remaining members of the
Cabinet will be completed soon. We urge the political
parties to work constructively to that end and contribute
to the swift formation of an effective Administration.
We would also like to welcome the elections held in
the Iraqi Kurdistan Region and the progress made in
relations between Baghdad and Erbil. We call upon
them to capitalize on that positive trend and resolve
all outstanding issues through dialogue and consensus,
based on the full application of the provisions of the
Iraqi Constitution.

With the electoral process completed, we encourage
the political parties in Iraq to work constructively
towards the implementation of political, economic
and social reforms, as well as the advancement of
stabilization and reconstruction in the areas liberated
from Da'esh. As the developments in the past months
have shown, Iraqi citizens need an accountable and
efficient Administration that would address the
expectations of all groups of Iraqi society.

Therefore, we would like to draw the attention
of the new Iraqi Government to the need to focus on
the delivery of basic public services and tangible
benefits for all Iraqis, including providing good
governance, creating job opportunities, improving
living conditions, fighting corruption and promoting
economic development. Last but not least, we believe
that consolidating security, law and order and providing
for the return of internally displaced persons should
also be among the most important areas of the new
Government's focus.

We regret that none of the well-qualified female
politicians were elected to senior leadership positions.
We call upon the political leaders to ensure the
appointment of women to senior positions within the
new Administration and their representation at the
highest levels of decision-making structures. There is
no peace withoutjustice, we have already said so in this
Chamber on a number of occasions, and it also relates
to Iraq.

That is why we believe that special emphasis must
also be placed on the issue of serving justice to the
victims of atrocities committed by terrorist groups,
based on fair-trial requirements and in accordance with
international standards. We express our full support
to the Investigative Team tasked with assisting Iraq in
holding accountable the perpetrators of violence. We
strongly urge the Iraqi authorities to include sexual
and gender-based crimes and other internationally
recognized crimes in the prosecution ofDa'esh fighters.

We hope that the Nobel Peace Prize awarded to
Nadia Murad will provide further impetus to ensure
justice for women and members of religious minorities
in Iraq, who are victims of outrageous and unthinkable
violence by Da'esh. We also call upon the Iraqi
authorities to ensure the provision of humanitarian
assistance, protection and the integration of women and
children who are of Da'esh families that have no link
with Da'esh.

In conclusion, let me express Poland's readiness to
cooperate closely with the new Government of Iraq as
well as our full support for the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq.

