Mr. Prodi: This is probably my last formal
briefing to the Security Council as Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Sahel, as I shall complete
my mandate on 31 January 2014, although I shall be
completely at the Secretary-General's disposal after
that. I would therefore like to begin by expressing my
profound gratitude for the support extended to me by the
Security Council and for the confidence shown in me
by the Secretary-General by allowing me to undertake
this challenging assignment.

I have been mandated by the Secretary-General to
develop a strategy for the region that would synergize
the ongoing efforts and at the same time put in place
measures that could help the Governments of the region
to sustain peace and security in the long run. The report
of the Secretary-General on the Sahel (S/2013/354),
issued in June, represented the culmination of the
strategy-formulation phase of the process and the
commencement of the implementation stage. Many
factors will continue to impact our efforts in the
Sahel and must be taken into account when we are
implementing the strategy.

First, the region will have to compete for attention
with other, equally serious crises around the world
and will struggle to maintain international attention to
itself. I say this because that attention is decreasing.
Secondly, the current global economic climate limits
traditional funding mechanisms and donors. Thirdly,
security and governance are intertwined, and making
progress on one will be extremely difficult without
making progress on the other. Efforts to fight extremists
and separatists cannot succeed without meaningful
progress on good governance. Finally, without a
reasonably stable security situation, development and
humanitarian activities cannot exert their impact. Peace
and development are related.

Keeping these factors in mind, I have endeavoured
to raise the profile of the challenges facing the Sahel as
widely as I could. I have visited many Heads of State
throughout the world to raise awareness of the Sahel
as a major global problem. In the effort to empower
local people at the deepest possible level, my efforts
have included visits to the region and interaction
with respective Heads of State, consultations with the
senior Government officials of key Member States, and
participation in several multilateral forums convened to
discuss the situation in the Sahel. I have also decided to
involve, as much as possible, local experts from Sahel
universities, research institutions and Governments in
the identification of the sectors and projects that would
be key to starting a strong development process.

The strategy for development identified five
priorities: agriculture, renewable energy for
electrification, infrastructure, education and health.
These ideas were then widely shared and discussed it
with the relevant stakeholders, including Governments
of the region. Thus the strategy was the result of a
process empowering Sahelians, and implementation
should occur in a similar manner.

The recent visit by the Secretary-General to the
region, along with the other principals, was another
important step in that regard and will go a long way in
bringing attention to the situation in the Sahel region.
However, simply maintaining attention to the Sahel
would not be sufficient, and considerable resources are
needed to help the peoples of the region. But I believe
that the most important innovation we can offer is that
of starting actions that can respond to the need for
urgency and efficacy. Therefore, we must put in place
a mechanism that can sustain the utilization of the
mobilized resources, multilateral and bilateral, both in
money and in kind.

In that regard, the African Development Bank is in
the process of formalizing the hosting of an innovative
fund called the Sahel Action Fund. Its particularity is
that, as a start, it would use the money share of the Fund
as a booster to finalize the design of projects approved
by the Governments of the region and implement pilot
installations. Turn-key development projects by donors
as in-kind donations would quickly follow as part of
an overall Sahel strategy. The same Fund will have a
secretariat supported, of course, by the United Nations.

Priorities for those efforts would be set by the Sahel
Coordination Forum, led by the five core Sahelian
Governments, as decided during the first meeting at
the top ministerial level, which has already taken place
in Mali, during the visit of the Secretary-General to
the region. The innovation brought by the new Fund
is substantial and addresses the issues of urgency and
efficiency of action. The strategy will be facilitated
by replicating the pilot projects from the local to the
regional level.

To give examples of where we stand in that process,
I am pleased to announce that a pilot project to provide
solar-powered water purification equipment to hundreds
of families in the Sahel will commence shortly. The
resources to supply, at the pilot stage, equipment
manufactured by a private European company has
been pledged by the Italian Government. That is my
vision of a private-sector actor acting with the support
of Government to help the people of the Sahel, free of
cost and any conditions. In any case, that effort will be
managed by the African Development Bank as part of
the overall Sahel strategy.

A similar effort in the provision of electricity
through solar energy in off-grid areas, in cooperation
with the Campaign for the Earth Foundation, is in the
pipeline as part of the Millennium Development Goal
targets set for the region. Scaling up the existing pilot
project in Mali is the final objective. On agriculture,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations has proposed a detailed capacity-building
project related to animal health. We are in the process
of mobilizing resources for it. Similarly, work on
identifying pilot projects for the infrastructure and
education pilot projects is ongoing.

In addition to that, as the Council heard a few
minutes ago, strategic efforts are needed from important
multilateral institutions to support the development
of the Sahel. It will be extremely important that the
Sahel Coordination Forum assume the responsibility
of enhancing synergies and avoiding duplication and
wastage of resources.

I am well aware that the approach I have proposed
is new and challenges the current norms of multilateral
assistance. However, I believe that it is an innovative
way to fill the gap between the ongoing activities on
the ground and the long-term development goals set for
the region, which will take some time to materialize.
I also believe that, given the precarious situation of
the peoples of the Sahel, that approach must be given
a chance to proceed and should be assessed on the
results achieved. At the same time, we must also focus
on introducing new and innovative technologies to the
Sahel region, as they have the capacity to push and
catalyse developmental efforts.

As mentioned earlier, security, governance and
development are linked. The situation in Mali was a
cause for serious concern for all of us and remains
symptomatic for the entire region. The progress made
since the French intervention is encouraging and
deserves commendation. But it is very clear that when
we talk about security, the problems have no border and
thus the solutions should have no borders.

As was openly and loudly requested at the
ministerial meeting in Bamako on the occasion of the
Secretary-General's visit, when security is at stake,
the coordination platform should be broadened to
surrounding countries. The surrounding countries are
Algeria, Morocco, Libya and Senegal, but the case of
Libya is especially critical.

Therefore, I would urge the Security Council that
all its decisions dealing with terrorism and conflicts
in the Sahel take into account the need for governance
reforms in the region. Furthermore, Libya, while not
part of the Sahel, has a profound impact on the entire
region. I would urge that the situations of the Sahel and
Libya be dealt with in coordination with each other, so
as to achieve the optimal effect.

As requested by the Council, the United Nations
system in the region has set up an internal coordination
mechanism, chaired by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Office for West Africa, Mr. Djinnit, with
the participation of the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Regional Humanitarian Coordinator, as well
as the regional development teams and the resident
coordinators of the Sahel countries.

In the area of governance, we have been focusing
on the implementation of activities that involve a
combination of, first, capacity-building measures aimed
at improving the delivery of essential services, and
second, political inclusion aimed at promoting broad
consensus among the population over the country's
priorities.
With regard to capacity-building, we have identified
two strategic priority areas for intervention: first,
support to electoral processes and, second, support
to judicial reform and access to justice. We have also
initiated a consultation process with civil society to
ensure its participation in the implementation of the
strategy, especially in activities that aim to promote
community security and fight violent extremism,
particularly in the border areas.

With regard to the second objective, to strengthen
national and regional security mechanisms we
have begun to implement activities in the areas of
border management and the prevention of violent
ideology. Given the vastness of the Sahel region
and the length and porosity of many of the borders,
we have been focusing on strengthening border
management through a combination of capacity-
building and confidence-building measures among
States. For example, under the Integrated Assistance
for Countering Terrorism Initiative, the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate have
been supporting the development of national counter-
terrorism strategies and the establishment of internal
coordination and information-sharing mechanisms for
integrated border management in Burkina Faso. We are
planning to expand that experience in more countries in
the Sahel region.

The collaborative management of borders is not
only about constraining the activities of criminals
and terrorists, but also about giving opportunities
for legitimate economic activity. That is why, in
implementing the third objective of the strategy, we
have been focusing on fostering better integration
between humanitarian and development interventions,
and supporting the design of innovative projects
and tools for resilience, including by developing
shared infrastructure. We have mapped ongoing
resilience-friendly intervention in the countries of the
Sahel as validated by the United Nations country teams
across the regions, and have planned regional strategic
invention on resilience by the United Nations system
across the Sahel.

A regional food reserve has already been developed
under the auspice of the Economic Community of
West African States, and the World Food Programme
will provide technical advice. In addition, the World
Bank has contributed $100 million to support a number
of activities in the Sahel region identified under
the resilience pillar of the United Nations strategy,
in partnership with the United Nations Population
Fund. Gaps in the current resilience operation have
been identified in the areas of urban livelihoods,
micro-insurance, community empowerment and
pastoral populations.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate two messages.
First, we must not forget the Sahel, even with so many
other problems on the Council's agenda. Secondly,
I appeal to the international community to be very
generous to the people of the Sahel in terms of both
financial and in-kind assistance, as they remain in dire
and urgent need.

