Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Prosecutor for her report and presentation. I would
like to reiterate our support for hear as well as for the
International Criminal Court (ICC).

Following 42 years of dictatorship, Libya is
now in transition. Violent acts are continuing,
including against diplomatic missions. But the Libyan
authorities, including Prime Minister Ali Zeidan, have
reiterated their commitment to pursuing the country's
democratization. While the Libyan revolution
exposed the shortcomings of State structures and the
disastrous legacy of Qadhafism, Libyans have shown
an unwavering determination in a post-revolutionary
context, which is, by definition, difficult. The Council
has mobilized to help them, and must continue to do so.

Despite its difficulties, Libya has asked to try Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi itself.
That courageous decision, which is in line with the
Rome Statute and resolution 1970 (2011), points to the
willingness of the Libyan authorities to shoulder their
responsibilities. The judges of the ICC have authorized
the Libyans to try Al-Senussi themselves, believing
that Libya had the willingness and due competence to
conduct that trial. On the other hand, the judges rejected
the request of the Libyan authorities to hear the case
of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi. The Libyan Government
has stated its intention to provide additional evidence
to the Court on that matter. We have no doubt that
Libya, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), will comply
with the decision of the ICC judges. Libya's respect
for its international obligations is a key indicator of its
commitment to the rule of law.
The Prosecutor also indicated that she was
continuing her investigation into allegations of crimes
committed in Libya by those close to Al-Qadhafi who
today might be situated outside Libyan territory, posing
a threat to the new authorities. The Prosecutor can rest
assured of our support.

As for other allegations, we welcome the work
carried out to establish a comprehensive strategy to
put an end to crimes and impunity in Libya. As stated
by Ms. Bensouda, the adoption of a new Libyan law
on transitional justice and the establishment of a
United Nations fact-finding and national reconciliation
commission could help respond to allegations of crimes
such as those committed in Misrata and Tawergha
during the armed conflict of 2011 or those that were
allegedly committed in Bani Walid in 2012.

Like the Prosecutor, we also welcome reports of a
new Libyan draft law making rape in armed conflict a
war crime. Finally, we express our grave concern at the
practice of torture and cases of deaths in detention in
centres under the control ofarmed brigades. As he stated
before the Council (see S/PV.7031), Mr. Tarek Mitri, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
the Libyan authorities are well aware of this problem.
Those practices must come to an end.

Resolution 1970 (2011) is an example ofthe capacity
of the Security Council and, more generally, of the
international community for unity and quick action.
Given the atrocities committed by the Libyan leadership,
the United Nations and regional organizations together
condemned such acts. Resolution 1970 (2011),
referring the situation in Libya to the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, was at the heart of a
process marking the isolation of criminals, regardless
of their rank. It is now a matter of ensuring follow-up
to that approach.

The process initiated by resolution 1970 (2011) must
take its course, as the Council reaffirmed in resolutions
1973 (2011), 2009 (2011), 2040 (2012) and 2095 (2013).
The ongoing process will require the full cooperation
of Libya with the Office of the Prosecutor and the full
support of the Council.

