Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to speak on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries at today's
quarterly debate on a subject to which we have always
attached great importance - the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.

First, let us thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for
his useful briefing.

In the light of the critical situation and diminishing
prospects for peace, including as a result of recent
provocative unilateral action taken with regard to
Jerusalem, in violation of Security Council resolutions,
and the adverse impact of such action, the Non-Aligned
Movement takes this opportunity to reaffirm its
abiding solidarity with the Palestinian people and its
unwavering support for their just cause.

At this critical juncture, and recognizing the
paramount importance of resuming negotiations to
achieve a just and peaceful solution, in accordance
with relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, the Movement reaffirms its commitment
to strengthening and coordinating international efforts
to promote a just, peaceful and lasting solution to
the Palestinian question, in all its aspects, including
respect for justice and the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including to self-determination
and independence. At the same time, it urges all the
parties and Member States involved to work to that end.
This continues to be a priority within the Movement's
agenda and is reaffirmed at the highest levels on an
ongoing basis.

The Movement reaffirms that the ongoing Israeli
occupation and the Palestinian-Israeli conflict as a
whole continue to pose a serious threat to international
peace and security. This urgently requires attention
and a solution that is in keeping with international law,
the relevant United Nations resolutions and, of course,
the Charter of the United Nations itself. Moreover, the
Security Council must uphold its responsibilities under
the Charter in this regard and act to ensure that its own
resolutions are upheld, as these are binding on all States
Members of the United Nations and represent the basis
of a peaceful, just and lasting solution to the conflict.

In this regard, the States members of the Movement
remain ready to contribute to the achievement of such a
solution, and we therefore call for intensified regional
and international efforts in support of this objective.
We also recall the responsibility ofthe Security Council
and the General Assembly in this regard, including
what was recently reaffirmed in resolution 2334 (2016),
which was welcomed and supported strongly by the
Movement. We believe that the resolution provides the
most viable path to peace, as it sets forth the essential
requirements and parameters for a just solution that
would preserve the two-State solution on the basis of
the pre-1967 borders, respecting the terms of reference
of peace endorsed by the international community, in
accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions
and the Madrid principles, including the principle of
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map.

Moreover, the Movement reiterates its call for
full respect for and the implementation of all relevant
resolutions in this regard, as this would create the
conditions necessary to end the occupation, justly
resolve the conflict in all its aspects and make
Palestinian-Israeli peace and security a reality.

It is therefore imperative that action be taken
immediately, in accordance with United Nations
resolutions, to redress the situation on the ground,
de-escalate tensions and foster an appropriate
environment for the pursuit of peace. Provocations,
unilateral actions and the escalation of tensions are
completely incompatible with the pursuit of peace
and can be neither rationalized nor accepted. Clearly,
contempt for the Security Council and disregard for
United Nations resolutions can only exacerbate the
situation, with further grave consequences, which must
be avoided.

Today the Non-Aligned Movement joins the
overwhelming international consensus in expressing
its grave concern regarding recent developments in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
in particular since the decision unilaterally announced
by some Governments that they would transfer their
embassies to Israel to the city of Jerusalem. In line
with the communication issued by the Movement on
5 December 2017, we reject these and any other related
actions aimed at consolidating Israel's control and the
unlawful de facto annexation of the city.
In this regard, we recall and reaffirm the provisions
of resolution 478 (1980), which expressly called on
those States that have established diplomatic missions
in Jerusalem to withdraw such missions from the
holy city. We reaffirm that any attempts to alter the
character, status or demographic composition of the
city of Jerusalem, as set out in the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, have no
legal effect and are null and void, and we also stress
that Jerusalem is a final-status issue to be resolved
through negotiations.

We further reaffirm all Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions relating to Jerusalem
and confirm that it is an integral part of occupied
Palestinian territory. Unilateral actions of that sort,
in flagrant disrespect of Security Council resolutions,
aside from jeopardizing the possibility of achieving
the two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders,
could seriously destabilize the fragile situation on the
ground, with dangerous effects, as can currently be
seen given that Israel, the occupying Power, has further
intensified its illegal and inhuman policies in occupied
Palestine, including in East Jerusalem. It has done
so including through the enactment of laws aimed at
further entrenching its 50-year foreign occupation and
facilitating its illegal acquisition of territory by force
through annexationist measures, which are prohibited
by international law and by this very Council.
Moreover, such actions could potentially have far-
reaching repercussions for the future of the two-State
solution to the conflict as prescribed by the Council.
That is why they must be fully condemned and rejected.

The Movement strongly condemns the recent
provocative decisions by Israel, the occupying Power, to
proceed with its settlement activities, in grave breach of
international law and in direct and deliberate violation
of the relevant United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016). We are alarmed by and deeply
deplore such flagrant contempt by the occupying Power
of the unequivocal determination by the Security
Council on this issue, which clearly reaffirmed that
Israel's settlement activities have no legal validity and
constitute a clear violation under international law, and
called on Israel to immediately and completely cease
all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and fully respect
all of its legal obligations, including those under the
Fourth Geneva Convention.

Turning to Gaza, the situation remains one of great
concern for the Movement, particularly the serious
humanitarian situation. In this regard, the Movement
reiterates its call for the total lifting of the 10-year-old
Israeli blockade of Gaza, which continues to impose
untold humanitarian, social and economic suffering
on more than 2 million Palestinian children, women
and men. The Movement stresses once again that the
crisis in Gaza must be addressed comprehensively,
in accordance with international law, including
humanitarian and human rights law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions, in the context of the overall
situation and of the continued illegitimate, belligerent
Israeli foreign occupation of Palestinian territory since
1967 and of the unequivocal calls for an end to this
half-century of occupation.

In the light of the current situation on the
ground, threats against the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) could result in nothing less
than a humanitarian disaster in Gaza, with potential
destabilizing consequences in host countries. The
Movement, therefore, urges States to extend the
needed support to UNRWA without delay, in line
with humanitarian principles, the relevant resolutions
and the abiding international responsibility vis-a-vis
the Palestinian question, in order to ensure continued
vital assistance to Palestinian refugees pending a just
solution to their plight.

The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all
measures and actions taken or to be taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, such as its illegal decision of
14 December 1981, which purports to alter the legal,
physical and demographic status ofthe occupied Syrian
Golan and its institutional structure, as well as the
measures taken by Israel to apply its jurisdiction and
administration there, are null and void and have no
legal effect.

In this regard and in line with our principled
position, we demand once again that Israel abide by
the provisions of resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
immediately from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
lines of4 June 1967, in accordance with resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973). Moreover, the States members
of the Movement emphasize the need for Israel to
withdraw from all Lebanese territories, including the
Sheba'a farms, the Kfar Shuba hills and the Lebanese
part of occupied Al-Ghajar village up to the Blue line,
in accordance with relevant international resolutions,
in particular resolution 1701 (2006).

To conclude, while reiterating its call for the
strengthening of international efforts aimed at
achieving, without further delay, an end to the Israeli
occupation that began in 1967 and the long-overdue
objective ofajust, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful
solution, the Movement reaffirms its long-standing
support for, and solidarity with, that just cause and
its strong commitment to continuing to support the
heroic Palestinian people in their quest to achieve their
inalienable rights and legitimate national aspirations,
including their right to self-determination, freedom and
independence in their independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. That is vital for the
establishment of a just, comprehensive and sustainable
peace. Only a comprehensive solution to the question
of Palestine will enable us to achieve the long-sought
peace in the Middle East region and to finally resolve
the Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole.

