Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the delegation of India
for its initiative in holding a meeting of the Security
Council on the issue of combating piracy in the context
of maintaining international peace and security. We are
also grateful to Mr. Eliasson for his briefing.

The Russian Federation is concerned about
increasing piracy activity in recent years in a number
of regions of the world's oceans. We favour finding a
long-term solution to the problem.

Piracy threatens the safety of navigation, as well
as other types of economic activity at sea. We are all
familiar with the staggering statistics demonstrating
the sheer scale of the losses inflicted by piracy on
the global economy annually. Proceeds from hostage
ransoms often go to fund other types of criminal
activity, including that associated with extremists.
Piracy is often a further destabilizing factor that serves
to exacerbate situations in areas of conflict.

Piracy off the coast of Somalia has continued to be
a major scourge in recent years, to such a degree that
its negative impact has begun to affect the interests of
virtually all States - effectively becoming global in
character. The efforts of the international community
under the auspices of the Security Council have led
to positive changes in the region. In our view, a set of
factors are at work in that regard, above all improving
the situation on land. In that connection, stabilizing
the situation in Somalia is playing a role. Coherent
efforts by States have also proven to be effective, in
particular efforts by Russia and regional organizations
to patrol shipping lanes and fend off pirate attacks at
sea. Self-defence measures by the maritime industry
have also been helpful. We call on all international
partners involved in anti-piracy efforts, including
the International Maritime Organization, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, to
work together in that regard.

Nevertheless, in spite of the successes, Somali
piracy remains robust. The situation could go awry at
any point. Pirates are shifting their focus onto parts
of the Indian Ocean that are more difficult to control.
Many piracy groups have turned to new sources of
criminal proceeds. Hostage-taking for ransom on land
has become more common. All of that indicates that it
would be premature to scale back international efforts
in this area. In that regard, Russia supports a one-year
extension of the powers to implement all the necessary
measures to combat piracy off the coast of Somalia,
including in its territorial waters. We intend to continue
to provide naval forces in the Gulf of Aden, working
in close coordination with other Stats and regional
organizations.

There is no doubt that tackling the problem of
piracy must be comprehensive in nature. We share the
conclusions of the London Conference on Piracy and
Somalia and the Istanbul 11 Conference on Somalia,
namely, that an approach is needed that brings together
efforts in the areas of development, strengthening
national anti-piracy capacity and establishing the rule
of law. An important part of that work continues to be
ensuring the effective prosecution of pirates and their
accomplices. We have also noted some positive steps
in that regard. It is important that the international
community be fully aware of the fact that, without
tackling the problem of impunity, it will be impossible
to fully eradicate piracy.

We welcome the willingness of States in the region,
including Seychelles, Mauritius, Kenya and Tanzania,
to intensify cooperation in this area. Overall, we are
satisfied by the work they have done on this issue with
the support of the various United Nations structures,
above all UNODC.

However, in spite of the importance of prosecuting
the perpetrators of pirate attacks, the focus now is on
identifying and neutralizing key actors in the pirate
industry. Doing that would be a blow to the very heart
of piracy. Without the masterminds and financial
mediators, the piracy business model would collapse. In
order to tackle that problem, we need to enhance legal
mechanisms for combating corruption and financial
malfeasance, including the legalization of criminal
proceeds. In that regard, we favour the introduction of
targeted sanctions against pirate leaders. However, that
proposal still does not enjoy full support from some
members of the Council. We trust that they will review
their positions.

We are closely following the new hotbed of piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea. In our opinion, the nature and
scope of the problem is different. What we are seeing
there are mainly acts of armed robbery close to the
coastline. We hope that the mobilization we have seen
of regional efforts with the necessary international
assistance will assist in preventing the escalation of the
threat.

