Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan voted in favour
of resolution 1546 (2004), which has just been adopted
unanimously by the Security Council.

The people of Iraq suffered for decades under an
oppressive regime, endured several wars initiated by
that regime, was pauperised by prolonged international
economic sanctions and then traumatized by another
war. This resolution is designed, in our view, to prepare
the way for Iraq to embark on a new era of security,
stability, peace and prosperity. It should mark a new
beginning for Iraq and its people.

It is Pakistan's hope that the adoption of this
resolution will enable the Iraqi people to fully regain
their sovereignty and full control over their own
destiny; promote security and stability in Iraq and
preserve its unity and territorial integrity; and promote
the reconstruction of its shattered economy and revive
its potential for economic growth and prosperity.

The text of the resolution just adopted by the
Security Council underwent substantial transformation
before becoming acceptable to all the members of the
Council, including Pakistan. We commend the sponsors
for the flexibility they demonstrated in the negotiating
process. We are glad that most of the suggestions for
changes in the resolution proposed by Pakistan were
accommodated in the draft by the sponsors. These
included, first, the transfer of full authority and
sovereignty to Iraq and full control by the Iraqi people
of their natural resources; second, an affirmation of the
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Iraq;
third, respect for the primacy of the wishes and desires
of the Iraqi people; fourth, Iraq's control of its own
security forces, which will progressively assume full
responsibility for its security; fifth, the presence of the
multinational force at the request of the Iraqi
Government and the creation of a coordination
mechanism between the Iraqi Government and the
multinational force on security policy and operations;
sixth, adherence by all concerned to the principles of
international humanitarian law; and seventh, respect
for Iraq's cultural, archeological and religious shrines,
which are among the most sacred in the Islamic world.

The resolution affirms that the United Nations
must play a leading role in promoting the
implementation of the processes envisaged therein. The
Secretary-General has indeed remained personally
engaged in the diplomatic and humanitarian efforts of
the United Nations, even after 17 August 2003. The
endeavours of Mr. Brahimi have been outstanding and
he has again performed a most difficult diplomatic feat
in difficult circumstances.

We view this resolution as the most significant
step since the first Gulf War towards the full
normalization of the situation in Iraq. It endorses the
presence of the multinational force at this time as a
means of restoring peace and security in Iraq. It
indicates a timetable for establishing an elected
Government and a programme to end the mandate of
the multinational force. However, the security
environment in Iraq remains volatile and unstable. We
must all trust and hope that, following the transfer of
sovereignty, the security environment will improve
significantly.

As indicated by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, the
problem of insecurity cannot be solved through
military means alone. Political solutions and
accommodations are required to achieve security and
stability in that country. We hope that the interim
Government will benefit from the international support
expressed through this resolution to broaden political
consensus in the country and to make all necessary
efforts - as Mr. Brahimi has remarked - to bring all
groups under the tent. We also hope that all Iraqis will
respond to the efforts of the interim Government to
broaden the political consensus and stabilize the
security environment in their country.

Peace and stability in Iraq will no doubt reinforce
stability in the region. Continued instability in Iraq, on
the other hand, is likely to have an adverse impact on
the security environment of the region as a whole and
beyond. As a regional State, Pakistan looks forward to
an Iraq at peace with itself and with its neighbours. We
believe that the support of Iraq's immediate neighbours
and of the Arab and Islamic countries for Iraq's
security and stability will be an important component
in realizing the political, security and economic goals
set out in this resolution.

In a recent telephone call he received from Prime
Minister Allawi, President Musharraf congratulated
him and assured him of Pakistan's full support and
cooperation in the reconstruction of Iraq. We fully
support the aspirations of the Iraqi people. We are
prepared to help them realize those aspirations in
accordance with their national priorities and in
accordance with their freely expressed wishes.

