Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): At the
outset, I would like to join my colleagues in
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November. I also join other speakers in thanking
Ambassador ngu and her team for their wise
stewardship of the Council last month. I would like to
thank Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo for his report
on the situation in Libya and the important information
that he has shared with the Security Council this
afternoon.

The conflict in Libya has ended. The National
Transitional Council has announced the country's
liberation. The Libyan people led that effort. Their
sacrifice and determination brought about their
freedom. The international community has also played
its role, including by protecting civilians and
supporting humanitarian aid, in accordance with the
resolutions of the Council.

The Libyan people are now coming together to
build a peaceful, democratic and prosperous new
Libya. They now know that Al-Qadhafi will never
again be able to threaten and brutalize them and their
country. We hope that that will bring relief to the
Libyans who suffered under his rule and to the victims
of his actions abroad. To demonstrate their clear break
from the past, Libya's authorities should continue to
speak out against reprisals and should hold those guilty
of abuses to account. In that regard, we welcome the
National Transitional Council's investigation into the
circumstances of Al-Qadhafi's death.

The developments in Libya should give all
Governments reason to pause before using violence
against their own people. The international community
will ensure that responsible individuals within such
Governments are held to account, either in their own
courts or in international courts such as the
International Criminal Court (ICC). Impunity is no
longer tolerable. In that context, the Government of
Syria ought to be aware that the eyes of the world are
upon it.

The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of the
Court. It played a leading role in securing the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1970 (2011), which
referred the situation in Libya to the Court. The
Council's swift and decisive action in that resolution
was matched by the work of the Prosecutor and his
Office in paving the way for arrest warrants to be
issued within four months. Their conduct of the case so
far has set new standards for international criminal
justice. I would like to thank him and his staff for their
efforts to bring justice to the victims of atrocities in
Libya.
Of course, the ICC's investigation into the
situation in Libya does not end with the death of
Al-Qadhafi. Two arrest warrants for individuals
suspected of crimes against humanity are still
outstanding. As Mr. Moreno-Ocampo has explained
this afternoon, the ICC is conducting other
investigations, including into the circumstances of
Al-Qadhafi's death. Saif Al-Islam and Abdullah
Al-Senussi remain at large and must be brought to face
justice before a court of law.

To accomplish that goal, the ICC needs the
cooperation of States. The authorities of the United
Kingdom have played a part in the ICC's investigations
so far by providing the fullest support, as and when
requested, to the Prosecutor and his team of
investigators. We call on the Libyan authorities to
continue their full cooperation with the ICC as it
pursues its investigations. We would also encourage
Libya's neighbours to do the same, including by
arresting and surrendering the two indictees, should
they be found on their territory.

