Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for
his briefing. I have also listened attentively to the
statements made by the representatives of Palestine and
Israel.

The Palestinian-Israeli situation is currently
very fragile, and China is deeply concerned about
the continuing conflict between the two sides in East
Jerusalem and other territories. We urge the parties to
maintain restraint and to avoid any expansion of the
conflict or further escalation of tensions. The issue
of settlements is one of the major obstacles to the
Middle East peace process, and China's position on
the issue is consistent and clear. We are opposed to
the Israeli settlement activities in East Jerusalem and
other occupied Palestinian territories. We urge Israel to
work seriously and responsibly to halt all its settlement
activities immediately, avoid taking any action that
could further aggravate the conflict, and create the
conditions necessary for building confidence between
Palestine and Israel and for resuming peace talks.

Dialogue and negotiation are the only route to a
Palestinian-Israeli peace. Both parties should adhere
to the strategic option for peace talks, resume them as
soon as possible and work towards a rapprochement.
The international community should strengthen its
mutual support and create synergy aimed at providing
a serious guarantee for advancing the peace process.
The relevant parties should enhance their sense of
responsibility and urgency, maintain an objective and
impartial approach and vigorously promote peace and
negotiation.

The Council should shoulder its essential
responsibility and play a mediating role in resolving
the Palestinian question. We would support the
Council in taking action to respond to the legitimate
demands of Palestine and other Arab States as soon as
possible. China has always supported the Palestinian
people in their just demand for and legitimate right to
independent Statehood, and will continue to work with
the international community in order to play a positive
and constructive role in advancing the Middle East
peace process.

