Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his video briefing. I
also thank Secretary-General Aboul-Gheit, Mr. Brahimi
and Mr. Doran for their presence and briefings.

The question of Palestine has dragged on for years
and has defied resolutions owing to its complexity.
Palestine and Israel have been neighbours for ever,
and their lots are closely linked. They in effect share
a common destiny. Only by resolving disputes and
differences through dialogue and consultations and
turning their swords into ploughshares will they be able
to find an answer to the Palestinian question and the
more fundamental issues concerning the Middle East.

The international community should act with a
renewed sense of urgency and collectively shoulder
the responsibility of defending the legitimate rights
and interests of the Palestinian people. There is an
urgent need for both sides to exercise restraint and take
concrete actions to resume peace talks without delay so
as to realize the two-State solution as soon as possible.

First, an independent State of Palestine and the
peaceful coexistence between Palestine and Israel
is the correct path for the efforts of the international
community. The establishment of a fully sovereign
State of Palestine based on the 1967 borders with East
Jerusalem as its capital is the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people, as well as the key to resolving the
Palestinian question. Based on the principle of land-for-
peace, the two-State solution, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, all
parties should determinedly promote the peace process.

Secondly, both sides should continue to demonstrate
good will and resume talks without delay in line with
the interests of the two peoples. Both sides should
effectively implement resolution 2334 (2016) and, in
both words and actions, demonstrate their sincerity

to return to peace talks and rebuild trust. Violence
directed against innocent civilians must stop. Israel
should cease its settlement expansion and its closure of
the Gaza Strip, and, at the same time, step up efforts to
improve the livelihoods of the Palestinian people.
Thirdly, the international community should build
consensus and synergy, which are an indispensable
external condition for resolving the Palestinian issue.
China welcomes the League of Arab States, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and countries
with influence as they play a greater role and step up
their efforts with both parties to consolidate the will for
peace talks and build momentum. The leading role of
the United Nations should be brought into full play and
any results of such efforts should be endorsed by the
Security Council.

China supports all international efforts aimed
at promoting peace between Palestine and Israel.
Recently, the relevant parties engaged in diplomatic
efforts to promote the resumption of talks. We hope
that both parties will continue their positive response in
order to relaunch negotiations at an early date. China is
a staunch supporter of the just cause of the Palestinian
people and an active mediator for peace between
Palestine and Israel. In 2013, Chinese President Xi
J inping put forward a four-point proposal for resolving
the Palestinian issue. In 2016, Foreign Minister Wang
Yi proposed three steps and deadlines for relaunching
the peace process. China's Special Envoy on the Middle
East Issue recently visited Palestine and Israel to
encourage both sides to meet each other halfway. China
is ready to step up its efforts with all relevant parties
to promote an early, comprehensive and just solution to
the Palestinian-Israeli issue so as to realize peace and
stability in the Middle East.

Today, 20 June, is World Refugee Day. The
international community should not forget the plight of
millions of Palestinian refugees and should continue to
provide humanitarian assistance to them. We commend
and support the efforts of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East and laud the refugee-receiving countries on their
contributions. China will continue to provide assistance
to Palestine, including by helping Palestine to achieve
social and economic development under the framework
of the Belt and Road Initiative.

