Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): First of all,
Mr. President, please accept my country's
congratulations on your appointment to your very high
office. Thank you also for this opportunity to address
the Council on the report of joint African Union-United
Nations panel on support for African Union
peacekeeping operations (S/2008/8l3).

At the outset, I would like to commend the panel
for their comprehensive, thorough and realistic report.
The panel has raised a number of recommendations for
strengthening the United Nations-African Union (AU)
relationship with regard to peacekeeping and for
developing the AU's structural, procedural, logistical
and human resources. The report has also raised some
interesting proposals regarding the establishment of a
new financial mechanism aimed at strengthening the
AU's capacity, both for peacekeeping and capacity-
building. These recommendations demand further
reflection by Member States, both in the Security
Council and in the General Assembly.

Australia commends the AU for its increasing
engagement in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
post-conflict reconstruction activities. The challenges
are significant, especially for a relatively new regional
organization that is trying to address operational
imperatives while simultaneously developing its own
peace and security architecture. In addressing these
operational and institutional challenges, we would
encourage the AU to learn from the experiences, both
good and bad, of the United Nations and other
comparable regional organizations.

With Africa remaining home to 40 per cent of
global peace operations, the need to strengthen the
AU's capacity for peacekeeping, both in terms of
responding to crises and promoting long-term stability,
is self-evident. We support the provision of assistance
by the United Nations to develop the AU's conflict-
prevention and peacekeeping capacity, and we
encourage the United Nations Secretariat and the AU
Commission to explore ways in which their
relationship can be further developed.

With more than 70 per cent of the United Nations
military personnel and more than 50 per cent of its
police personnel deployed to missions in Africa, we
also support the report's call for the establishment of a
more effective strategic relationship between the
United Nations and the AU. We need to recognize that
those United Nations resources are scarce and need to
be used in a cost-effective and efficient manner.

I would like to emphasize that the Australian
Government is keen to strengthen our engagement with
Africa and the AU in the field of peace and security
and to cooperate where appropriate with African
Member States in addressing many of the challenges
raised in the report. This was outlined by our Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Smith, when he addressed the
African Union Executive Council meeting in Addis
Ababa on 29 January.

During his visit to Addis Ababa last month, the
Australian Minister for Defence announced that a
number of places would be made available for AU-
nominated officers to undertake training in Australian
defence courses on vital military skills to help increase
the effectiveness of peace missions. The Defence
Minister also announced that Australia would co-
sponsor, together with the AU and United Nations, a
peacekeeping symposium in Africa later this year to
allow for an exchange of expertise and experiences.
Furthermore, he undertook to explore the possibility
that Australia may be able to provide some modest
training and mentoring assistance to the Eastern
African Standby Brigade to help build the capacities
and capabilities of the AU for peacekeeping and peace-
support and prevention activities.

Australia also looks forward to continuing our
support for the E-Learning for African Peacekeepers
programme, known as ELAP. We have been a proud
supporter of this programme since its inception, in
2006. In that time, the programme has attracted over
168,000 enrolments, at no cost to the participants, in
distance training across some 22 peacekeeping courses.

As noted throughout this report, military
capabilities can never substitute for long-term political
solutions to crises. Australia has been pleased to
contribute to United Nations initiatives aimed at
strengthening the relationship between the AU and the
Organization and at developing more effective conflict-
prevention mechanisms in Africa, both at the regional
and subregional levels.

In conclusion, we look forward to working with
members of the Council and members of the African
Union in the coming months as we further consider this
important report.
