Mr. Christiane (spoke in French): The former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the candidate countries; as well as the
Republic of Moldova and Ukraine, align themselves
with this statement.

I sincerely thank you, Sir, for giving me the floor
at today's debate on Haiti, in which the European
Union is always honoured to participate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2018/1059) and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. La Lime, for her briefing.

The European Union is concerned about the overall
situation in Haiti, which could be described as an
economic, financial, social, security and governance
crisis. Since July, Haiti has again been experiencing
a period of political and security-related instability.
Challenges to the new Government and President Moise
have emerged against a backdrop of demonstrations
and riots in the country's main cities. Several instances
of violence resulted in loss of life and looting in July,
as people protested against rising fuel prices and the
mismanagement of PetroCaribe funds. Other protests
were organized in October. They were better planned
and included the deployment of the Haitian National
Police, which managed to curb tensions and reduce
collateral damage, despite some instances of violence
and repression. Another demonstration took place
on 18 November, followed by sporadic outbreaks of
violence orchestrated by armed gangs, although that
call to violence was not heeded to the same extent as
those before it. The country also faces soaring inflation,
which is tied to the national currency's loss in value
against the United States dollar.

In that regard and given the political instability in
the country at the end of the former President's term
of office and throughout the last electoral cycle, the
European Union believes that it is essential to hold
parliamentary elections for the Chamber of Deputies
and the Senate, within the time limits provided for
in the Constitution. Respect for the legitimacy of
democratically elected institutions and the regular cycle
of elections appears, in parallel and in complementarity
with national dialogue, to be sine qua non to the
functioning of democracy in Haiti.

As indicated in the benchmarks for an exit strategy
prepared by United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti, consensus-based and far-reaching
reform of the electoral system would be a key element
in preventing further crises and regaining the trust of
the population. It appears that the adoption of the two
draft electoral laws, prepared by the executive branch,
could be complicated. It is therefore essential that the
Haitian authorities and parliamentarians work together
to organize legislative elections in October 2019. We
hope that the elections will be held as scheduled and in
the best possible conditions.

The European Union is and will remain a faithful
partner of the Republic of Haiti. It remains committed
to supporting the country at this sensitive juncture,
in consultation with other partners, including in the
much-needed reform process. We expect the Haitian
authorities to promote the political dialogue required to
reach an agreement and ease tensions. To that end, we
support the efforts of the Prime Minister.

The European Union supports the work done by
MINUJUSTH in support of the development of the
Haitian National Police, justice, the rule of law and the
protection and promotion of human rights. However,
we share the concerns expressed in the latest report
of the Secretary-General that the security situation
remains fragile and that progress on many benchmarks
is insufficient. The continued failure of the Haitian
National Police and national authorities to control gang
violence, along with accusations of collusion and other
problems, is ofparticular concern. The European Union
is concerned about the ability of the Haitian National
Police to operate effectively after the withdrawal
of MINUJUSTH. It is therefore crucial to complete
the work of strengthening and professionalizing the
Haitian National Police and to continue focusing on
the reform and strengthening of the justice and prison
systems and the consolidation of human rights. The
departure of MINUJUSTH is scheduled for the same
month as the scheduled elections, which have always
been linked to instability throughout Haiti's history.
That is why it is so important that the elections be held
on the dates scheduled.

In conclusion, I reiterate the European Union's
gratitude to MINUJUSTH for its contribution in the areas
of security, conflict prevention and the strengthening
of democracy and the rule of law in Haiti. We believe
that the structural causes of instability in the country
have not been addressed and that, unfortunately, the
political and security situation remains very fragile.
Special attention to ensuring respect for human rights
in the work of the security forces, as well as access
to impartial justice for all, which will be especially
necessary. It is essential that the Haitian police and
judicial system be effectively prepared to assume in
the future all of the duties currently discharged by the
United Nations Mission. We believe that organizing
the transition of MINUJUSTH will be fundamental
in that respect. Together with the United Nations and
the international community, the European Union
will support the Haitian authorities in building on
their commitment and efforts to ensure a better future
of peace, democracy, stability and well-being for the
Haitian people, who, after so long, deserve nothing less.

The father of Alexandre Dumas, author of The
Count ofMonte Crista, was born in Haiti. Following in
his footsteps, the time has come for the Haitian people
to gain access to the treasure trove of happiness after
having endured the unjust prison of misfortune.

The meeting rose at 5pm.
