The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Spain.

The unanimous adoption of resolution 1495
(2003) clearly represents an important step towards a
just, lasting and mutually acceptable settlement of this
controversy. It is of particular importance for the
countries in the region and for the Mahgreb in general.

Spain has always had a policy of constructive
neutrality and of not imposing solutions on the parties.
We have spared no effort, as an interested party to the
conflict as well as in our capacity as President of the
Council, to achieve the greatest possible consensus.

We believe that, under current circumstances, the
Council could not have limited itself to approving a
mere technical extension. The Council had before it the
serious and concrete proposal of Mr. Baker, the
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General - a proposal
recommended by the Secretary-General - and it was
duty-bound to express its views on it. Furthermore, in
giving positive consideration to the proposal, the
Council could not waste the opportunity that this
provided the parties to make a commitment based upon
mutual agreement.

Spain would like to express its satisfaction at this
outcome - which coincides with our position -
particularly since it deals with a dispute, and, therefore,
the Security Council must deal with the issue under
Chapter VI of the Charter. Given that a resolution of
the dispute must be based on agreement among the
parties, we are also pleased that that is indicated in
both the preambular and operative parts of the
resolution.
Furthermore, the resolution deals with other
important objectives of the Council. It supports the
Personal Envoy's peace plan, considering it the best
chance for a solution, and calls upon the parties to the
conflict to cooperate with the United Nations and
among themselves with a View to accepting and
implementing the peace plan.

I would like to conclude by thanking all members
of the Security Council for their understanding, as well
as for the efforts that they made in the course of
drafting. We would like in particular to thank the
United States delegation - Ambassador Negroponte
and his team - for their ability to combine the
determination to make real progress with the necessary
flexibility to include contributions from Council
members, including my own.

In conclusion, Spain would like to reiterate the
appeal that has been addressed to the parties not to
waste this opportunity and to begin, with the least
delay, a dialogue leading to the full acceptance of the
plan and the implementation of its provisions on the
basis of mutual agreement. Spain reaffirms its support
for such a dialogue. We will do our utmost to ensure
that it can become a reality in the near future.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.45 am.
