Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking Mr. Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
presence and for the report that he has just presented to
the Council (S/2011/682, annex). I also take this
opportunity to welcome the contribution of the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
Council's work. Lastly, I associate myself with the
statement to be made by the head of the delegation of
the European Union a little later.

We are preparing to renew for a year the mandate
of the activity of the European Union Force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (EUFOR) and Operation Althea in a
political context weighted with uncertainty for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The security situation has been calm and stable
for several years. That is attributable to the Bosnians
themselves and their institutions. The arrest of Ratko
Mladie, on 26 May, and of Goran Hadzie, on 20 July,
and their immediate transfer to The Hague to be tried,
constitute a positive development that ends a phase. All
those sought by the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia have now been arrested. I note
that those arrests did not lead to any significant
reaction on the ground.

However, for more than a year now, since the
elections of October 2010, the country has been unable
to form a new central Government. The outgoing
Council of Ministers manages day-to-day matters and
the budget operates on a temporary basis. That lack of
Government is starting to have a significant negative
impact on the economy and delays reforms towards the
European path.

We therefore call on all Bosnian leaders to
rapidly find the necessary compromises to establish a
central Government and return to the reform process,
beginning by calibrating the Constitution with the
European Convention on Human Rights. Not to do so
would mean Bosnia and Herzegovina turning its back
on any European prospect, while all States of the
region, one after the other, are taking this opportunity
to prepare themselves, each at its own pace, to rejoin
the European family one day.

That requires, first and foremost, the resumption
of political dialogue and, on the other hand, an end to
resorting to nationalist rhetoric, which today is still too
common. It goes as far as denying the legitimacy of the
State of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a Member of the
United Nations and the Security Council, or attacking
the legality of the decisions of the High
Representative. The latter means that the staff of the
Office of the High Representative must enjoy sufficient
immunity guarantees.

Apart from words, there are deeds. In that regard,
France remains very concerned and warns Bosnian
leaders against any initiative that contravenes the
Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement and that would threaten
the stability and integrity of the country. More
generally, France again calls on the leaders of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to return to dialogue, overcome their
divisions and work towards consolidating a functioning
State that upholds democratic principles. They must
shoulder the primary responsibility. They were elected
by Bosnian voters to that end.

In that context, I would also like to reaffirm my
country's commitment to the independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
High Representative, keeper of the peace accords on
behalf of the international community, and his action
and dialogue with Bosnian political representatives has
our full support.

In that regard, I wish to particularly note the
increased commitment of the European Union to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Last spring, the European
Union agreed an intensified approach for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and its presence on the ground has thus
been strengthened. A new European Union Special
Representative and delegate, Mr. Sorensen, assumed
his duties a few months ago to help support the country

in its consolidation process and reforms. Mr. Sarensen
has our full support. Furthermore, as the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the European Union decided on
10 October, EUFOR and Operation Althea will be
restructured so as to again focus on training and
advising the Bosnian armed forces, while maintaining
the means to handle, if necessary, executive tasks in
support of the work of the Bosnian authorities.

In order to improve the effectiveness of our
action, we owe it to Bosnia and Herzegovina to
consistently work to adapt our presence to the situation
on the ground, be it the civilian or military presence of
the European Union or the restructuring of the Office
of the High Representative. France will fully
participate in those efforts.

