Mr. Fadaifard (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for
having convened this public meeting on the grave and
deteriorating situation in the Palestinian territory.

The separation wall, which is being built by the
Israeli regime deep in the occupied West Bank, marks
the beginning of a new phase in the plight of the
Palestinian people. It is fast becoming a new, major
source of injustice for the Palestinians and of tension in
the Middle East. The wall is a new means of achieving
the Israeli goal of depriving the Palestinians of their
inherent national rights. As such, it is having serious
impact on all aspects of the Palestinian question.

What we are currently witnessing in the West
Bank is a manifest and clear act of territorial
annexation under the guise of security. The
construction of the separation wall means the
confiscation of more Palestinian land, the demolition of
more Palestinian houses and businesses, the ruin of
more Palestinian lives and the further degradation of
the environment. When completed, the separation wall
will stretch for hundreds of kilometres, with wide
buffer zones, trenches, barbed wire, an electric fence, a
two-lane patrol road and no-go areas 70 to 100 metres
wide. And that is what the Israelis deceitfully call
simply a fence.

Palestinians between the wall and the Armistice
Line will effectively be cut off from their farmland,
workplaces, schools and health clinics. The wall will
cause direct harm to hundreds of thousands of
Palestinians living in dozens of villages and towns. It
will result in the confiscation of parts of the West Bank
and of a percentage of its inhabitants, leaving the rest
prisoners in cantons, which are merely open prisons.
There are serious fears that the Palestinians caught
between the wall and the armistice line will find life so
unbearable that they will move to what remains of the
West Bank on the eastern side of the wall, thereby
creating a new generation of refugees.

Moreover, the wall is to complement the
expansionist policy of settlement building. The illegal
settlements in the West Bank, built against the will of
the international community, will be the principal
beneficiaries of the wall. Likewise, the illegal Jewish
settlements are expanding in parallel to the completion
of the racist wall. Recent press reports indicate that
Israel is building hundreds of new homes in the West
Bank, further undermining and discrediting the road
map and the efforts of its sponsors.

The decision on the wall and new settlement units
is further proof that the Israeli regime has never been
serious about peace, and that its goal is to draw
arbitrary borders and to sabotage the possibilities of
establishing a viable Palestinian State. Israel's desire to
stick to completion of the racist wall, coupled with its
policy of settlement expansion, seeks to ensure in
advance the defeat of any efforts aimed at enabling the
Palestinians one day to have a viable State.

Given the magnitude of the injustice of the
separation wall for the Palestinians, at a time when
other aspects of the oppressive Israeli policy continue
unabated, the consequences of building the wall would
be enormous for them and the whole region. That
would make the Palestinians more disappointed with
international efforts, a prospect that would lead to a
further deterioration of the situation in the occupied
territory. However, nobody should assume that the
consequences of such a project will be felt by the
Palestinians alone. Undoubtedly, the deterioration of
the situation in the Palestinian areas would, in turn,
further worsen the situation in the whole Middle East,
which is already in turmoil and suffers from, among
other things, the consequences of the adventures in
Iraq.

Conquest, or the acquisition of territory by force,
has been outlawed by the prohibition on the use of
force contained in the Charter. Several Security
Council resolutions reaffirm that prohibition, and state
that the status of the West Bank and Gaza must not be
altered by the occupier. Likewise, the Fourth Geneva
Convention prohibits the alteration and annexation of
occupied territories.

Thus, given the enormity of what is at stake and
the international consensus on the need to stop the
unlawful construction of the wall in the West Bank, it
is incumbent upon the Security Council to live up to
the expectations of the international community and
take the necessary action with a view to upholding
international law. In particular, the time has come for
the Security Council to demand that the separation wall
be stopped and reversed.

