Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Allow me also to say a few words in
connection with the passing of Yasser Arafat. A major
international political activist has passed away. He
dedicated his entire life to the just cause of the
Palestinian people, to fighting for its inalienable right
to the establishment of an independent State which
would exist in peace with Israel within secure and
internationally recognized borders. The President of
the Russian Federation has sent the appropriate
message to the leaders of the Palestinian National
Authority, in which he described Mr. Arafat's passing
as a heavy loss to all Palestinians. Our country will be
represented at Mr. Arafat's funeral by Mr. Boris
Gryzlov, Speaker of the Parliament of the Russian
Federation.

Turning to the item on our agenda, allow me to
express gratitude to the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Lord Ashdown, for having introduced the
report, which contains a full picture of the Bosnian
settlement process, and also for his substantive briefing
on the present stage of the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. We are also pleased to welcome here the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Mladen Ivanie; we thank him for his
statement of the position of the Bosnian Government.

We note with satisfaction the positive dynamic of
the processes taking place in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the key role being played by the High
Representative in ensuring, in cooperation with the
Bosnian authorities, the success of the reforms being
carried out there. The Russian Federation is ready to
continue to support the efforts being made by the High
Representative and his Office to form a viable State
system in Bosnia and Herzegovina, above all in
strengthening the supremacy of the rule of law.

Despite visible changes in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the stabilization process in that country is
still moving at an uneven pace. There continues to be
mutual distrust among the peoples of the country who
are forming a State; substantive divergences remain
regarding strategic objectives and the future of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Of course, we cannot fail to note the complex
economic and social situation and the high level of
unemployment, although in that respect some positive
steps have been taken, as described today by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We believe that international backing is still
necessary at this stage for the development of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. That by no means invalidates the
basic policy of a phased transfer to the Bosnian
authorities of responsibility for the situation in the
country. We continue insistently to favour a gradual
reduction in the staffs and the competencies of
international agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina;
here, we are paying particular attention to the High
Representative's mission implementation plan.

We believe that the affirmed dedication of the
western Balkan countries to the European perspective
can unquestionably be used effectively as an additional
stabilizing factor in the region. Nevertheless, we
believe that the process of a settlement in Bosnia
cannot be totally adjusted to the agenda of the
European Union. The most important thing at this stage
remains the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreements. Dayton should not be reduced to the 16
conditions identified by the European Commission and
to the requirements of the Partnership for Peace
programme. Nor should the responsibility for the
problems that continue to exist in Bosnia and
Herzegovina be attributed solely to the Serbs.

Cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia unquestionably is
an important element of the Dayton Agreements. The
Russian Federation also favours the strictest
compliance with relevant Security Council resolutions.
Here, I should note that we recently paid in full our
financial obligations to the Tribunal.

However, we do not consider that the stability of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the peace process as a
whole should be held hostage to that specific aspect of
the Dayton Agreement. It is only one aspect of Dayton.
Recently, there has been increasingly harsh criticism of
Republika Srpska because of the lack of progress in
this area. We believe that international agencies and
systems must carry out a balanced and objective policy
towards all three of the peoples now forming the State
and towards both of the Bosnian entities, in particular
since the authorities in Banj a Luka have, on the whole,
been taking a constructive position on many issues
related to the implementation of the Peace Agreement
and to the implementation of the reforms.

An extremely important objective of the process
leading to a peace settlement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to be that of ensuring the
equality of citizens throughout the territory of the
country. We attach great importance to full
implementation of the 1999 amendments to the
constitutions of the entities, regarding so-called
constituent peoples. This work must be concluded
while Bosnia and Herzegovina remains in the Dayton
era. We note that, as far as this issue is concerned,
Republika Srpska is ahead of the federation, which still
has a great deal to do to meet its obligations. We
welcome the progress made in the implementation of
the military reform in Bosnia Herzegovina -
including, among other things, the formation of a
single command structure and the establishment of
civilian control.

We are counting on the fact that the process of
reforming the police, which has begun, will be
conducted as military reform is being conducted, in a
highly balanced fashion, which will involve consensus
on all of the planned transformations, and without
pressing for excessive centralization in that area.

Along with that, the Office of the High
Representative should continue to closely follow social
problems, such as the return of property that belongs to
the State and providing for pensions, among others. A
just decision on their part will determine, to a great
extent, both the speed and the extent of achieving
political stability in the country.

The transfer of the military component of the
peace agreement to the responsibility of the European
Union is an extremely important and major stage of the
stabilization process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In our
view, the most important thing is to ensure a smooth
transfer, with the drawdown of the Stabilization Force
(SFOR), and to carry out the transfer of the various
competencies within the framework of international
law, including appropriate monitoring by the United
Nations Security Council.

For its part, Russia intends to continue to play an
active and constructive role in the process of
implementing the principles agreed on by the
international community for a Bosnian settlement,
within the framework of the mechanism established to
achieve that objective - in particular, within the
framework of the Peace Implementation Council and
its Steering Board, the contact group, and in close
contact with the High Representative.

