Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, let me thank Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for the
briefing he has provided us this morning. We would
also like to express our gratitude for the efforts by
Mr. Tom Koenigs, former Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as well
as his entire staff.

We are aware of the important role that UNAMA
has played in the reconstruction of Afghanistan and
that it why we would like to wish every success to
Mr. Kai Eide in his new post as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the Mission.

Since the latest report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Afghanistan, the news that has
reached us has not been very encouraging. This reflects
the daunting challenge represented by the
establishment of a viable and peaceful State in a
country that, in recent decades, has only known war
and intolerance.

However, we wonder if the growing obstacles
that the international community is facing in
Afghanistan are not the result of the lack of
coordination and determination on the part of those
who are in charge of assisting in its reconstruction.
This could be making it difficult for them to tackle the
roots of the conflict.

For example, we are disappointed to see that
member States of North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), the organization in charge of security in
Afghanistan, offer diverging strategies to stabilize the
country. Decisions that prioritize swift results rather
than long-term improvements, both in the institutional
and security sectors, could be risky as they can
undermine the attention and resources that are directed
towards suppressing the insurgency.

Furthermore, unilaterally pushing for non-
consensual policies does not help to generate
coordinated strategies and also undermines the will of
the people of Afghanistan to rebuild their country and
to play an active role in this reconstruction. This lack
of coordination and promotion of shared objectives
represents a serious obstacle to multilateralism, which
is the very foundation of our institution.

Lastly, we understand that, in order to bring more
consistency to the efforts of the international
community in Afghanistan, we need a more energetic
leadership from UNAMA. The future of the country
must, of course, be in the hands of the people of
Afghanistan themselves, as was pointed out very
clearly and accurately by the Ambassador of Italy, but
UNAMA can and must assume a more proactive role in
coordination efforts aimed at building and securing a
viable State in Afghanistan.

Both the United Nations and the international
forces must step up their efforts to improve
cooperation mechanisms among themselves. They must
also strengthen the able and responsible management
of the Afghan leadership. For this reason, we support
the extension of the UNAMA mandate until March
2009, with a greater and more energetic coordinating
role for the United Nations in the efforts to rebuild the
country and to improve its security situation.

