Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Shearer and Ms. Sunday for their important briefings. South Sudan has officially formed the Transitional Government of National Unity. We welcome that agreement and the readiness of the parties to put aside their differences and make way for a sustainable peace process. In that regard, we would like to acknowledge the role of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and other regional and international actors for their mediation efforts in that process. We hope that that encouraging step will make it possible to advance the agreed reforms, particularly those relating to transitional justice, accountability and transparency in public administration. At the same time, we regret the recent incidents of intercommunal violence, which have exacted a high toll in terms of the dead and injured, as well as the volatile security situation along the border. While it is clear that this rapprochement between the parties is an important step forward, it is no less certain that it will be successful only if it results in the eradication of the root causes of the conflict. It is of great concern that the recent report of the Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan (A/HRC/43/56) notes that more than half the population is acutely food insecure. It is urgent that such a commitment be reflected in an improvement in the quality of life of a population where more than 7 million people are in need of life-saving assistance. That situation is exacerbated by the recent floods and the continuing threat of diseases such as Ebola. Also of concern is the serious threat in the Horn of Africa of an outbreak of desert locusts, whose reproduction is linked to the effects of climate change and which has been described as a disaster by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. In that regard, it is necessary to promote State policies for the development of resilience and the mitigation of the undeniable risks resulting from climate change. Meanwhile, we emphatically reiterate our call for the implementation of all measures to end to sexual and gender-based violence, the recruitment and use of child soldiers and human rights violations in general. In particular, we call for the implementation of transitional justice mechanisms, such as the hybrid court for South Sudan. In that vein, we would like to acknowledge the ratification by the Government of South Sudan of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict and the signing of the comprehensive action plan by the Government and the South Sudan People's Defence Forces. The culture of entrenched impunity and the lack of accountability prevailing in South Sudan have been the main triggers of violence and must therefore be addressed in order to bring about genuine democratic transformation. The Transitional Government must urgently prioritize accountability and national reconciliation. Peace will not be achieved if there is no resolve to bring to justice those guilty of crimes against humanity. In conclusion, we would like to emphasize the need to promote the meaningful participation of women, young people and civil society in the formation of the Transitional Government of National Unity. We continue to call for achieving 35 per cent participation of women in leadership positions within the Government.
