I would like to begin by thanking the penholders, the United Kingdom and Germany, for facilitating the negotiations that produced the resolution the Security Council is adopting today (resolution 2525 (2020). We would also like reiterate our support for the Sudan as it strives to lead a successful transition to democracy, bring peace to the country and oversee its economy's recovery. Additionally, we would like to express our solidarity with the Sudan as it fights the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We welcome the extension of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until the end of 2020, which was also recommended by the African Union Peace and Security Council. That was a logical step, for a combination of reasons. First, we have heard both the calls from the ground and the expressions of fear that people have with respect to the withdrawal of UNAMID, and it is important to respond to them. The transition from UNAMID to the Sudan in terms of the protection of civilians should be smooth and gradual and it should not leave any security vacuums that would threaten civilian lives. In this regard, we welcome the Sudan's plan to provide protection for civilians, which was communicated to the Security Council last month. We hope that UNAMID and the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan will be seen as useful allies in building the capacities necessary to assume the full responsibility of protecting civilians. Secondly, as we are approaching the end of UNAMID, it is crucially important that the withdrawal be done in a responsible manner, so as to ensure that any of the gains secured since the start of the Operation, in 2007, will not be lost. Thirdly, there are certain realities, such as the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the rainy season, that have to be taken into account when planning for the withdrawal of UNAMID. Furthermore, as the realities evolve on the ground, we expect to take a decision on the future of UNAMID. We are looking forward to working with the transitional authorities of the Sudan on the future course of action. Finally, we would like to express our thanks and support for UNAMID, which has been helping to bring peace and security to the people in Darfur.
