Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): Let
me also thank Special Representative Mahiga and
African Union (AU) Special Representative Diarra for
their informative remarks. We also welcome the Prime
Minister of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG)
of Somalia to these proceedings.

Somalia continues to present some of the most
complex and urgent humanitarian, political and
security concerns in Africa and the world. The Security
Council should continue to pay close attention to these
interwoven challenges, as we are doing today.

The United States is gravely concerned about the
severe drought and humanitarian crisis in Somalia and
across the Horn of Africa. More than 11 million people
urgently need emergency assistance, including as many
as 4 million Somalis in need of food. Inside Somalia,
the famine has spread alarmingly. A sixth region has
now been affected, and we expect the situation to
continue to decline. Without urgent action, more than
750,000 people could die in the months ahead. We
welcome the upcoming humanitarian summit on
Somalia and the larger Horn of Africa region, which is
to be held during this session of the General Assembly.
The need is vast and the time is short.

The United States is providing approximately
$102 million in humanitarian relief assistance for
Somalia, and more than $600 million to the entire Horn
of Africa in response to the crisis. We join the
Secretary-General in calling on our fellow Member
States to contribute generously to the programmes
outlined in the consolidated appeal for Somalia. We
must fully fund the ongoing emergency response so
that the most desperate can receive the food, water,
medicine and shelter that they need to survive.

l 1-49644

Humanitarian actors in Somalia must coordinate in
order to maximize the impact of aid efforts throughout
the country.

At this hour of crisis, the United States condemns
the callous actions of Al-Shabaab, including the
targeting of civilians and the blocking of humanitarian
aid for millions of Somalis. Al-Shabaab continues to
block access to the populations hit hardest by the
famine. Its cruelty has severely impeded international
efforts to tackle the growing humanitarian crisis. All
armed groups must respect human rights and protect
civilians, especially women and children. Rape and
sexual violence against innocent women and children
are unconscionable and must stop. All parties in
Somalia share responsibility for protecting civilians
and enlarging and preserving the humanitarian space.
All armed groups in Somalia must adhere to
international humanitarian law.

Let me turn now to the political situation. The
United States welcomes the signing of the Kampala
Accord on 9 June and the outcome of the high-level
consultative meetings in Mogadishu in early
September. We commend Special Representative
Mahiga for his efforts to spur political reconciliation
and progress, including through an agreed upon road
map with benchmarks and timelines. It is now up to the
Transitional Federal Government to improve
governance by working with responsible regional and
local administrations, civil society groups and clan
leaders, on the basis of shared goals of peace and
stability, to achieve the benchmarks laid out in the road
map.

To that end, we remind the Transitional Federal
Institutions that future international support will be
contingent upon the completion of the tasks in the road
map. Now is the time for sustained and vigorous
peacebuilding efforts by the Transitional Federal
Government.

The Somali people deserve a responsible and
credible Government. We urge the Transitional Federal
Government to take advantage of the new security
environment to extend the writ of the police, the
criminal justice system and other civilian institutions
into the newly liberated areas of Mogadishu. The TFG
must provide improved governance, essential services
and fiscal transparency and responsibility, and it must
hold credible elections in August 2012.

On the security front, the United States welcomes
the significant military achievements of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
Security Forces. The coordinated AMISOM. offensive
against Al-Shabaab that began in February has
achieved impressive results. It contributed to
Al Shabaab's withdrawal from nearly all of Mogadishu
on 6 August. Nonetheless, Al-Shabaab remains a threat,
and we urge AMISOM. and the Somali Security Forces
to persevere in their counter-insurgency efforts. For its
part, the TF G must make further progress on the agreed
road map, and must begin providing services in as
much of Mogadishu as possible in order to solidify
recent security gains.

The United States commends the Governments of
Burundi and Uganda for their commitment to
AMISOM. We thank Major General Mugisha for his
leadership and all of AMISOM's brave peacekeepers.
We welcome further troop commitments from other AU
partner nations so that AMISOM. can reach its
mandated strength to quickly secure its expanded area
of operations.

The United States intends to continue our strong
bilateral support to AMISOM. troop-contributing
countries. Since 2007, we have obligated more than
$258 million worth of training equipment and logistic
support to AMISOM. and its troop-contributors. We
have also provided more than $85 million for security
assistance to the TFG to develop a professional and
capable Somali security force. We urge other Member
States to fund, without caveats, the United Nations
Trust Fund for AMISOM, including the urgently needed
reimbursement of contingent-owned equipment.

The United States also commends the work of the
United Nations Support Office for AMISOM. and the
significant contributions that it has made to improving
AMISOM's logistical operations and quality of life. We
urge the United Nations to expand its presence and
activities in Somalia as the security situation allows.
Relocating United Nations personnel to Mogadishu is
key to the long and difficult effort to defeat Al-Shabaab
and to restore stability and decent governance in
Somalia.

Finally, let me turn to piracy off the coast of
Somalia~ a scourge that began because of the
instability and lack of governance on land that now
threatens the peace, security and stability of Somalia.
Piracy, and the illicit and lucrative economy that it
brings with it, contribute to corruption and corrode
sustainable political and economic development. The
only sustainable long-term solution to piracy, which
will also advance Somalia's long-term economic
development, political stability and humanitarian
situation, is security and good governance.

The United States is deeply committed to
supporting humanitarian relief efforts and to the
security and stability of Somalia. We will continue to
partner with the international community to help end
the worsening humanitarian crisis and bring relief to
the suffering people of that troubled land.

