Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for
her briefing.

We have no doubt that today's meeting was called
for by the United States delegation for the sole purpose
of continuing to destabilize the situation in Venezuela
by imposing its own approaches and methods to resolve
the problems that the country has recently been facing.

This meeting, which we all have to attend, is another
element of the United States strategy to carry out regime
change in Venezuela. We regret that the United States
is drawing the Security Council into its unscrupulous
games. However, since we are all gathered here, we
would like to share with the Council our principled
views on what is taking place.

Let us speak frankly. The topic of today's meeting
is not the situation in Venezuela, as the organizers
would like Council members - who are, incidentally,
clearly divided on this issue - to think. Unfortunately,
today we are considering the most typical case of what
is called a "threat to international peace and security",
one that has been created by the threat or use of force
against the political independence of a State. The
authors of the Charter of the United Nations, among
which, I must note, the United States prominently
figured, included a warning in the Charter - in Article
2, paragraph 4 - in an attempt to save the world from
such events. However, it seems that Washington has not
opened that treaty for quite a long time.
Such flagrant United States interference in the
internal affairs of another State is nothing new. The
Americans have not changed, and apparently do not
intend to change, their attitude to Latin America as an
area of exclusive interest to them - a backyard of sorts,
in which they can do anything they want, without taking
into the account the interests of its inhabitants. This
is a reincarnation of the so-called Monroe Doctrine,
on which President Trump spoke openly during his
statement at the high-level segment of the seventy-third
session of the General Assembly (see A/73/PV.6). Back
in 1913, President Woodrow Wilson spoke about how
the United States intended to teach the South American
republics to elect good people. Today that lesson is
being taught to Venezuela, which recently dared to
pursue an independent policy that does not coincide
with the economic and political interests of the warden
that watches over the western hemisphere.

I would like to quote the words of another American
President, which were spoken in Congress on the eve
of the creation of the United Nations, of which he was
one of the founding fathers. He considered the United
Nations as his main political project and truly believed
that its creation was capable of saving humankind from
wars and conflicts. That President was Franklin Delano
Roosevelt, who said:

"The Yalta Conference ought to spell the end of the
system of unilateral action, the exclusive alliances,
the spheres of influence, the balances of power,
and all the other expedients that have been tried for
centuries - and have always failed."

Unfortunately, the real policy of the United States in
the western hemisphere - and not only there - is in
striking contrast to those noble and just ideals. Regime
change is a favourite geopolitical game of the
United States.

Washington's attempts to undermine Nicaragua are
no secret. The fact of open United States interference
in the internal affairs of that State was confirmed by
the 1986 decision of the International Court of Justice
at The Hague in the case regarding the Iran-Contra
affair. At the time, the United States tried to finance
Nicaraguan rebels. Cubans still remember the Bay of
Pigs invasion, and Chileans will never forget the role
of the United States in overthrowing Salvador Allende.
Before our eyes, the attempts by the United States to
impose its will on other nations is being supplemented
with a new chapter. That is just a brief glimpse into
what Washington has done in Latin America alone. The
nations of Africa, Asia, the Middle East, the Pacific
region and aEurope have quite a bit to add to that list.
Against that backdrop, inventing so-called evidence of
interference in United States elections out of thin air
and accusing other countries of malicious policies is
not only absurd, but also laughable.

The Venezuelan people once again supported
the candidacy of Nicolas Maduro as President of the
State by giving him almost 68 per cent of the vote
on 20 May. Anticipating that scenario, from the start
Washington did everything it could to discredit the vote
and cast a shadow over the re-elected authorities of the
country. In particular, there is enough evidence that a
number of opposition candidates were subjected to the
most severe pressure, which forced them to withdraw
their candidatures and refrain from competing in
the elections.

Ultimately, using the opposition's partial boycott
as a pretext, the United States and several of its
allies set about implementing a plan to overthrow the
legitimate authorities of the country. As we know from
the American press, prominent members of the United
States Congress actively participated in that venture.
The attempt to overthrow the Government immediately
after the election was unsuccessful. Washington
therefore tried to destabilize the situation step by
step, including through the Organization of American
States (OAS) and a number of Venezuela's neighbours.
However, as is well known, the United States did not
succeed in pushing through an anti-Venezuela draft
resolution at the OAS Permanent Council on 24 January.
There is not enough support within the Organization
for those plans, which is quite a telling sign.

We are now witnessing the culmination of
those efforts, which were timed to coincide with the
inauguration of the legitimately elected President.
Extremist opponents of the legitimate Government,
having failed to defeat Maduro, including by physically
eliminatinghim, chose themost confrontational scenario.
On 23 January, the President of the National Assembly
proclaimed himself interim President of Venezuela.
The United States and a number of other countries
immediately recognized him, thereby confirming that
they had either abetted or were directly involved in the
creation of an artificial parallel Government, which now
threatens to seriously destabilize the situation in the
country. National Security Advisor John Bolton made
a Bolshevik-style statement on the expropriation of all
Venezuelan property in the United States, while allies
from the opposition were promised financial support.
We strongly condemn those who are pushing
Venezuelan society towards the precipice of a bloody
feud. The United States is painting us a picture of
confrontation between the Maduro regime and the
people of Venezuela. That picture is far from the reality.
In spite of everything, the leader of Venezuela clearly
enjoys broad support among the population. Incidentally,
according to sociological studies conducted in October
2018 by an organization close to the opposition, the
National Assembly, the leader of which Washington is
currently positioning as the so-called President, is not
supported by approximately 70 per cent of the people
of Venezuela.

Again on the matter of the elections and being
informed, the representative of the United Kingdom
spoke about stuffed ballot boxes in Venezuela,
suggesting that the elections were rigged. I would recall
that there are no ballot boxes in Venezuela; it uses an
electronic system of voting.

In support of Venezuela, we are first and foremost
against gross violations of international law, in
particular those provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations that clearly condemn any interference in the
internal affairs of independent States. Furthermore, the
American leaders are making making obvious hints
regarding the use force when they talk about all options
being on the table. Taking advantage of the presence of
the Secretary of State of the United States of America,
I want to ask Mr. Pompeo directly if that means that
the United States is ready to use military force against
a sovereign State under a bogus pretext? We need
to hear a clear answer here in the Chamber: Does
Washington intend to once again violate the Charter of
the United Nations?

Secretary of State Pompeo claims that only China,
Russia, Cuba, Syria and Iran are supporting Maduro.
However, if the Secretary of State were to spend a
little more time in the Chamber, he would hear first-
hand the true stance of the overwhelming majority
of a sovereignty State and the policy of overthrowing
unwanted regimes. The countries mentioned are
not in support of the Maduro regime; instead, they
support international law, and I think the Secretary of
State already had a chance to hear that. In the context
of the notion of a rules-based order, which has been
promoted by our Western colleagues, perhaps the act
of overthrowing unwant regimes is welcome to them.
However, international law quite clearly classifies
such actions as a violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular in Article 2, paragraph 4. We
consider such behaviour unacceptable. It undermines
the principles of the Charter and the basic norms of
international conduct.

We would also like to address our Latin American
partners. Do they understand that if they condone such
actions, tomorrow any other Latin American country
could find itselfin the place ofVenezuela? The illegality
of what is taking place in Venezuela is flagrant, and
the leadership of the Organization of American States
supports this and, following Washington, rubber-
stamps threats against an independent State.

We are convinced that resolving the Venezuelan
crisis requires taking several obvious and simple
steps. First, there needs to be an end to all external
interference and to the propping up of the leaders of
the opposition. Secondly, every effort should be made
to launch an inter-Venezuelan dialogue and facilitate
reconciliation. In that regard, Venezuela's neighbours
can - and should - play a determining role. We know
that similar initiatives are already being put forward.
Thirdly, we should refrain from discriminatory
economic measures against Venezuela. It is no secret
that, to a great extent, the current economic crisis was
provoked by those countries that cry out most about the
suffering of the Venezuelan people.

I would like to correct something that Secretary
of State Pompeo said. We did not block the draft
presidential statement proposed by the United States.
We made certain constructive amendments that we
were sure would be wholeheartedly supported by the
majority of the members of the Security Council.
Some members have already voiced their support. As
such, the ball now is in the hands of the American
delegation. It is up to them. However, we are not
sure that this kind of statement, which is based on a
carefully weighed assessment of the Secretary-General
and which reaffirms the sovereignty of Venezuela, the
inadmissibility of interference in its internal affairs
and respect for its Constitution is something that the
delegation ofthe United States is striving for. We believe
that it is now more important than everto ease up on
the rhetoric and refrain from threats and ultimatums,
as well as to contribute to beginning a dialogue within
a legal framework and ensure the stabilization of the
situation in Venezuela. We are ready to contribute to
that end. We call on everyone to do so as well.

