Mr. Jeremie (Serbia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting of the
Security Council on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), pursuant
to resolution 1244 (1999).

I welcome the presence of Special Representative
Lamberto Zannier and gratefully acknowledge the
unequivocal statement in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2011/281) that the Mission's priorities
remain unchanged.

We believe it is critical for all responsible
stakeholders on the ground, together with the Security
Council, to reaffirm support for UNMIK as an
indispensable pillar of peace and security. We echo the
importance that the Secretary-General places on the
close coordination required of all international actors
that operate within the framework and under the
authority of the United Nations and resolution 1244
(1999), including the Kosovo Force (KFOR), the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Mission in Kosovo.

We also reiterate our support for UNMIK's
ongoing commitment to the external representation
function for Kosovo. We continue to be deeply
concerned, however, that the province's ethnic
Albanian authorities remain fundamentally sceptical on
this issue. Today's report suggests, on the one hand,
that they appeared to be taking a pragmatic attitude".
On the other hand, the same document highlights
Pristina's continuing unwillingness to attend a number
of regional meetings, for which UNMIK's facilitation
is required, including sessions of the Regional
Cooperation Council.

Serbia hopes that the constructive and inclusive
approach offered by UNMIK will be embraced at long
last. Adhering to established procedures and legally
binding agreements is the only way to ensure that
11-33372
regional cooperation continues to improve under the
current set of circumstances, which have been severely
complicated by the 17 February 2008 unilateral
declaration of independence of the ethnic Albanian
authorities of our southern province.

I would like to once again reaffirm my
Government's position on the unilateral declaration of
independence. We do not, and we will not, recognize it,
explicitly or implicitly. This is mandated by the
democratic will of the people of Serbia and enshrined
in our Constitution. A substantial majority of States
Members of the United Nations, and of those seated on
the Security Council, continue to respect Serbia's
sovereignty and territorial integrity, in accordance with
the basic principles of the United Nations Charter and
the Helsinki Final Act.

On behalf of my nation, I would like to reiterate
our deep gratitude for their support and solidarity in
the face of numerous pressures. We urge them to
maintain their principled position, thus ensuring that
unilateral attempts to impose outcomes to ethnic and
territorial disputes are not legitimized, and thereby
preventing Kosovo's unilateral declaration of
independence from becoming a dangerous and
destabilizing precedent for the whole world. This will
also contribute to maintaining a healthy international
environment within which the negotiations between
Serbia and Pristina can continue.

Last September, the world supported by
acclamation the fact that dialogue is the only road to
peace in Kosovo. I want to emphasize that Serbia
remains strongly committed to these talks, which
finally got under way during this reporting period. The
Secretary-General has observed that while the long-
awaited launch of the dialogue is an encouraging
development, it is still too early to assess its results.
The report characterizes the dialogue as being
conducted in a positive and constructive atmosphere.
Indeed, a strong foundation has been laid for arriving
at consensual solutions to all outstanding issues. We
hope that the forward momentum will be maintained,
strengthening the spirit of compromise that holds the
key to success in this endeavour.

Discussions have taken place on the following
topics: civil registry, cadastral records,
telecommunications, electricity, civil aviation and a
package of issues defined as freedom of movement.
Some progress has been achieved. For instance, a
working group was established and tasked with
ascertaining the current state of the civil registry
books. Agreement has already been reached on
practical arrangements regarding UNMIK's
chairmanship of the Central European Free Trade
Agreement for 2011, within the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999). It was also agreed that neither
the facilitator nor any other stakeholder would attempt
to unilaterally impose any outcome on the parties, as
after the unsuccessful Ahtisaari process. Serbia will
remain a constructive participant in the dialogue, and
will continue to offer multiple proposals for each topic.

We firmly believe that the United Nations needs
to be present during the negotiating sessions. This is a
transparent process, and we have nothing to hide from
the Organization. We therefore appeal to all those who
insist that the United Nations must be left out of the
room to reconsider their positions, especially in the
light of the Secretary-General's continuing dedication,
as stated in today's report, "to ensure an effective
exchange of information and reporting on the dialogue
to the Security Council" (S/20H/28], para. 59).

The Council's leading role in determining and
providing legitimacy to a comprehensive settlement
remains indispensable, in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999) and the Council's primary responsibility
to maintain international peace and security.

Let me underline how critically important it is
that no one tries to alter realities on the ground
unilaterally. Numerous reports by the Secretary-
General have warned us of that danger, including the
one before us today. The province's ethnic-Albanian
authorities have repeatedly sought to extend the reach
of their Pristina-based institutions to North Kosovo,
against the will of the local population, including
multiple attempts to deploy heavily armed special
police units. According to the report, this has increased
tensions. The report also states that the majority-Serb
community of North Kosovo perceives these
provocations as

"not being dictated by rule of law considerations
but, rather, as being intended to intimidate the
local population and impose Pristina structures
upon them without their consent" (ibid., para. 19).

We remain deeply concerned by these and other
unilateral measures against Kosovo Serbs. Addressing
the General Assembly last September, President Boris
Tadie clearly stated our position on this matter: "Any
attempt to change these realities through the use of
force would bring an immediate end to the process of
dialogue." (A/65/PV.]6, p. 10)

The Secretary-General's report underscores
recent developments in Serbian cultural and religious
heritage issues in Kosovo. We appreciate UNMIK's
key role in facilitating UNESCO's activities in the
province, as well as the work of the Council of Europe-
led Reconstruction and Implementation Commission,
which we believe should continue under the terms of
its existing mandate.

As the report indicates, Orthodox churches and
graveyards continue to be desecrated, with arrests for
attacks on places that represent the core of Serbian
national identity remaining few and far between. This
unfortunately indicates the preponderance of a culture
of impunity that tolerates extremism and hate crimes. A
prime example of the current state of affairs is the
Church of the Virgin Ljeviska, located in the centre of
the ancient Serbian capital of Prizren. The church was
placed on UNESCO's List of World Heritage in Danger
following the March 2004 pogrom. Nevertheless, it has
remained a target for extremists.

On 13 April, Bishop Teodosije of Raska-Prizren
and of all of Kosovo and Metohija wrote a letter to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zannier in connection with the most recent large-scale
theft of the shrine's led roof. This crime, which local
authorities charged with protecting the site did not
even report, has further damaged the early fourteenth-
century frescoes that were commissioned by Serbia's
King Milutin. It is the third such act of vandalism since
the March 2004 pogrom. The manifest inability to
protect one of the most important heritage sites in
Southeast Europe needs to be addressed. As Bishop
Teodosije's letter to Special Representative Zannier
concludes, after so many failures of the local
authorities to protect our holy sites, a more adequate
long-term international protection of the Serbian
Orthodox heritage in Kosovo is more than necessary.

Viewed in this light, the ongoing commitment of
KFOR to maintain a static presence at some of our
most important holy sites is absolutely critical. These
include the Devie monastery, the Visoki Decani and the
Patriarchate of Pec', both of which remain on the
UNESCO List of World Heritage in Danger. Given the
rising tide of tension in Prizren, we also call on KFOR
to redeploy a guard unit to the Cathedral of the Holy
Virgin of Ljeviska.

The Secretary-General's report paints a bleak
picture of the overall situation in South Kosovo.
Domestic political turmoil dominated the reporting
period, it says. Sharp divisions came to the surface in
the wake of the controversial results of last year's
election. That led to a political crisis that culminated in
a court ruling that brought to an end the 35-day-old
presidency of Behgjet Pacolli. Following what the
report terms "intensive talks and diplomatic
mediation," Atifete Jahjaga - who until then was the
Deputy General Director of the Kosovo police - was
picked to be the new President.

Last week, the European Police Office (Europol)
released its biennial European Union (EU) Organized
Crime Threat Assessment. That report identifies
Kosovo as a major European organized crime hub and
states that Albanian-speaking groups "remain the most
prominent in trafficking heroin to and within the EU".
One of Europol's key judgments is that these criminal
groups are among the best resourced in Europe,
drawing their membership from individuals with a
secret service, police or paramilitary background. The
Threat Assessment concludes that some of their
proceeds are reportedly destined for support
organizations of the former Kosovo Liberation Army,
or the KLA.

Key public figures, mostly former KLA leaders,
stand at the very centre of serious allegations contained

in a deeply disturbing report - overwhelmingly
approved by the Council of Europe Parliamentary
Assembly on 25 January - entitled "Inhuman

treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo". The report claims that the KLA
leadership is responsible for kidnapping hundreds of
Serb civilians before, during and after the 1999
conflict, and that those abductees were sent from
Kosovo to secret detention camps in the Republic of
Albania. According to the report, the captives were
forced into surgery, before being left to die. Their
internal organs, once extracted, were sold on the
international black market.

This represents a uniquely monstrous practice in
the voluminous annals of brutal warfare in Europe and
has shocked the conscience of the world. The tragic
situation has been aggravated by the deeply disturbing
fact that for years, to quote from that Council of
11-33372
Europe report, "international actors chose to turn a
blind eye to the war crimes of the KLA, placing a
premium instead on achieving some degree of short-
term stability". The report concludes that "certain
crimes committed by members of the KLA, including
some top KLA leaders, were effectively concealed and
have remained unpunished".

We plead for the full truth in the allegations of
human-organs trafficking to be established and for
justice to be done. If that is our common goal, there is
only one way forward, and it requires action by the
Security Council.

To that end, the Republic of Serbia has made a
formal proposal in the form of a concept paper that has
been designated as an official Security Council
document (see S/201l/256) at the request of the
Secretary-General. N0 existing institution can either
conduct a comprehensive investigation or ensure the
cooperation of all concerned. Only a mechanism
created by the Security Council can do that. Without it,
any number of alleged participants in the human-
organs trafficking criminal conspiracy could remain
beyond reach. Justice would be ill served should
anyone implicated in this heinous endeavour not
answer for what he did because of mandate or
jurisdictional limitations.

It is in this context that we should examine the
precipitous assertion made by the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), in a press
release of 28 January, that it has the capacity, the
expertise, the location and the jurisdiction to conduct
the investigation. That is factually incorrect, as our
concept paper describes in detail. The truth is that
EULEX - which classifies itself as a technical
mission - can operate only within Kosovo, and
nowhere else, whereas the alleged criminal trail leads
not only to a number of European countries but also
into parts of Africa, Asia and the Middle East.

Let us turn for a moment to the contemporary
Medicus case, as mentioned in Annex I of the
Secretary-General's report. This case involves another
criminal conspiracy to source human organs for illicit
trafficking and mirrors in many ways the KLA-led
operation. While EULEX has been able to indict a
number of ethnic Albanians on various charges, two of
the ringleaders - both foreigners - have fled Kosovo
and cannot be extradited. Therefore, even if all the
11-33372
defendants currently in the custody of EULEX are
convicted, justice will be only partially served.

While EULEX cannot conduct a comprehensive
investigation on its own, it should play a crucial role in
uncovering the truth about what happened inside
Kosovo itself. To be an effective part of the ad hoc
investigation mechanism, however, EULEX will need
to assure its full statutory independence from the ethnic
Albanian institutions. Right now, EULEX bases its
investigative and prosecutorial competencies on
legislation passed by Pristina.

EULEX will also have to upgrade its current
support capacities by providing, inter alia, a more
effective witness protection and relocation programme.
That will guarantee credible testimony by all without
fear of retribution. In addition, EULEX will have to act
far more decisively than it has, for example, in the case
of Fatmir Limaj, a former Minister of Transport and
Telecommunications indicted in connection with
allegations of war crimes. As Annex I to the Secretary-
General's report acknowledges, more than two months
have passed since the latest unsuccessful attempt by
EULEX to clarify the issue of his supposed immunity
from prosecution. Limaj continues to mock EULEX
efforts to arrest him and continues to be a free man.

In each previous instance involving war crimes in
the Balkans - whichever side the perpetrators
belonged to and irrespective of their political roles -
the Security Council has given a mandate to
investigate. We ask for nothing more, and we have no
moral right to settle for anything less. If all
investigations into war crimes committed by Serbs
received mandates from this body, then why should the
investigation of war crimes committed against Serbs
not take place under the auspices of the Security
Council as well? With malice towards none and with
firmness in the right, we ask: what possible explanation
could there be for such a double standard? Like must
be treated as like. No suspected war criminals in the
Balkans should ever enjoy any sort of privileges,
immunities or protections.

The Secretary-General, in his letter of 3 May
addressed to you, Mr. President (S/2011/281),
expressed his support for an in-depth, impartial and
independent investigation into the serious allegations
of human organs trafficking. The United Nations, the
letter concludes, will cooperate fully with such an
investigation, should one be carried out.
7

This is a black and white situation. No nuance is
possible here, for there must be no gray area when it
comes to war crimes. On behalf of my nation, I appeal
to the Security Council to support our plea to
thoroughly investigate allegations of the harvesting and
smuggling of organs of innocent Serbian civilians. We
will not rest or retreat until the full truth about what
happened is uncovered. This is our solemn obligation
to all the victims of this terrible inhumanity and to
their families. We must not let them down.

This matter also constitutes an integral part of the
reconciliation process and is itself a prerequisite to
establishing a lasting peace between Serbs and
Albanians. Let us come together in the service of
justice and see that it gets done through a
comprehensive, independent investigation accountable
to the whole world.

