Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): We thank
the Ukrainian presidency of the Security Council for
having convened this public debate on the important
topic of the protection of critical infrastructure
from terrorist attacks. We also thank the briefers for
their statements.

Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

Multiple responses are needed to counter terrorism
and violent extremism. First, we must tackle the root
causes of the phenomenon by collectively protecting our
fundamental values: respect for human rights, the rule
of law, good governance, sustainable development, the
fight against impunity and the promotion of tolerance.
The international community must also join forces to
promote the peaceful and political resolution of the far
too many conflicts ravaging our planet.

In that connection, Syria is the clearest tragic
example, but is unfortunately not the only conflict. Other
regions are embroiled in war and instability that are
conducive to the growing influence of terrorist groups.
In that regard, we highlight the Security Council's
particular responsibility to unite the international
community in efforts to find peaceful and political
resolutions to those conflicts. Additionally, it is clear
that we must directly confront Da'esh, Al-Qaida and
affiliated groups. In that regard, Belgium is an active
participant in the international coalition against Da'esh.

With particular regard to the protection of critical
infrastructure, I would like to make the following
comments. In this area, as in others, the importance
of prevention is paramount. In that respect, modern
methods of prevention, based on adequate training of
security officers and law enforcement officials, should
be developed. Belgium attaches great importance to
these aspects, in particular through the organization
of drills and the introduction of specific training
programmes for its security forces.

The critical infrastructure security plan must
contain both physical measures, such as the installation
of security barriers or surveillance cameras, as well as
cybermeasures such as firewalls or detection systems.
In addition, authorities should ensure the development
of digital emergency planning, and crisis and alert
management for populations directly affected by an
emergency. In Belgium, for example, the Belgian Centre
for Cyber Security, created in 2014, has developed a
national plan that describes the roles and tasks of the
various authorities in the event of a national incident or
national cyber security crisis.

Effective public-private cooperation is another
important area of prevention and response to threats, as
it is not uncommon for parts of critical infrastructure
to belong to the private sector. There is therefore a need
to increase opportunities for the public and private
sectors to meet, in particular through conferences,
drills or trainings. Establishing an information network
among private companies and public authorities against
terrorist threats is an extremely important tool in
that respect.

Strengthening international cooperation, including
through information exchange, joint drills and the
development of scenarios and contingency plans,
should be encouraged. With this in view, the European
Union (EU) has developed, together with its member
States, a number of tools to deal with the threat, notably
the European Programme for Critical Infrastructure
Protection and the European Directive of 6 July 2016
on network security and information systems within
the EU. Because those tools, as well as others, were
detailed in the statement made by the representative of
the EU, I will not revisit them.

The important role of the United Nations, in
particular through the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
the Executive Directorate - which assists the
Committee-andtheCounter-TerrorismImplementation
Task Force, bears mentioning. These bodies can work
usefully to raise Member State awareness on the issue
of protecting critical infrastructure against the terrorist
threat by promoting the exchange of good practices
in the operational framework. Such awareness-
raising may include, for example, the organization of
meetings in which States share lessons learned from
their own experience and present best practices that
have proven successful. The United Nations is a vital
forum for developing the exchange of information
and best practices and helping to identify gaps in the
protection of critical infrastructure. For that reason,
Belgium sponsored resolution 2341 (2017) adopted at
the beginning of this meeting.

