Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the briefing
of the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu.

My delegation reiterates the importance of the
verification carried out by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Technical
Secretariat with regard to the destruction of the last two
facilities linked to the production of chemical weapons
declared by the Syrian Arab Republic. We agree that
the full and verifiable destruction of all such facilities
is a key step in the implementation of resolution
2118 (2013). Following the response submitted by the
Syrian Government to the OPCW Director-General's
letter of 10 April, we are awaiting the analysis and
conclusion of the OPCW's Declaration Assessment
Team on that additional information. We also stress
the importance of the United Nations Office for Project
Services continuing to support the OPCW Fact-find
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic, in line with the
Tripartite Agreement.
We welcome the planning of future visits by the
OPCW secretariat to the sites identified in the third
and fourth reports of the OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (see S/2016/738 and S/2016/888). We encourage the Secretariat to continue
such visits in order to gather evidence that will make
it possible to determine the possible use of chemical
weapons. To that end, it is essential that any investigation
into the use or possible use of chemical weapons, not
only on Syrian territory but in any circumstance, should
include on-site visits as a critical element, with the aim of
conducting conclusive and verifiable investigations. In
that connection, we reiterate our support for the OPCW
Fact-finding Mission, in accordance with its mandate,
to continue its work of investigation and verification of
all alleged attacks with chemical weapons in the most
objective, methodical and technical manner.

With regard to the incident involving the alleged
use oftoxic chemical substances as a weapon in the city
of Douma, we reiterate the need for the investigation
to follow a standard, independent and transparent
protocol, with on-site visits as a key element, and we
await the collection and analysis of the information
collected by the Fact-finding Mission to confirm the use
of chemicals weapons and identify those responsible
through the relevant mechanisms and in the framework
of the Charter of the United Nations.

We wholeheartedly believe that, regardless of the
powers granted to the secretariat and the Director-
General of the OPCW at the fourth special session
of the Conference of States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention in June, the Council still has the
obligation to reach consensus on the creation of an
independent, impartial and representative investigative
mechanism to carry out a thorough, reliable and
conclusive investigation that will make it possible to
identify the perpetrators and hold them accountable
before the courts. We welcome the good offices of the
Secretary-General. We believe that all options must be
considered in order to reach consensus on this issue.

Finally, we insist that the only way to resolve this
conflict is through an inclusive political process of
dialogue, led by and on behalf of the Syrian people
within the framework of the Geneva process and
resolution 2254 (2015), under the auspices of the
United Nations. That means that we must continue to
provide the necessary support for the efforts of the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy for Syria and for the
establishment of a constitutional committee.
