Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank Special Coordinator Mr. Robert
Serry for his briefing on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. I would also like
to thank the Palestinian Minister for Foreign Affairs
and the Permanent Representative of the State of Israel
for their statements. On the occasion of this debate,
my delegation will talk about the Israeli-Palestinian
question and the situations in Syria and Lebanon.

As we once again meet to consider the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
my delegation can only express its great concern about
the events that continue to take place in the region. As
we all know, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict continues
to keep the attention of the international community,
in particular the Security Council, without achieving
tangible progress.

Events with regard to conflict in recent months
are perceived differently by the parties involved. We
still recall the crisis between Hamas and Israel in the
month of November, which led to numerous Victims
and massive destruction of property. The sense of
responsibility that the two parties demonstrated, with
the help of friendly countries, in particular Egypt,
fortunately make it possible to reach an agreement that
put an end to the crisis. My country would once again
like to welcome that.

To preserve that peace, the State of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority must resolve to work towards
strengthening mutual trust. While granting Palestine
the status of observer State in the United Nations
gave rise to the hope within the Palestinian Authority
that that would bring about a rapid settlement of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, concerns remain over
the definition of the territories comprising the State,
dividing Israelis and Palestinians. We note since then
the determination to restart building settlements in East
Jerusalem and the West Bank. In my delegation's View,
that threatens to complicate the two-State solution of
Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and
security within internationally recognized borders.

Similarly, Hamas, which stands firm in its position
of not recognizing the State of Israel, should, in our
view, put aside its extremist demands and work towards
unity with Fatah, which continues to state its readiness
to resume talks with the State of Israel.

In the light of the prevailing situation, my country
would like to reiterate that the solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict requires direct negotiations
between the two parties. Those negotiations, which
had began but have been suspended for a while, must
resume, under the auspices of the Quartet, in the context
of establishing the State of Palestine and guaranteeing
Israel its security. The international community should
help the two parties to resume the negotiations process
without preconditions. It can do that by calling for
reactivating the Arab Peace Plan, the Madrid principles
and the road map, with the support, of course, of States
Members of the United Nations that have any influence
on the two parties.

In Syria, the situation is becoming increasingly
tragic. The violence has spread to all corners of the
country, exacerbating the humanitarian situation of
the refugees and displaced persons, while the civilian
population sees its rights massively violated by
belligerents of all sorts. The fact that the number of
dead now exceeds 60,000, as has been pointed out, and
that the destruction of private and State infrastructure
has intensified, while diplomacy has to date not found a
solution to the crisis, has only added to our frustration
in view of the chaotic situation engulfing Syria brought
about by its own population. In view of the evidence,
it would be no exaggeration to say that the mission of
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Joint Special Representative of
the United Nations and the League of Arab States for
Syria, appears destined for the same fate as that of his
predecessor.

The Security Council and the international
community as a whole have so far remained powerless
to end the ongoing tragedy in Syria, which poses a
genuine threat to humankind. Nevertheless, we believe
that there is still a chance to resolve the conflict. That
will necessitate unity and solidarity among the members
of the Security Council, in particular the permanent
members, to deal with the distressful situation of the
Syrian people. In that regard, we welcome the recent
initiatives taken by the United States of America and
the Russian Federation, together with the Joint Special
Representative, with a view to achieving a satisfactory
solution. All things considered, Togo reaffirms its
unwavering support for the Joint Special Representative
and urges him to continue his efforts with the Council's
support, which he has always asked for.

The Security Council, together with the League of
Arab States, should redefine the strategies that could
assist in resolving the crisis by negotiation. For all of
the evidence indicates that a military Victory by one
of the parties would likely not lead to durable peace
and security in Syria. In Togo's View, national dialogue
remains necessary in creating a new, peaceful and
reconciled Syria.

With regard to Lebanon, my country remains
concerned about the current insecurity on the border
with Syria and about the repercussions of the war
in Syria on that country. That is why we condemn
the killings of politicians, military personnel and
innocent civilians - all victims of terrorist attacks.
Such a climate of insecurity and impunity threatens
the country's stability. Togo commends the efforts of
the Lebanese authorities to strengthen security for its
population and urges the international community,
especially the Security Council, to continue to support
those efforts.

