Mr. Kurz (Austria): First of all, let me thank the
Russian presidency for having convened this important
debate. Not since the Second World War have we seen
such large numbers of people desperately fleeing
conflict areas to save their lives. Nearly 60 million
people worldwide are on the move. In 2014 alone,
13.9 million people became newly displaced, four times
as many as in the previous year. We are witnessing a
mass exodus, especially from the wider Middle East
towards Europe, mostly via Turkey, Greece and the
Western Balkan States.

This mass exodus has worrisome aspects for
countries of origin, transit and destination. For
countries of origin, it increases the brain drain, and for
countries oftransit and destination, it poses a significant
challenge for societies and their social systems.

We all know what the main trigger for this mass
exodus has been: the barbaric war in Syria and the
horrors committed by Daesh in Iraq and Syria. To
respond to this challenge, I believe that we have to
address the sources of the problem, and we must act in
a united manner.

First, we have to confront the root causes in the

countries of origin. In the case of Syria, that means that
we have to intensify our fight against Daesh and other
terrorist groups. Austria actively participates in the
global coalition to counter the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL). We cannot offer military assistance,
but we have recently increased our help, sending more
humanitarian aid, protective equipment and mine
detectors. But we have to engage in this fight also
among our societies. We have to do more to stop the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters and to cut off financial
support to their organizations.

Secondly, we need greater unity at the international
level. Our first priority should be to put a rapid end to
the bloodshed. Here we need clear leadership from the
Security Council. We will be able to make a difference
only in the United States and Russia pull in the same
direction. We need a mandate not only for action
against Daesh but also for the protection of civilians,
including the establishment of safe and buffer zones.
Austria stands ready to contribute to such a United
Nations-mandated operation in the region.

The positive outcome of the E3+3 negotiations with
Iran in Vienna offers a glimmer of hope. What has
been possible on the Iran issue in finding a negotiated
diplomatic solution should also be possible for Syria.
Progress is difficult but not impossible. We have to
actively take matters into our own hands and stand
united to end the war in Syria and fight terrorism. We
owe this to the victims of terrorism, to the many who
have to flee their homes, and also to our own population
so as to ensure their security needs.

