Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): We welcome the
convening of this open debate under your presidency,

08-6603]
Sir, on the situation in the Middle East, which affords
an opportunity to Member States to share their
perspectives with the Security Council on this
important matter.

Comprehensive peace in the Middle East and a
just, lasting and peaceful settlement of the core issue of
Palestine is a long-held common objective of the
international community, supported by the Council. Yet
the achievement of that goal remains elusive,
frustrating our collective efforts and desire for peace
on the one hand, and perpetuating the cycle of
injustice, violence and instability on the other. The
consequences of that failure will be disastrous - in the
first instance for the oppressed populations of the
occupied territories and, beyond that, for regional and
international peace and security. A sincere and
concerted effort is required to prevent the situation
from deteriorating further and to advance a genuine
process aimed at resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict
comprehensively and peacefully.

It was in that context that the peace process
relaunched at the Annapolis conference in November
last year had engendered great hope and legitimate
expectations. It is, however, regrettable that there has
been no appreciable progress in the negotiations. On
the other hand, the situation on the ground in the
occupied territories has become further aggravated,
largely because of Israel's policies and actions.

The international community is rightly
disappointed and concerned over these developments.
As we approach the end of 2008, the goal of a peace
treaty, instead of materializing, has only once again
been postponed. Thus, we can understand the general
feeling among Member States that resolution 1850
(2008) adopted by the Security Council the day before
yesterday does not do full justice to the gravity of the
situation and should have embodied a relatively
stronger and clearer message from this Council. But
more important than that is the fact that international
pressure was such that the Council could not afford to
keep quiet at this critical juncture.

Despite its shortcomings, the resolution is
important in the sense that it keeps alive the hope for a
peaceful settlement, building upon previous
agreements and obligations. But the international
community must now ensure that its commitment for
peace in the Middle East is consolidated and translated
into concrete results, addressing all core issues during
the course of the next year. Pakistan would like to
underline a few points that, in our view, are essential
for this process to succeed.

First, the time has come for the Security Council
to exercise its responsibility for peace and security in
the Middle East, for which there could be no better
way than to implement its own resolutions and
decisions. Business as usual has become unsustainable.
Greater political will, especially on the part of
permanent members, is required to achieve real
progress.

Second, the Quartet must also utilize its full
potential in support of the peace process through a
transparent and objective engagement, bringing the
parties together and mobilizing the international
community's moral, diplomatic, political and economic
backing of the peace efforts.

Third, in the context of the regional approach, the
Security Council and the Quartet need to engage more
seriously with the League of Arab States, which for its
part has demonstrated a determined, constructive and
dynamic approach for achieving comprehensive peace
in the region, particularly through the Arab Peace
Initiative. Likewise, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, which has an historic interest in the
peaceful resolution of the question of Palestine, may be
a key partner for peace efforts in the Middle East.

Fourth, the framework for peace has already been
determined in the relevant United Nations resolutions,
including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003), as well as the Madrid terms of
reference, the Road Map, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the understandings reached at Annapolis, which flow
from that framework. There can be no deviation or
modification in that basic mandate for the peace
process.

Fifth, to achieve a lasting settlement of the Arab-
Israeli conflict, it is imperative to address its root
cause - the Israeli occupation of the Arab territories.
The solution therefore requires Israel's complete
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and all other occupied Arab
territories, including the Syrian Golan. We would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate our call for parallel
progress on the Syria-Israel and Lebanon-Israel tracks
in order to achieve comprehensive peace in the Middle
East.

Sixth, the impediments for peace should be
recognized objectively and removed effectively. The
one-year period since Annapolis has proved once again
that negotiations can only succeed in an enabling
environment of mutual trust and confidence and positive
developments on the ground. That requires urgent and
credible actions by all sides and various fronts, from
security and political issues to capacity-building,
humanitarian and socio-economic development aspects
aimed at improving the daily lives of the Palestinian
people.

As stipulated in resolution 1850 (2008), the
parties must fulfil their respective obligations under the
Road Map and refrain from any steps that could
undermine confidence or prejudice the outcome of
negotiations. Israel must stop its military campaigns in
the occupied territories, which continue to cause
considerable and injuries and loss of innocent life,
including among Palestinian women and children.

The firing of rockets into Israel, which does not
serve the Palestinian cause, must also stop. We reiterate
that the killing of all civilians or any civilians is
unacceptable. All sides are called upon to shun
violence and respect their respective obligations under
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention.

Particular responsibility lies with the occupying
Power, both in Palestine and in Kashmir. In order to
demonstrate its credibility and desire for peace, such
Powers must seriously reconsider their policies and
unilateral actions, which in this case are imperilling the
lives of a besieged Palestinian people as well as the
peace process and do not serve Israel's own security
concerns. Israel must shun the use of force, put an end
to human rights violations, discrimination, social and
economic strangulation and collective punishment of
the Palestinian people, immediately halt the
construction of the illegal separation wall, stop its
colonization campaign of settlement and demolish
outposts, as promised at Annapolis, and remove the
blockade of the Gaza Strip. Israel must cease the policy
of forcibly establishing facts on the ground, fracturing
Palestinian society, changing its demographic structure
and fragmenting the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem - all actions that jeopardize
the negotiations and the process of a viable and
contiguous State of Palestine.

Seventh, the international community must
support the efforts aimed at achieving inter-Palestinian
reconciliation, which is a must for credible and
comprehensive peace. We urge our Palestinian brothers
to put aside their differences and pool all their energies
in the pursuit of peace.

Pakistan remains deeply concerned by the
protracted suffering and dispossession of the
Palestinian people. It is high time for this human
tragedy, inflicted and aggravated by decades of
occupation, to be brought to an early end. We therefore
reiterate the call for a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace based on international law, and full
implementation of the relevant United Nations
resolutions and agreements and obligations of the
parties. Pakistan will remain steadfast in extending its
full support for the achievement of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people to exercise self-
determination and sovereignty in the independent and
viable State of Palestine, on the basis of the pre-l967
borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, and a
just resolution of the Palestinian refugees issue, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III)
of 11 December 1948. That is a cherished objective,
the realization of which the Security Council and the
entire international community must devote full and
sustained attention and all the resources at their
disposal. Success demands nothing less.

