Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalfofmy Government, I should like to express my
condolences to the families and the two members of the
Group of Experts killed in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We also extend our sympathy and solidarity
to the United States, Sweden and Chile. We share their
pain and sadness.

We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2348 (2017), which sends a very strong strong signal
of the Security Council's unity on such an important
issue. Allow me to thank the French delegation for its
efforts on the text, which is an outcome commensurate
with the challenges we face today.

The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) ia a tangible sign
of the willingness of the United Nations to continue
supporting the people and the Government of that
country. This year marks a major milestone in the
country's history, and this peacekeeping force must
ensure the protection of civilians and support the
implementation of the Saint-Sylvestre agreement and
the electoral process, which are two complimentary
elements of the strategy for maintaining peace in
the country.

The commitment of troop-contributing countries
remains crucial. We hope that it will be possible to find
increasingly specialized resources that can provide
greater effectiveness and mobility to the Mission. We
should of course also appreciate the efforts of troop-
contributing countries in extremely difficult conditions.
The issue of the effectiveness ofpeacekeeping missions
is very important, and we must increasingly improve
their performance. We remain willing to work to
that end.

In that regard, Italy agrees with the analysis and
proposals made by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2017/206) to the Security Council. We hope that the
mandate in today's resolution regarding the possibility
of cooperation among various missions can prove to be
a sufficiently flexible tool to bolster the effectiveness
of MONUSCO.

We stress the importance of swiftly carrying out
the specific arrangements set out in the Saint-Sylvestre
agreement, which was signed thanks to the mediation of
the Conference episcopale nationale du Congo, which
I commend. I should like to conclude with a call for
political compromise in order to hold peaceful, credible
and inclusive elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

