Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. Foreign Secretary, for coming to preside over
this very important briefing. Welcome you to New York.

The United States is grateful for the United
Kingdom's unwavering commitment to the fight against
terrorism. It is a vital member of the global coalition to
defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS),
and we appreciate its continued leadership on the issue.
We also thank our briefers.

Just three years ago, ISIS was on a rampage.
These terrorists seized Iraq's second-largest city and
threatened the capital. In northern Syria, ISIS used its
safe haven to plan attacks and radicalize new recruits.
It was a threat that no civilized nation could ignore.
The United States stepped up to face that challenge.
We did not face it alone. We rallied a global coalition
to defeat ISIS - a partnership of like-minded States
and organizations to confront that evil. Our ranks
grew, and that global coalition now totals an incredible
77 members.

Together, we have made significant progress.
Iraq was able to declare its territory liberated from
ISIS. The coalition has driven ISIS out of much of
its former territory and Syria. However, the fight is
not over. A committed core of ISIS fighters remains
in Iraq and Syria. They are a resilient enemy, and so
we must remain vigilant. After coming so far, we do
not want to give ISIS room to regroup. Our hard work
will continue to make sure that ISIS faces an enduring
defeat. That is why we work with our partners to help
the victims to rebuild. In Iraq and Syria, our coalition
partners have been clearing rubble, defusing mines
and restoring electricity and other services. That has
allowed 150,000 Syrians to return to what used to be
the ISIS capital, Raqqa, since the city was liberated.
That work will continue for some time thanks to the
generous contributors of approximately $300 million in
new stabilizing funds.
We welcome the leadership of those partners in
stepping up to address such challenges. Our shared
contributions show the enduring strength of that global
coalition. However, sadly, defeating ISIS in Iraq and
Syria will not be the end of the story. As we have heard,
the hateful ideology of ISIS has taken root in new
corners of the world - places such as Afghanistan,
Nigeria, Libya, Somalia and the Sinai. The lesson in
that regard is that ISIS is an enemy that adapts and
one that will seek out the world's ungoverned spaces.
We must deny ISIS a safe haven. In many of those
places that means putting real pressure on parties to
end conflicts that have dragged on for years. We need
to focus on building up State authority and extending
the reach of institutions so that ISIS does not have the
breathing room to expand and to plot new attacks.

We also cannot forget the enduring threat posed
by Al-Qaida. ISIS may have captured more headlines
in recent years but the leaders of Al-Qaida are still
plotting attacks around the world. That includes a
large remaining Al-Qaida presence in Syria, Yemen
and other parts of the world. The future of our fight
against terrorism will look different than the challenges
that came before. Our enemies no longer control large
pieces of territory, spanning multiple countries. They
hide in the shadows or in places where Governments
hide them or look the other way. Such terrorists never
cease to look for new opportunities, and so we cannot
let down our guard.

We know the tools that will be critical to that fight.
The United States led the way in negotiating resolution
2396 (2017), which sets the highest standards for States
to disrupt the travel of foreign terrorist fighters. Every
Member State must implement that resolution in full
in order to break up the routes that terrorists use to get
from one battlefield to another. That means making
sure that Member States use and share the latest
technology, such as passenger name records, watchlists
and biometrics, in order to identify threats trying to
cross our borders. Screening all travellers with those
tools is an essential step.

Member States need to come up with strategies to
address fighters who may try to return to their homes.
As one of our briefers mentioned today, it is not only
men, but also women and children, who may have tried
to join terrorist groups. Under resolution 2396 (2017),
every Government must focus on a comprehensive
plan to prosecute, rehabilitate and reintegrate foreign
terrorist fighters and their families.

We must also make full use of our sanctions
regimes so as to deny funding to terrorist groups and
the entities that continue to support them. Where force
is necessary, the United States will deepen its long-
standing partnerships with countries fighting terrorism.
Above all, we will never hesitate to act to protect the
American people from the threat of terrorism.

Today, while we look back at the campaign against
ISIS, we must prepare for tomorrow's challenges. We
must maintain our resolve, and we will prevail. There
is no doubt about how the story will end. The forces of
terror will never win. The fight against terror will take
different forms, but the outcome is certain. The United
States will continue to be a force in the effort against
ISIS and Al-Qa'ida until we defeat the threat.

