Mr. Yauvoli (Fiji): Fiji fully supports the
Security Council's continued leadership on this subject.
The issue of Iraq is neither a unilateral nor a bilateral
question. Clearly, the effect of a war on Iraq will be felt
globally, not only by the parties in conflict. While we
commend the preparation by the United Nations of
contingency plans in anticipation of war in Iraq, we
remain confident that the international community will
continue to take the lead and closely monitor the Iraqi
situation so as to avert war. In that connection, we must
be guided firmly, more by preventive diplomacy and
less by a belligerent approach to conflict resolution. On
that basis, Fiji pleads in favour of the multilateral
approach that the Council is taking in the maintenance
of peace and in conflict resolution.

The mandate of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC),
as set out in resolution 1441 (2002), is largely being
adhered to. We welcome the reported procedural
cooperation in the Iraq disarmament process over
recent weeks. We are pleased in particular that to date
the UNMOVIC inspections have found no weapons of
mass destruction. Iraq's cooperation with spontaneous
on-site inspections at more than 300 sites is very
commendable.

Furthermore, Iraq's acceptance of aerial
surveillance and of interviews of scientists without
witnesses, and its appointment of a second commission
to search for relevant documentation, are very positive
developments. However, the Commission now needs
Iraq's continuing efforts fully to comply with
resolution 1441 (2002) and to give the Commission its
immediate, unconditional and active cooperation on
banned weapons that are unaccounted for, in order to
resolve existing unresolved issues of disarmament.
Such positive collaboration would avert any inclination
to wage war. Iraq's goodwill is therefore indispensable.
History teaches us that in many instances
disarmament by force is counterproductive and can
lead to militancy. As the case of Iraq shows, the result
is an endless spiral of aggression and war. We now
have peaceful alternatives, and if we consolidate the
necessary political will, the world can avert unknown
and unprecedented catastrophe.

We therefore commend the efforts of UNMOVIC,
supported by the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA). Until their efforts are concluded and their
conclusions or recommendations evaluated by the
Security Council, any engagement in war would be
premature and regrettable. We must try painstakingly to
avoid it.

