Mr. Danon (Israel): Last Friday, a disgusting act
of terror took place in my country. The Salomon family
had gathered together for the traditional Friday-night
Shabbat meal. They came together to celebrate a joyous
occasion, the birth of a new grandson. But it was only
a matter of time before the family's festivities ended
in horrific bloodshed. A Palestinian terrorist broke
into their home. He murdered Yosef, the 70-year-old
grandfather of the family, and Yosef's daughter Haya and
son Elad. That terrorist slayed those innocents in cold
blood before the eyes of the children and grandchildren.
This family, including the youngest children, had to
witness their loved ones bleed to death at the hands
of terror. Had it not been for Elad's wife, the horrific
attack would have taken the lives of the entire extended
Salomon family. She hid the children while a brave
neighbour who heard the victims' screams neutralized
the terrorist before he could complete his massacre.

We cannot continue to ignore the basis for this
ghastly assault. The attack did not happen in a
vacuum. No, that terrorist committed a heinous crime
following rampant, relentless incitements to violence
by Palestinian officials. The Palestinian President,
Mahmoud Abbas, has publicly endorsed the practice of
paying salaries to convicted terrorists and their families.
Schools are named for mass murderers. Monuments
dedicated to these killers stand at the centres of
Palestinian towns and villages. Palestinians in Gaza
even celebrated Friday's horrific events. The result is
clear. Palestinians are radicalized and encouraged to
kill innocent Israelis in cold blood. It is no secret that
they have built an industry of incitement. How many
more innocents will be murdered? How many more
terrorists will be paid to kill? And how many thousands
of dollars will be awarded to the Salomons' killer? This
incitement, culture of hate and glorification of terror
must end now.

We are assembled in this forum to examine the
situation in the Middle East. So let us examine the real
situation. The core of so much violence in our region
and around the world comes from the unrelenting
glorification of terror. We cannot continue to sideline
the truth. Friday's unspeakable atrocity was not an
isolated incident. This kind of encouragement to terror
has been going on for decades. The Palestinians will
not admit it. They make up excuses and divert attention
from the truth. They have just claimed that Israel is
seeking to change the status quo on the Temple Mount
and that that is what prompted the violence. Nothing
could be further from the truth. Israel's top priority is
to maintain the safety and security of all Temple Mount
worshippers and visitors. The Palestinians' top priority
is to ignite violence.

Let me go back to 4 October 2003. Jews and
Arabs were gathered together in Haifa's famous
Maxim restaurant. Maxim was seen across the world
as a symbol of coexistence, brotherhood and peace.
While enjoying a family lunch, no one suspected the
impending violence. On that October day, Hanadi
Jaradat, a female Palestinian student from Jenin,
disguised herself as a pregnant woman. Jaradat walked
into the restaurant with one twisted intention in mind:
to blow herself up and kill as many innocent people as
possible. In cold blood, Jaradat took the lives of2l Jews
and Arabs and badly injured 51 others. Dead customers
were still sitting upright in their chairs, with blood
spilling from their bodies. Babies and young children
were propelled across the room from the force of the
blast. No plight or struggle can justify such disgusting
acts of terror. No claim of victimhood can validate the
cruelty and the insanity of such sick crimes.

Terror has many untold victims. Oran Almog is one
of them. While only 10-years-old, Oran lost his father,
grandfather, grandmother, brother and cousin because
of Hanadi Jaradat. Oran was badly burned and blinded.
Oran is here with us today.

Hanadi Jaradat's family - the family of the
killer - has earned tens of thousands of dollars in
payments for her crime. Jaradat's two accomplices have
earned more than $500,000 in total terror payments, and
those sums are only increasing. The more prison days,
the higher the terror wage. Jaradat's father declined all
condolences and called his daughter a "gift". What a
gift indeed. Jaradat's family earned a blank check for
her suicide. In October 2012, the Arab Lawyers' Union
awarded its top prize to that terrorist. The Union even
sent a delegation to her family to present them with
the award.
Professional women in Israel, like in many of the
other members' countries, win awards in the arts,
sciences and business. Professional Palestinian women
win awards for murder. As Israeli women become chief
executive officers, Palestinian women like Hanadi
Jaradat become chief executive killers. The Palestinian
Authority (PA) is just as guilty as the terror groups
themselves. Abbas not only has the audacity to claim
that he seeks peace, but actively funds, promotes and
glorifies terror.

In 2016, the Palestinian Authority spent more than
$300 million - yes, members have heard correctly - on
the salaries paid to terrorists and their families, on
mass killers with innocent blood on their hands. The
PA under Abbas dedicates approximately 7 per cent of
its budget to funding terrorists and their families. How
much of its budget does it spend on higher education?
The answer is as low as l per cent. You do not need a
university degree to determine where the Palestinian
Authorities' priorities lie.

Mahmoud Abbas has made his position clear. He
supports the policy of "pay to slay". Just recently,
he said,

"I will not compromise on the salary of a martyr or
a prisoner."

This is the leader of the Palestinian Authority who pays
terrorists to kill. The truth is plain and simple: Israel
values every life, while the PA praises every death. Not
only does Israel cherish life, but Israel believes firmly
in building a better future for every person.

In Israel we value the freedom of expression, the
freedom of ideas and the freedom of religion - for all
religions. In Israel we empower women and minorities.
We protect the rights of Muslims, Christians and Jews
to pray at their holy sites. We commit to ensuring the
safety of all worshippers and visitors and to taking
the necessary measures to guarantee their complete
security. In Israel we teach our children to invest in
democratic values and a genuine, enduring peace. The
Palestinians do not. They teach hate. They invest in
terror. And they celebrate death.

In Palestinian classrooms fourth-graders solve
word problems to calculate the number of terrorists
killed in suicide attacks against Jews. If children are
surrounded by the praise of terror in and out of school,
they are destined to kill. Israel wants nothing more than
to simply live in peace with its neighbours. We extend
a hand in peace, but the Palestinians continue to say no.
Prime Minister Netanyahu has stated time and again
that we are ready and willing to negotiate - anytime
and anywhere.

The United Nations is an Organization dedicated
to peace, human rights and justice. One might think
it would be quick to condemn the glorification of
terror wherever it happens, but that is hardly the case,
especially with regard to the Palestinians. The PA
has mastered the art of deceit, and the international
community has fallen for it. The Palestinians spin.
They call those who send suicide bombers to Israeli
restaurants, stab Israelis in the streets and seek Israel's
ultimate destruction "political prisoners". Worst of all,
the Palestinians fund their terror scheme through the
generous donations of other countries. That is right: the
international community has allowed approximately
30 per cent of foreign aid intended to support the
Palestinian's well-being to fund blood money.

Israel will not tolerate the bankrolling of terror any
longer. We will not accept the glorified killing of our
citizens. I turn to the Palestinian representative and ask
him to look at Oran and tell him and the Council that
the Palestinian Authority will stop paying thousands
of dollars every month to the terrorists and abusing
international aid and foreign funds to promote terror.
His silence speaks for itself

As Oran has taught us,

"After what I have gone through, I know that even if
they hurt you, they cannot defeat you. If we remain
united and continue to maintain our togetherness,
no one can beat us".

Oran is a true hero, a true patriot and a true model for
the appreciation of life. Like Oran and all the people of
Israel, the Council must value life over death. The blind
acceptance of murder cannot go on. The silence in the
face of terror must end.

I turn now to the Security Council, a body founded
to ensure "the maintenance of international peace and
security" for all. The Council must not sacrifice the core
values of justice, morality and truth for cheap political
victories and empty promises. Let us pledge to work
together to end this vulgar exploitation of international
aid. Let us hold the Palestinians accountable and ensure
that they teach their children to seek peace. Only then,
will we see the possibility of real peace in our region.

