Mrs. Rodriguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome this open debate of the Security Council
and align ourselves with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Once again, we express our deep concern over the
situation in the region of the Middle East, in particular
the lack of tangible progress towards a just, peaceful,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, which is at the heart of the Arab-
Israeli conflict.

We reiterate our deepest concern over and rejection
of the unilateral declaration made by the President of
the United States, recognizing the city of Jerusalem
as the capital of Israel, which constitutes a serious and
flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions. The intention to modify the historic status
of Jerusalem violates the legitimate interests of the
Palestinian people and the Arab and Islamic nations,
It will have serious consequences for stability and
security in the Middle East, further increase tensions in
the region and undermine any effort aimed at resuming
peace talks between Israelis and Palestinians.

The Security Council must uphold the responsibility
entrusted to it by the Charter of the United Nations for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
take the necessary decisions, and demand an immediate
end to Israel's occupation of Palestinian territory,
aggressive policies and settlement practices, and
require compliance with the resolutions adopted by this
organ on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. It should also immediately
put an end to the nearly decade-long blockade of the
Gaza Strip, where more than 2 million Palestinian
civilians are immersed in a deep socioeconomic and
humanitarian crisis.

Cuba will continue to support a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
that is based on a two-State solution and allows the
Palestinians to enjoy their right to self-determination
and a free, independent and sovereign State, with its
capital in East Jerusalem and within the pre-1967
borders, as well as the right of refugees to return. We
will also continue to support the entry of Palestine as a
full Member of the United Nations.

With regard to the Syrian Golan, Cuba demands
an end to the Israeli occupation and reiterates that
any measure or action that has been or is being taken
to change the legal, physical and demographic status
and the institutional structure of the occupied Syrian
Golan, as well as Israel's measures to exercise its
jurisdiction and administration in that territory,
constitute violations of international law, international
agreements, the Charter and resolutions of the United
Nations, including Security Council resolution 497
(1981), and the Fourth Geneva Convention.

Cuba advocates maintaining constructive and
respectful dialogue among the peoples of the region, and
calls for respect for sovereignty and non-interference in
the internal affairs of States.

