Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I, too,
would like to thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
introduction of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/ 127). I should also like to thank Ambassador
Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,

for his statement today. I would also like to wish
Ambassador Staffan de Mistura every success in his
new responsibilities as the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Afghanistan.

This debate and the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in a few days' time demonstrate the
commitment of the international community to
bringing about the reconstruction of that country and to
ensuring that the people of Afghanistan regain full
control of their destiny, as agreed at the International
Conference on Afghanistan held London on 28 January.

The support that we can provide in this new
transition phase emerging from the London Conference
is very important, as UNAMA continues to coordinate
international efforts aimed at ensuring that the Afghan
Government is adequately empowered to discharge
fully its responsibilities for security, development,
national reconciliation and regional cooperation. We
trust that during the next international conference,
which is to be held in the spring in Kabul, the
Government of Afghanistan will put forward specific
measures that will help strengthen the country's
institutions and the rule of law, in particular by
combating corruption and impunity.

My delegation concurs with the report of the
Secretary-General to the effect that, during the new
stage that has emerged through renewed international
momentum, UNAMA must intensify its efforts to
implement its mandate while focusing on three main
areas. First, it must support the Government's capacity
to coordinate with the international community.
Secondly, in the area of elections, is must provide
support politically and to institutions by means of the
Independent Electoral Commission, specifically to
strengthen national capacities. And, thirdly, it must
continue to exercise its good offices to support the
implementation of Afghan reconciliation programmes.
All that must be led by the Afghan Government itself
and be in line with its national priorities.

With regard to security, we regret the fact that,
once again, the Secretary-General's report tells of an
increase in violent incidents over the figures for
previous years. The year 2009 marked the greatest
losses of civilian lives since 2001. There is no denying
that these statistics reveal that insecurity continues to
be the main factor hampering progress in Afghanistan.
In that regard, we believe that continued civilian
oversight of international forces must remain a crucial
condition to completing the efforts they have
undertaken.

We also reiterate our total repudiation of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We
condemn any attack against civilians, humanitarian and
United Nations personnel and journalists. We trust that
communication and coordination between the
representative of the Secretary-General, Afghan forces
and the International Security Assistance Force will
lead to a reduction in civilian loss of life and an
improvement in the country's security.

We also recognize that the peace and
reintegration programme that has been announced by
President Karzai to promote the reintegration into
society of anti-Government elements desiring to lay
down their weapons heralds a message of
reconciliation and dialogue, which is so necessary
given the country's circumstances. However, that must
be carefully considered to ensure that all guarantees
necessary for the country's development are
successfully fulfilled.

We commend the joint initiatives undertaken, in
particular, by the Governments of Afghanistan, Iran
and Pakistan to combat the production, trafficking and
consumption of drugs in the region. Through this focus
on shared responsibility, they will contribute to
generating mutual confidence and promoting joint
strategies to combat the scourge, and will certainly
have a direct impact on the security situation in the
region.

Given the promulgation of the law on public
amnesty and national stability to pardon the
perpetrators of serious crimes, including serious
violations of human rights, we emphasize that the fight
against impunity has a fundamental role in national
reconciliation, as does the observation of pertinent
international law. We also believe that it is of primary
importance to address the needs of the roughly 296,000
internally displaced persons and that they be given the
opportunity to return to their places of origin in an
atmosphere of reconciliation and full respect for their
fundamental human rights.
Lastly, with respect to elections, it is important to
endeavour to apply all the lessons learned during the
presidential elections of August 2009 in order to ensure
the credibility and transparency of the forthcoming
parliamentary elections. To this end, we would urge,
first, the appointment of a new Electoral Complaints
Commission; secondly, the adoption of measures to
assert the independence of the Independent Election
Commission; thirdly, the launch of an investigation,
pursuant to Afghan electoral law, of alleged fraud in
the most recent elections; and fourthly, the guaranteed
participation of women and minorities.

We fully believe that the elections scheduled for
the second part of the year will provide a new
opportunity for the Government of Afghanistan, with
the support of the international community, to reinforce
its commitment to the priorities of the country and to
its people.

