The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Belgium, Brazil, Burundi, Colombia, Egypt,
Eritrea, India, Israel, Japan, Lesotho, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Norway, Portugal, South Africa and the United
Republic of Tanzania, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rahal (Algeria),
Mr. Wouters (Belgium), Mr. Fonseca (Brazil),
Mr. Neturuye (Burundi), Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia),
Mr. Darwish (Egypt), Mr. Menkerios (Eritrea),
Mr. Sharma (India), Mr. Lancry (Israel), Mr. Takasu
(Japan), Mr. Mangoaela (Lesotho), Mr. Dorda
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Brattakar (Norway),
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa)
and Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania)
took seats at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it
that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity, Mr.
Salim Ahmed Salim, and to the facilitator of the internal
Congolese dialogue, Sir Ketumile Masire.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

It is now my high honour and privilege to invite the
Secretary-General and the Chief of Protocol to escort Sir
Ketumile Masire, facilitator of the internal Congolese
dialogue, to a seat at the Council table.

It is now my high honour and privilege to invite the
Secretary-General and the Chief of Protocol to escort Mr.
Salim Ahmed Salim to a seat at the Council table.
Invitation to His Excellency Mr. Laurent-Desire
Kabila, President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo


The President: It is now my high honour and
privilege to invite the Secretary-General and the Chief of
Protocol to escort His Excellency Mr. Laurent-Desire
Kabila, President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to a seat at the Council table.

Mr. Laurent-Desire Kabila, President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, was escorted to
a seat at the Council table.

Invitation to His Excellency Mr. Pasteur Bizimungu,
President of the Republic of Rwanda


The President: It is now my high honour and
privilege to invite the Secretary-General and the Chief of
Protocol to escort His Excellency Mr. Pasteur Bizimungu,
President of the Republic of Rwanda, to a seat at the
Council table.

Mr. Pasteur Bizimungu, President of the Republic of
Rwanda, was escorted to a seat at the Council table.

Invitation to His Excellency Mr. Frederick J.T.
Chiluba, President of the Republic of Zambia


The President: It is now my high honour and
privilege to invite the Secretary-General and the Chief of
Protocol to escort His Excellency Mr. Frederick J.T.
Chiluba, President of the Republic of Zambia, to a seat at
the Council table.

Mr. Frederick J.T. Chiluba, President of the
Republic of Zambia, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.

Invitation to His Excellency Mr. Joaquim Alberto
Chissano, President of the Republic of Mozambique


The President: It is now my high honour and
privilege to invite the Secretary-General and the Chief of
Protocol to escort His Excellency Mr. Joaquim Alberto
Chissano, President of the Republic of Mozambique, to a
seat at the Council table.
 

Mr. Joaquim Alberto Chissano, President of the
Republic of Mozambique, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.

Invitation to His Excellency Mr. Yoweri Kaguta
Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda


The President: It is now my high honour and
privilege to invite the Secretary-General and the Chief of
Protocol to escort His Excellency Mr. Yoweri Kaguta
Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda, to a seat at
the Council table.

Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the
Republic of Uganda, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.

Invitation to His Excellency Mr. Robert G. Mugabe,
President of the Republic of Zimbabwe


The President: It is now my high honour and
privilege to invite the Secretary-General and the Chief of
Protocol to escort His Excellency Mr. Robert G. Mugabe,
President of the Republic of Zimbabwe, to a seat at the
Council table.

Mr. Robert G. Mugabe, President of the Republic of
Zimbabwe, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.

Invitation to His Excellency Mr. Jose Eduardo dos
Santos, President of the Republic of Angola


The President: It is now my high honour and
privilege to invite the Secretary-General and the Chief of
Protocol to escort His Excellency Mr. Jose Eduardo dos
Santos, President of the Republic of Angola, to a seat at the
Council table.

Mr. Jose' Eduardo dos Santos, President of the
Republic of Angola, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.

Welcome to Foreign Ministers


The President: I am pleased to acknowledge that at
this meeting of the Security Council Canada and Namibia
are represented by their Ministers for Foreign Affairs, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland by
the Minister of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs, France by the Minister Delegate for Cooperation
and Francophonie, and Mali by the Minister of the Armed
Forces.
I should like to acknowledge and welcome the
presence of other Ministers for Foreign Affairs in the
Council Chamber today. Their presence is an affirmation
of the importance of the subject matter to be addressed.
The spirit of cooperation demonstrated by all those
present here, which has made this very important meeting
possible, is greatly appreciated by all of us.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

The Security Council indeed feels like home to me.
I had the honour of presiding over the Council many
times as Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, and as Secretary of State I am proud to have
been in the Chair during the ministerial meetings on
Africa in 1997, and to have participated in the follow-up
session, in 1998. I spent many long hours here discussing
important issues of war and peace. Memory softens
judgement, so I cannot recall a single dull moment; but it
is fair to say that the deliberations this month on Africa
are a particularly creative use of the Council Chamber. I
am especially pleased to be able to preside over today's
meeting.

Notable as well was the special appearance last
Thursday of the Chairman of our Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, and the presence Friday of the full
Committee for a hearing. I believe it was very useful for
the Council to hear all their views directly and for them
to hear those of the Council members. Chairman Helms
is a man of conviction and a strong advocate of a distinct
point of view about the United Nations and America's
relationship to it. He and I have made a point of working
together where we can and making sure that when we
disagree we do so agreeably. So let me be clear: only the
President and the executive branch can speak for the
United States.

Today, on behalf of the President, let me say that the
Clinton Administration and I believe that most Americans
see our role in the world and our relationship to this
Organization quite differently than does Senator Helms.
We believe in leading with other nations whenever that is
possible. We strongly support the United Nations Charter
and the Organization's purpose. We respect its rules,
which we helped write. We want to strengthen it through

 

continued reform, and we recognize its many contributions
to our own interests in a more secure, democratic and
humane world.
The United Nations also provides a vital forum for the
consideration of matters affecting security and peace, and
that is what has brought us to this extraordinary meeting
today. The presence of so many national leaders reflects the
seriousness of the unresolved turmoil in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and their commitment to peace.
Because of that nation's location and size, and because of
the number of countries involved, the conflict there could
be described as Africa's first world war. The continent
cannot hope to meet the aspirations of its people until this
war is history.

In today's meeting, and in succeeding days, I hope we
will make decisive progress. But if that is to happen,
reciprocal actions will be required.

The parties must detail in a credible fashion their plans
for meeting the commitments they have made. The Council
and the international community must respond with their
plans for supporting the transition from conflict to
cooperation.

We start with a firm foundation for progress in the
form of the Lusaka Agreement. The leaders here today
deserve great credit for negotiating and signing that
Agreement. President Chiluba merits high praise for his
diplomatic skill in facilitating it. The United States strongly
supports the Agreement and urges all parties to live up to
their obligations.

Under the Lusaka principles, the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will be restored and thereafter respected. The
all-important process of dialogue within the Democratic
Republic will go forward.

Foreign troops will be required to withdraw in a
lawful and orderly manner. Concrete mechanisms will be
established to ensure that the Congo will not be used as a
safe haven for illegal armed groups from any country.

These are the steps that can guide Central Africa down
the path to security for all. This is the way to fulfil the
region's vast economic potential. This is the option the
overwhelming majority of people urgently desire. No one
will gain from continued conflict. No one will lose what is
rightfully theirs from peace.

The primary responsibility for implementing these
steps rests with the parties, including the rebel groups.
The international community, including the United States,
can and does condemn the violation of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's territorial integrity by foreign
troops, but we cannot compel the withdrawal of those
troops. Nor can we conduct an internal dialogue. But we
can help make responsibilities easier to fulfil, and the
United States is doing its part.

First, we have lent steady and strong diplomatic
support to the Lusaka process.

Secondly, we are providing $1 million to assist the
work of the Joint Military Commission (JMC). We urge
cooperation by all parties in working with the JMC to
implement the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter and in accordance with the Lusaka
Agreement.

Thirdly, we will work with Congress to provide $1
million this year to support President Masire's effort to
facilitate the Congolese national dialogue. This is vital
because such a dialogue can be a critical step not only
towards ending the current conflict, but also in preventing
future ones. It can lay the foundation for political
processes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo that
have broad public support and for institutions of
government that could make the Democratic Republic as
democratic in practice as it is in its name.

Fourthly, the United States strongly supports Special
Representative Morjane's efforts to curb human rights
abuses, prevent atrocities and expand humanitarian relief.
The most disturbing aspect of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has been the horrific
abuse of fundamental human rights by all sides. We have
even heard credible reports recently of women being
buried alive in the eastern part of the country.

There is no rationale of past grievance, political
allegiance or ethnic difference that excuses murder,
torture, rape or other abuse. Here, today, together, we
must vow to halt these crimes and to bring those who
commit them to justice under due process of law.

Finally, provided our efforts this week result in
renewed impetus towards implementation of the peace
Agreement, we will consult with our Congress and work
to achieve a swift Council consensus on authorizing
deployment of a phase-two United Nations peace mission.

 

To succeed, any such mission must be based on
commitments from the Lusaka signatories on the key issues
of access, security and cooperation. As the Secretary-
General will attest, we have learned much over the past
decade about the "dos" and "don'ts" of United Nations
missions. We must apply those lessons firmly and
realistically in this case. But we must also be resolute in
our determination to help the Democratic Republic of the
Congo move from war to peace.

Once again, I congratulate the Secretary-General and
Ambassador Holbrooke on convening this meeting, and I
am so pleased that so many leaders are here. I look forward
to a very productive discussion and to a dialogue that will
help us all move further down the road to stability and
prosperity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and all
of Africa.

I now call on the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, Mr. Kofi Annan.


