Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish): As my colleagues have done, I too would like
to begin by welcoming our colleague, the new
Ambassador of Tunisia, who has just taken up his
responsibilities in the Security Council. We would also
like to welcome the Ambassador of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We are grateful for the information provided to us
by Mr. Petritsch, the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. His contribution is essential for a full
picture of what is happening in Bosnia and
Herzegovina vis-a-vis the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Accord.

The economic, political and social situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has undergone positive
changes in recent months. The results of the elections
demonstrate the commitment of the citizens of that
country to make real change. The increased return of
displaced persons and refugees has made it necessary
to reformulate the policies designed to deal with this
issue, so as to make them sustainable in the long-term.
The economic reforms being carried out represent the
commitment that exists to achieve the structural
progress and changes suggested by international
economic bodies.

All these changes are still very fragile, which is
why the international community cannot assume an
attitude that would indicate that its commitment to this
country is no longer a priority. History has shown us
how the domino effect has had an effect on the
conflicts in this region in particular. That is why we
must avoid letting the existing institutional fragility
make it possible for the crises in neighbouring
countries to have negative effects on the consolidation
of a multi-ethnic and multicultural society in this
country.

We agree with the priorities set by Mr. Petritsch
with regard to economic reform, the return of refugees
and the consolidation of institutions. We also agree that
working seriously to reach those goals would ensure
the structural changes necessary to guarantee stability
in the country. Nevertheless, we are concerned by the
fact that the current political instability may diminish
the efforts being made to reach those goals.

As many others have said, we reject the attitude
taken by the Bosnian Croat nationalist party, which has
become a threat to the implementation of the Dayton
Agreement. We are concerned at the latent threat posed
by that party's creation of an autonomous government,
regardless of the fact that a decision to do so has been
put off.

We have several questions in this regard that we
hope Mr. Petritsch will help us clarify. First of all,
notwithstanding the explanations he gave us in his
briefing, it is clear that the attitudes of nationalists
have found a response among various populations.
What actual support do they have in the Bosnian Croat
population? Secondly, what actions can, or should, be
taken to prevent a negative effect on military forces? I
would also like to ask Mr. Petritsch whether the
initiatives of the Bosnian Croat nationalists could be
imitated by other nationalist parties having the same
tendencies? Finally, I would like to hear Mr. Petritsch's
views as to whether the Security Council can make any
contribution to ensure that this nationalist group
abandon its objectives, which are contrary to the
necessary process of democratization and the
implementation of the Agreements.

To conclude, we would like to reiterate something
we have said on other occasions. The conflicts in the
Balkans cannot be dealt with one-by-one or in
isolation; they must be analysed in a regional context.
If we make a mistake in this regard, we will not reach a
definitive solution; rather, we will consciously be
putting off problems in order to solve them in the
future. The achievements attained in Bosnia and
Herzegovina must contribute to solving those problems
by seeking to strengthen a model for international
cooperation that leads to the establishment of a multi-
ethnic society that can live in peace.

