Ms. McAskie: In accordance with your agenda
today Madam President, I will focus my remarks
mainly on issues relating to the protection of civilians.
As the war in Sierra Leone painted a devastating
picture of the changing nature of warfare, wherein
civilians are not only incidental victims, but direct
objects of attack; in fact, they are targeted with extreme
violence, murder, widespread rape and sexual violence,
amputations, mutilation, burning alive, conscription of
children, forced labour, abduction, massive destruction
and looting. The list is horrendous and endless. These
tactics were used to terrorize, to prevent participation
in the political process, and ultimately to control illegal
exploitation of natural resources.

All the issues the Security Council has discussed
on the protection of civilians come to the fore in any
discussion on Sierra Leone, whether it is access to
vulnerable populations or the impact of sanctions.
Widespread and systematic violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law underscores the
importance of bringing to justice the perpetrators of
these atrocities. Women and children in particular have
been targeted in an unprecedented manner during the
conflict. One of the questions asked in the background
paper is whether or not there should be special gender
provisions in the Special Court. I will return to that
issue later in my remarks.

The war in Sierra Leone was further
characterized, as speakers before me have said, as an
ongoing regional problem, and - particularly as far as
humanitarian actors were concerned - an ongoing
regional problem of massive population displacement.
Again, amongst those displaced, women and dependent
children were disproportionately represented. The
estimates are as high as 80 per cent.

Unlike many other peacekeeping mandates, that
of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) specifically authorized peacekeepers to
take necessary measures to afford protection to
civilians under imminent threat of physical violence -
understandably, of course, within its capabilities and
within its areas of deployment, and in accordance with
Chapter VII of the Charter. The level of support
UNAMSIL was able to give to fulfil its mandate was
determined by troop strength, and much of the support
to the protection of civilians became possible only
when UNAMSIL reached full capacity, or close to it.

Because of the complexity of the task of the
United Nations, I think we all agree that it was
important in this case for the United Nations to adopt
an integrated approach to this crisis. And, hopefully to
be as frank as the preceding speaker, it is true there
were concerns amongst the humanitarian community
about such integration in the early days. Fears that the
humanitarians would be "co-opted" by the political and
military side led to great discussion amongst the
organizations. The appointment of the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, was one of
the issues causing the greatest discussion. I am pleased
to say something I believed from the outset, that as it
has turned out, many of those fears were unfounded; it
has proven to be a good model and a good lesson.
Under the current structure, the Humanitarian
Coordinator is in a far better position to address
humanitarian concerns within the mandate, within the
Mission, and in fact has centralized humanitarian
issues within the political and military decision-making
of the Mission.

One of the issues we will need to look at,
however, relates to learning from the way in which it
was possible in general to preserve the humanitarian
space and the independence of humanitarian workers,
as appropriate. In fact, the May 2000 crisis, when
peacekeepers were taken hostage, could provide a good
example of the challenges. My colleague addressed this
in his remarks. The humanitarians will of course be
working very closely with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in the lessons-learned study.

Let me refer to the aide-memoire
(S/PRST/2002/6, annex) which the Council has
adopted on the protection of civilians and touch on
some of its elements. Today's workshop provides a
welcome occasion to use the aide-memoire as it was
intended, namely to facilitate due consideration of
issues pertaining to the protection of civilians within
the different phases of peacekeeping operations. As
most participants know, the aide-memoire addresses 13
main objectives, ranging from access, to vulnerable
populations, to the impact of natural resource
exploitation. In fact, with the help of the Norwegian
Government a very useful short pamphlet has been
produced, but the print is so tiny that I wonder if the
Norwegian Ambassador would tell us whether people
in Norway have better eyesight than people in other
parts of the world, as I need very good glasses to read
it. But it is very handy to carry around.

UNAMSIL's mandate was very good in terms of
its comprehensiveness on the inclusion of issues and
objectives relating to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, in comparison to previous
peacekeeping mandates. Of the 13 main objectives
contained in the aide-memoire, all of the relevant
objectives were addressed in Security Council
resolution 1270 (1999). In fact resolution 1270 (1999)
is the most frequently referred-to resolution in the aide-
memoire.

Let me touch on some points arising from the
aide-memoire. The first is media and information. An
important lesson that has been learned is the need for
accurate management of information. Security and
military information was crucial for the protection of
both humanitarian personnel and civilians, and the
establishment of the humanitarian information centre in
UNAMSIL, following the model of Kosovo but
expanded in this case to include UNAMSIL
participation, played a key role in furthering that
objective.

Secondly, on disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation (DDRR), particularly
with regard to the effects on children, another
important lesson comes from the successful
demobilization of the 47,000 combatants, including
almost 7,000 child soldiers. It was a critical lesson, that
the creation of an official DDRR programme in Sierra
Leone was in fact a central tenet of the Lome Peace
Accord, signed in July 1999. The Accord was the first
such agreement to recognize the special needs of
children in the DDRR process. UNICEF has drawn a
number of important lessons from this experience;
there have been integrated into its policy and
programming efforts, and will continue to inform our
ongoing work in this area.

As the mandate developed and matured,
peacekeepers were able to play an important role in
improving humanitarian access through the provision
of security for humanitarian personnel and through
securing safe areas for internally displaced persons and
refugee returnees. That was not true at the outset, but
the growing cooperation between humanitarians and
peacekeepers led to some very useful outcomes.

Recently, UNAMSIL has cooperated with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, transporting returnees from the Liberia
border areas to safer zones inside Sierra Leone. With
respect to recent movements of internally displaced
persons, almost 4,000 people have been transported by
UNAMSIL and by the International Organization for
Migration from western-area camps, where they have
received resettlement packages. Approximately 12,000
internally displaced persons remain to be formally
resettled, however, following the fourth phase of the
resettlement process.

A fourth point from the aide-memoire is the
effect on women and girls, and I shall touch on that at
somewhat greater length. Another lesson that I would
add here is that, in situations such as that in Sierra
Leone, women and girls have suffered an extraordinary
level of rape, including gang rape, and every possible
form of sexual violence. UNAMSIL's mandate could
perhaps have been even more comprehensive had it
referred specifically to the special protection and
assistance needs of women and girls. That would
include moving beyond the classic norms of gender
sensitivity and mainstreaming, to include responses to
endemic gender-based violence and sexual
exploitation. This is an area about which we are all still
learning, as the tragic events in West Africa have
shown us, and we look forward to the study on the
problems of sexual exploitation to point us in the right
direction to deal with these matters.

When we talk about boys being taken as forced
conscripts, we must also remember that an equal or
larger number of girls were forced to become partners
of combatants or were otherwise held as sexual slaves
and forced to bear unwanted children at a young age.
Many girls have suffered permanent physical harm. In
Sierra Leone, UNICEF has supported the establishment
and coordination of a network of services for girls who
were abused during the war. The difficulty is in
identifying the girls who have been victimized. Stigma,
shame and lack of opportunity or resources keep many
girls silent, and thousands of young girls who were
abducted during the war were used for sexual purposes.
We characterize Sierra Leone in terms of the horrors of
the amputations, but, for every person with limbs
amputated, 10 or 100 girls were abducted and abused.
Many of them continue to stay with their commanders,
while others have returned anonymously to their
communities. In efforts to address those issues, the
Government has acted extremely well, with a national
sensitization campaign on rape being launched, with
information on sexual abuse, on rape and on how to
help victims.

I referred to the response to the crisis of sexual
exploitation in West Africa. Let me also mention that,
in Sierra Leone, a coordinating committee for the
prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse has been
formed. Among many actions taken, the committee has
adopted standards of accountability for humanitarian
workers, which were launched in March by the United
Nations Humanitarian Coordinator, who himself is the
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. At the inter-agency level worldwide, the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee has now produced a
report on protection from sexual exploitation and abuse
in humanitarian crises as well as a global plan of
action, which has now been endorsed by all the heads
of agencies.

It is important to note, however, that the mandate
provided for training of UNAMSIL personnel in
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law, including child- and gender-related provisions. An
important advance over previous mandates was the
inclusion of human rights and civil affairs offices - a
model that has been followed in subsequent
peacekeeping operations. Those aspects should
continue to be strengthened, even while the military
component is phasing down.

My last point from the aide-memoire is the issue
of justice and reconciliation. Here, the issue for the
Special Court and for the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission remains the issue of funding, as we are all
aware. The President's background paper, as I
mentioned, asks the question of whether special
attention could be given to gender-related issues. I
think this is clearly a case in which rape was used as a
war crime, and it should be so recognized. There will
need to be special measures - including measures
related to witness protection programmes - to enable
women to come forward.

Let me close by saying a few words on the
regional aspects, as others have. The Council will be
dealing with that this afternoon, but I think we all agree
on the extent to which cross-border activities have
destabilized the region, and that the escalating conflict
in Liberia is among the factors now posing the greatest
threat to stability in Sierra Leone and in neighbouring
countries.

Since the beginning of this year, Sierra Leone has
already received some 40,000 Liberian refugees,
Guinea more than 30,000 and Cote d'Ivoire an
estimated 60,000. In anticipation of any gradual
drawdown of UNAMSIL's activities in Sierra Leone,
due consideration could perhaps be given to enhancing
the Sierra Leone Government's capacity to maintain
internal security and the security of its borders; it could
also assist with the effective screening of incoming
refugee populations, a task that has proved very
difficult in the past.

In recognition of the importance of the regional
approach, the United Nations regional Office for West
Africa is in the process of being finalized, and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
will work very closely with it. In fact, we have already
opened a regional office, which will focus most
immediately on issues related to the Mano River
Union.

As a senior humanitarian, I should be remiss if I
did not use this occasion to close by reminding us all
that the Secretary-General, in his recent report to the
Security Council, highlighted the fact that resources are
still required to finalize the uncompleted aspects of the
peace process. Only one third of the funding for the
Consolidated Appeals for Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone has been collected. That critical funding
shortfall throughout the region will seriously hamper
humanitarian agencies in their desire to meet basic
standards of humanitarian assistance and also to move
from relief to recovery, as agencies will be forced to
limit programming to the most urgent lifesaving
assistance. This is particularly critical at a time when
the United Nations, along with the donors and other
partners and, of course, the countries of the region
themselves - the most important players in all of
this - move from relief through transition and into
development. The United Nations is gearing up on that
aspect.

Let me close by thanking you, Madam President,
for the opportunity to address the Council on the
important issue of the protection of civilians.

