Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow me
to join previous speakers in congratulating you, Mr.
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. We also wish to thank you for
convening this meeting and to commend you for your
excellent stewardship of the Council. We also wish to
extend our appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive and valuable report (S/2007/ 152),
and to his Special Representative, Mr. Tom Koenigs,
and his colleagues in the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their tireless
efforts and commendable dedication to Afghanistan.
We also welcome the presence of Mr. Costa, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime. We thank him for his efforts and for his
important briefing.

The Afghan people and Government have come a
long way. They have successfully met all milestones
set by the Bonn Agreement. They also saw the political
transition through to completion, in December 2005,
when they concluded the general electoral process by
inaugurating the Afghan National Assembly. That body,
which has now developed into a vibrant forum for
debate on a range of issues, provides an increasingly
powerful counterweight to the executive branch.

Led by President Karzai, and benefiting from
international and regional assistance, the Afghan
people, despite the enormity of the task, have also
made significant progress towards the rehabilitation of
the basic infrastructure that can support the long-
awaited political, economic and social development of
their country. Among many other promising
developments, economic indicators provide grounds
for optimism about the future - given that, for
example, the rate of inflation continues to decline and
the exchange rate has remained stable.

Despite all those promising steps and
encouraging developments, various daunting
challenges and hurdles remain for the Afghan people
and Government to face on their way to security,
stability and development. Terrorism and insurgency-
related violence, coupled with a pervasive drug
economy, continue to pose a formidable combination
of threats, thereby putting at risk the return of the
country to peace and stability. We are concerned about
the recent increase in terrorist acts and insurgency-
related violence, particularly in the south and in the
south-eastern parts of Afghanistan. Moreover, terrorist
activities and violence by the Taliban and Al-Qaida are
well in excess of those recorded for previous years.
The increasing number of terrorist acts and other
security incidents, in particular the high number of
suicide bombings - which the report has described as
representing the most visible link between the
insurgency and international terrorism - pose a grave
threat to the political transition nationwide and put the
achievement of the Bonn process in jeopardy.

As mentioned in the report, during the past year
terrorists and insurgents have been emboldened by
their strategic successes, rather than being disheartened
by tactical failures. Therefore, in view of certain
developments on the ground, it must be underlined that

any action, including contacts with those responsible
for insecurity and mayhem, that could be wrongly
interpreted as rewarding terrorists and criminals will
prove counterproductive in combating terrorism and
insecurity in Afghanistan.

The Islamic Republic of Iran condemns the
continued terrorist acts committed in Afghanistan and
extends its full support to the efforts of the Afghan
Government to improve the security situation in the
country. We are concerned about the possibility of the
expansion of insecurity to the rest of Afghanistan,
including to the western parts of the country, which
have so far remained secure. Such an event would
adversely affect the return of refugees and exacerbate
drug trafficking. We are of the View that, in order to
respond more effectively to the surge in terrorist
violence in certain parts of Afghanistan, the capability
of the Afghan police and army should be enhanced. In
that regard, it is imperative that members of the
international community spare no effort in empowering
the Afghans themselves to address their own security
problems by, inter alia, intensifying efforts to improve
and accelerate the training and equipping of the Afghan
police and army. We have noted with satisfaction that,
apart from manpower and equipment shortfalls, the
Afghan National Army continues to make good
progress.

As the report indicates, poppy cultivation and the
drug economy continue to grow in Afghanistan. As a
neighbouring country, Iran is extremely concerned
about that daunting challenge. Afghanistan now
accounts for 92 per cent of the total supply of opium
and its derivatives, especially heroin. We share the
view that trafficking in narcotics poses a grave threat
to reconstruction and nation-building in Afghanistan by
undermining the rule of law, fostering corruption and
supporting terrorist violence.

Undoubtedly, terrorism, insecurity and drug
trafficking in Afghanistan are mutually reinforcing, and
terrorist groups are among the major beneficiaries of
drug money. It is therefore imperative and
indispensable for members of the international
community, especially those who are at the receiving
end, to adjust their counter-narcotics strategy
accordingly. Equally important is the absolute need for
the international community to assist the Afghan
Government in implementing its National Drug
Control Strategy.
We therefore concur with the Secretary-General
that an urgent concerted effort by all stakeholders is
needed to improve implementation of the National
Drug Control Strategy and that tackling the drug
industry in Afghanistan must be viewed as part of the
overall strategy to build healthy State institutions and
restore people's trust in the authority of the
Government. We further believe that more concrete
steps need to be taken on the part of Afghanistan,
regional States and the international community to
fight that menace, as the measures taken so far do not
correspond to the magnitude of the challenge. The
Islamic Republic of Iran, for its part, has fought a
costly war against heavily-armed drug traffickers in the
past decades, and stands ready to continue that fight.
Undoubtedly, if Iran is to sustain its ongoing fierce
fight against drug trafficking, international support and
especially the cooperation of neighbouring countries
are indispensable.

We concur with the Secretary-General that, given
the enormous challenges that Afghanistan is facing
today, that country and its international partners find
themselves once again at a critical juncture in
Afghanistan's transition. We also share the View that it
is essential for the international community to
reconfirm its commitment to Afghanistan and
consolidate the accomplishments of the past six years.
In that respect, the nationally owned and led
Afghanistan Compact remains the best strategic
framework for cooperation between the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community. As a
member of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board of the Afghanistan Compact, Iran stands ready
to contribute to the process and to the full realization
of that imitative. We also reaffirm the central role of
the United Nations in Afghanistan, including its
coordination of efforts to implement the Afghanistan
Compact, and therefore support the Secretary-
General's proposal to extend the mandate of UNAMA,
as outlined in the report.

As indicated in the report, Iran is among the key
economic partners of Afghanistan in the region and has
expanded its economic relations with that country in
recent years. We have contributed extensive financial
and technical assistance to Afghanistan's infrastructure.
Out of $560 million in reconstruction assistance for
Afghanistan pledged by Iran at the Tokyo conference,
we have thus far spent more than $270 million on
mutually agreed projects in the areas of infrastructure,
technical and educational services, and financial and
in-kind assistance.

Also, by hosting almost 3 million Afghan
refugees for about three decades, Iran has incurred
huge costs in the process. The Iranian Government
expects more cooperation on the part of the
international community and the Afghan Government
in the process of voluntary repatriation of refugees.

I wish to conclude by reiterating that our
determination will remain unwavering and our resolve
will continue to be firm in supporting the Afghan
people and Government in their quest for peace and
prosperity.

