Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): It is not
easy to find words to describe the terrorist attack,
which has claimed the lives of Mr. Vieira de Mello and
dozens of others, including a Spanish naval officer. The
unthinkable has happened. The United Nations has
indeed been attacked in an outrageous, heinous act.
Our delegation sends its condolences to the families of
the victims of this criminal attack.

I am grateful to the ambassadors of the United
States and the United Kingdom for their briefings,
which were made in this grim atmosphere, on some
advances that have been made in certain areas. This
also shows us the magnitude of the tasks that lie ahead,
which can be summarized in three areas: security, the
political process and the economy.

The first, and very important, task pertains to
security. The terrorists who carried out Tuesday's
attack and the handful of people who harbour nostalgia
for the regime of Saddam Hussain are primarily
seeking to create an atmosphere of chaos that will
splinter the international community. They must not
succeed in their objective. Unfortunately, however,
there will be setbacks. Nevertheless, the international
community must stand firm with regard to its presence
in Iraq and its determination to bring peace to that
country. With regard to the security of United Nations
personnel in particular, it will be necessary to find a
mechanism to effectively protect both the
Organization's staff and humanitarian workers, while at
the same time respecting their independence.

No less important to the political process is the
need for the Iraqi people to continue and heighten their
involvement in shaping their own political future. It is
for that reason that we support the establishment of the
Iraqi Governing Council as an important first step
towards a democratically elected Government and the
full exercise by the Iraqi people of their sovereignty as
soon as possible.

The third aspect to which I have referred is the
task of economic reconstruction. To meet that
challenge, it is essential that the international
community respond generously by participating in the
donors' conference, to be held at Madrid in October,
with the renewed intention of redoubling its financial
efforts to overcome the current situation.

My country is in Iraq with a single objective,
namely, to return peace, stability and freedom to that
country. We seek a prosperous Iraq in which its own
peoples are able to determine their future free from
obstacles and despotism. To that end we have sent an
outstanding brigade to Iraq that includes 1,300 troops
from Spain and other troops from the brotherly
countries of El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and the
Dominican Republic.

I do not believe that this is the time for
recrimination or inquiries about how some of us
behaved in the past two to four months. Efforts to
analyse the motivation behind the actions of some
members of the international community are pointless,
counterproductive at the moment and unlikely to
contribute in any way to achieving what I believe all of
us want, namely, peace and freedom for all Iraqis.

In conclusion, the tragic events of last Tuesday
should only serve to reaffirm our determination that the
United Nations continue to play the ongoing and
expanding role we want it to play and that the
international community continue to work to meet the
legitimate aspirations of the Iraqi people. The memory
of all who have given their lives for that cause, as well
as the credibility of the United Nations itself, demand
it.

