Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno for his detailed briefing.

In spite of the efforts made by the international
community for a long time now, the situation in
Kosovo remains a very complex one. In recent days,
there has been a serious aggravation of the situation in
Mitrovica, where there have been massive conflicts
between Albanian and Serbian inhabitants in which the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) have
become involved. There is a continued tension in the
ground security zone in the Presevo valley. We all
know that this has been caused by the constant feeding
from Kosovo of the Kosovar Albanian extremists that
have been entrenched there.

The Special Envoy of the United Nations
Secretary-General to the Balkans, Carl Bildt, recently
called the situation in the Presevo valley the most
serious threat to stability in the Balkans. We carefully
followed the activities of the international presence in
preventing the forays of extremists and preventing the
spread of inter-ethnic conflict. However, the events that
are unfolding in Kosovo and neighbouring regions
reaffirm the conclusion that we have repeatedly made
to the effect that, unfortunately, for the time being we
do not see any qualitative breakthrough for the better in
compliance with Security Council resolution 1244
(1999).

There is no perceptible progress in the launching
of the political process leading to a comprehensive
settlement of the problem of Kosovo. It is a bad
resolution - if it is being resolved at all - of the
problem of the return of refugees and the restoration of
a multi-ethnic society in the region where all
nationalities would be guaranteed equal security. In this
context, we regard as subject to dispute the advisability
of the speedy holding in Kosovo of region-wide
elections. Without ensuring the necessary level of
security, there can be no return of refugees, who
number, I would recall, approximately 200,000
individuals. This means that such elections would not
be representative in nature. There is also no clarity in
the question of the powers of the future regional
bodies, which must be developed with the direct
participation not just of the various groups in Kosovo
and not just of the representatives of the international
community, but with the direct participation of
Belgrade.

All of this speaks to the inappropriateness of
artificially forcing the urgency of preparing for
elections in Kosovo. We note that recently the
leadership of UNMIK has tried to take a balanced
approach to this question of preparing for elections.
There is no doubt that before the beginning of the
campaign, there should be full clarity as to the
understanding of the so-called substantial autonomy, in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).

As we understand it, that is the purpose of the
United Nations in preparing UNMIK legal frameworks
for self-governing bodies in Kosovo. But I repeat once
again, preparations for such frameworks should
necessarily involve the participation of the authorities
in Belgrade. Of course, the Security Council itself has
to play a central role in the definitive solution, both
with regard to the question of the concept of central
autonomy for Kosovo within the framework of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and that of the time-
frame for the holding of elections.

Constant attention should be given to the
situation in the ground security zone in the south of
Serbia. We believe that the latest proposals by Belgrade
to solve this problem deserve full support. I have in
mind the programme to settle the crisis in the south of
Serbia, which was adopted on 6 February by the
Government of Serbia, as well as the statements made
by Yugoslav authorities regarding the possibility of
holding talks with Albanian leaders in the Presevo
Valley area.

On the whole, we believe that it is extremely
important for the international community to overcome
stereotypes in its views regarding the initiatives
emerging from Belgrade. We trust that doing so will
help to bring about the opening of an UNMIK office in
the capital of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia as
soon as possible. We would once again like to
emphasize that without the close cooperation of the
international presence with the Yugoslav authorities,
we can have no compliance with resolution 1244
(1999) or arrive at a comprehensive resolution of the
situation.

One of the steps to be taken in this regard must
be - finally - the signing of the relevant agreements
on the status of the international presence in Kosovo.
The Security Council could give that process the
relevant political impetus. The signing of those
agreements could also help strengthen the legal basis to
ensure the safety of UNMIK and Kosovo Force staff in
their efforts to achieve comprehensive compliance with
resolution 1244 (1999).

We continue to be concerned about the ongoing
serious contradictions in the activities of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. I
know we will soon discuss this particular topic in the
Security Council, but I would also like to touch on it
today as well. In both the Security Council and the
General Assembly, we have repeatedly spoken of the
inadmissibility both of the politicization of the
Tribunal and of a selective approach to identifying
those who bear guilt for the Yugoslav tragedy.
However, prejudice in the work of the Tribunal,
including anti-Serb bias, persists. We can see this
above all in the activities of the Tribunal's Prosecutor,
Ms. Carla Del Ponte.

Another issue to which we have repeatedly
referred is the fact that, despite our many requests,
information on the details of the tragedy in Racak has
been concealed from members of the Security Council.
It was only in February of this year that we finally
received a reply, signed by Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Marie Guehenno, which told us that the Ms. Del
Ponte, the Tribunal's Prosecutor, had decided that she
could sanction the distribution of only a summary of
the report of that investigation, but not the full text of
the report itself. Unfortunately, the summary we
received is vague in nature and does not give a clear
picture of what actually happened in Racak or who was
responsible for the tragedy. We believe the top-secrecy
in which the Tribunal has tried to veil its factual study
is absolutely inappropriate. We are convinced that the
members of the Security Council must finally receive
the full text of the report on the events in Racak. Ms.
Carla Del Ponte does not represent a private
organization, but rather the Tribunal established by a
decision of the Security Council, which should be
responsible to the Council. If she has some secrets
from the Council, we believe that is unacceptable.

A similar approach was shown in November of
last year, when we asked the Secretary-General to
distribute as an official document of the Security
Council a text of a memorandum of understanding
between the Tribunal and the headquarters ofthe armed
forces of the alliance in Europe. That memorandum
was concluded between the Tribunal and the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in 1996.
However, despite our requests, the text of that
memorandum has thus far not been issued and remains
secret. Therefore, on 28 December 2000 we were
compelled to issue a reminder of that request. We
continue to await a response. In the meantime, Ms.
Carla Del Ponte has publicly stated that such a
memorandum does not exist. To put it mildly, that is an
attempt to mislead the world community. Everyone
knows that such a memorandum does exist, and
references to it are to be found in reports submitted by
the Secretary-General to the Council. We insist that the
text be distributed to the Security Council and the we
dot the is and cross the t's on this issue.

We also feel that it is time to talk about the future
activities of the Tribunal itself. Resolution 1329
(2000), which the Security Council adopted on 30
November 2000, asks the Secretary-General to submit
proposals as soon as possible regarding a date for the
cessation of the temporary jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
We believe the Council could already have been
informed about proposed time-frames for compliance
with its instructions.

With regard to the use of depleted uranium
munitions in Yugoslavia by NATO, which Mr.
Guehenno referred to today, we believe that the studies
conducted by the United Nations Environment
Programme and the World Health Organization have
not given us answers to all the questions. Therefore,
along with many other countries, we advocate the
conduct of an independent experts' study of the
consequences of the use of such munitions in order to
determine the real dangers to the environment and the
population, as well as to overcome the obstacles to
determining steps to be taken to prevent threats to
people's health. NATO countries that took part in the
military action against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia should assume the relevant costs.

The Security Council should also continue to
keep under its review all aspects of the situation in
Kosovo and the activities of the international presence
in the region. We understand that the new leadership of
UNMIK and Mr. Hans Haekkerup need time to look at
the situation locally and determine priorities for their
activities. We of course support the efforts of Mr.
Haekkerup in every way, in order that he may be able
to determine clear ways to reach complete and
comprehensive compliance with resolution 1244
(1999). We trust that once he is settled in Kosovo the
members of the Council will find it possible to hear
directly from him an appraisal of the situation and his
views on how to achieve full compliance with
resolution 1244 (1999) and how to normalize the
situation in the region. We hope that such a meeting
with Mr. Haekkerup will take place in the Council next
month.

We also believe it appropriate to think, in
consultation with Mr. Haekkerup, about the issue of a
new Security Council mission to Kosovo. That mission
would of course include a visit to Belgrade, and
perhaps also visit the Presevo Valley if the security
situation allows. We trust that, in the week to come, the
members of the Security Council, along with our
colleagues in the Secretariat and the leadership of
UNMIK, will discuss the specific parameters of this
proposal.

