Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset, Mr. President, to thank you
for having convened this meeting and in particular for
joining us personally today. We also welcome the
concept note (S/2012/83, annex) circulated by your
delegation as background for our debate, as well as the
briefings by the Secretary-General and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime.

I should like to make five points, centred more on
the thematic aspects than the geographical ones that are
part of the subject of this open debate. While there is
little that we may be able to contribute to the specific
situation of West Africa and the Sahel region,
unfortunately my country has been a direct victim of
transnational organized crime and, therefore, has some
experiences that it can share.

The first point is precisely that. Although our
attention today is focused on West Africa and the Sahel
region, we could just as well be discussing my own
region, Central America. In other words, transnational
organized crime is a universal problem, whereby
numerous low- or medium-income countries are
transformed into transit points of illicit activities, be
they drug trafficking, human trafficking, contraband of
stolen durable goods, trafficking in precious stones or
others. The phenomenon has some common
characteristics, the main one being the vulnerability of
the affected countries.

Those countries tend to have a geographical
location that favours the moving of illicit goods and
services from their source to the market for their final
consumption. They tend to be low- or medium-income
countries, with relatively weak justice and security
institutions and large contingents of low-income
people, who are consequently susceptible to the
temptation of exposing themselves to activities outside
of the law, as well as a culture of opaqueness in
financial management.

Furthermore, in smaller economies the magnitude
of resources managed by transnational criminal cartels
has a relatively heavy weight, which facilitates the
cooptation - or, alternatively, intimidation - of those
people who can facilitate their illegal activities. The
phenomenon does not always constitute a threat to
peace and security, although clearly it has that potential
in some cases.

That brings me to my second point, which is that
if the illicit activity is of a transnational nature, it must
be tackled through actions that combine robust
responses in each country together with a strong
element of international cooperation. Although it
sounds like a truism, it is nevertheless true that the
countries that serve as the main markets encouraging
the activities of criminal cartels are co-responsible for
the phenomenon of transnational crime. As a result,
they should also take responsibility in responding to
that scourge.

Cooperation takes on a broad range of forms that
ranges from cooperation to strengthening local
capacities to international covenants and standards.
Guatemala has an interesting experience in having
associated the United Nations, the Government of the
country and the donor community in establishing the
International Commission against Impunity in
Guatemala (CICIG). As to international covenants and
standards, just as an illustration, we are a party to the
Convention on the Protection of Children and
Cooperation in Respect of Intercountry Adoption and
to the three international conventions against illicit
trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances. As is known, the Security Council itself as
well as the General Assembly have made contributions
to limiting illegal transactions in diamonds, especially
when the proceeds of their trade fuel armed conflicts.
All of that is a result of international cooperation.

In the third place, combating transnational crime
is a highly propitious field for interregional
cooperation, whether it be in West Africa or in Central
America. When a group of small States faces that
phenomenon, logic dictates closing ranks and
cooperating to face a common challenge. For example,
in our case, the Central American Governments have
adopted a regional security strategy. The strategy
includes four components, namely, fighting crime,
preventing crime, strengthening institutions and the
rehabilitation, reinsertion and management of penal
systems. A Central American security commission has
been established to follow up on the execution of the
specific projects that are part of each of the
components I have mentioned. It is supported by the
close collaboration of Mexico and Colombia, as well as
the cooperation of bilateral and multilateral donors. All
of that is undertaken in the framework of the Central
America Integration System (SICA).

In the fourth place, transnational crime, whose
purview in the United Nations tends to be concentrated
in the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
impacts on virtually all the activities of our
Organization. That is why it has been a subject of
concern in the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, some of the subsidiary bodies of the
Economic and Social Council and, of course, the
Security Council, depending on the issues under
consideration. It is a cross-cutting issue that, among
many other aspects, has the potential to disturb
international peace and security. But our preference is
to address that phenomenon with a broader approach,
including a strong component of alternative strategies
to encourage economic agents to devote themselves to
profitable and lawful activities.

Finally, precisely because of what was I said in
connection with the previous point, responding to
organized transnational crime requires an integral and
holistic approach. It should be tackled from the supply
and the demand sides of the traded goods and services.
It requires strengthening our security and justice
institutions for criminal prosecutions and holding
people accountable. In addition, it needs to offer
alternatives for those who live in the shadow of illicit
activities, both the leaders of cartels as well as the
great number of individuals who make their livelihood
from these activities due to a lack of better
opportunities.

I trust, Mr. President, that those lessons drawn
from our experiences in Central America will be useful
to your own region.

