The President: I have received a letter from the
representative of the Central African Republic, in
which he requests to participate in this meeting. I
propose to invite that representative to participate in
this meeting, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Poukre-Kono
(Central African Republic) took a seat at the
Council table.

The President: Participants have before them
document 8/2010/584, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic and on the activities of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that country.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council supports the ongoing
efforts aimed at national reconciliation in the
Central African Republic and welcomes the
progress achieved so far. It calls on the politico-
military groups that have not joined the political
peace process to do so.

"The Security Council calls upon the
Government of the Central African Republic and
all national stakeholders to continue their efforts
to move forward expeditiously with the
preparation and conduct of free, fair, transparent
and credible elections.

"In this regard, the Security Council takes
note of the presidential decree of 30 July 2010
that has set 23 January 2011 as the date for the
2
first round of the presidential and legislative
elections, and of the peaceful completion of the
registration process.

"The Security Council calls for the
Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) to
continue its efforts to meet the timetable agreed
by all stakeholders and to address outstanding
technical and logistical challenges promptly,
transparently and in a consensual manner, with
the support of the international community. It
urges all national stakeholders to uphold the
independence of the IEC and to respect the result
of the polls.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
progress made so far in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process. It calls
on all politico-military groups to take the
necessary measures for the transparent and
accountable completion of disarmament and
demobilization without delay.

"It also calls on the Government of the
Central African Republic to expedite the
elaboration and implementation of a national
reintegration strategy for former combatants and
notes that transparent funding and coordination of
reintegration programmes is critical to the
programmes" long-term success. It encourages the
international community, including the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the
Central African Republic (BINUCA), to provide
timely and adequate support to the process.

"The Security Council renews its call to the
Government of the Central African Republic to
revive the efforts to reform security sector
institutions, which is a crucial element of the
peacebuilding process in the Central African
Republic, and for addressing widespread
impunity, promoting the rule of law and
increasing respect for human rights.

"The Security Council remains seriously
concerned by the security situation in Central
African Republic. The Council condemns all
attacks by local and foreign armed groups that
threaten the population as well as the peace and
stability of the Central African Republic and the
subregion, including the July 19 and November
24 attacks by the Convention of Patriots for
Justice and Peace on Birao.
10-69132
"The Security Council commends States in
the region for their increased cooperation,
welcomes efforts they have made to address the
threat posed by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA)
and notes, in this regard, the recommendations
that resulted from the conference hosted by the
African Union in Bangui in October 2010, which
include the formation of a joint operations centre,
a joint brigade and increased cooperation on
border patrols. It calls for the countries of the
region and the relevant United Nations missions to
continue to enhance coordination and information-

sharing regarding the threat posed by the LRA.

"Noting the primary responsibility of the
Government of the Central African Republic to
promote security and to protect its civilians with
respect for the rule of law, human rights, and
international humanitarian law, the Security
Council stresses the importance of bilateral
partners' work enhancing the capacity of the
Central African Armed Forces and stresses that
such assistance should be in support of the wider
security sector reform process. The Security
Council also encourages further cooperation
between the Governments of the Central African
Republic, Chad and the Sudan in order to secure
their common borders. The Security Council
recognizes the contribution of the Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African
Republic (MICOPAX) in support of durable
peace and security in the Central African
Republic and calls on regional and subregional
organizations to consider, upon request of the
Government of the Central African Republic,
further actions to support security in the Central
African Republic, such as reinforcing MICOPAX.
10-69132

"The Security Council welcomes the
ongoing support to the peacebuilding process in
the Central African Republic provided by the
international community. It welcomes in
particular the important work of BINUCA, under
the leadership of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde,
and the efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission
in advising and advocating for coordinated
international support to address core
peacebuilding priorities, including elections and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
The Security Council further welcomes the
finalization of the Integrated Strategic
Framework for the coordination of peacebuilding
efforts in the Central African Republic.

"The Security Council welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General on the Central African
Republic dated 19 November 2010 (S/2010/584)
and the recommendations contained therein, and
welcomes the extension of BINUCA for the
period of one year up until 31 December 2011,
operating in accordance with its mandate as set
out in the statement of its President of 7 April
2009 (S/PRST/2009/5), taking into consideration
the withdrawal of the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad from the
north-east of the Central African Republic."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/26.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.

