Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Cote d'Ivoire commends you, Mr. Prime Minister,
for guiding the work of the Security Council and
welcomes the holding of this open debate devoted to
the issue of children and armed conflict. My delegation
expresses its gratitude to Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive
Director of UNICEF, for their instructive briefings on
the situation concerning children and armed conflicts
throughout the world. I also thank Ms. Yenny Londofio,
of the Colombian civil society group, for her briefing.

Although it has been a particular focus of attention
for decades, the protection of children in armed
conflict remains a major concern that calls for greater
involvement on the part of the international community
with a view towards a concerted and holistic response
to confronting the challenge. Despite the adoption of
major international instruments, such as the United
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, of
20 November 1989, and its Optional Protocol on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, of 25 May
2000, the phenomenon has only increased in scale. The
annual report (S/2018/465) of the Secretary-General,
published on 16 May, sounds the alarm in pointing out
the significant increase in serious violations against
children in conflict-ridden areas in 2017. It lists more
than 21,000 cases - an increase of 31 per cent as
compared to 2016, which gives cause for great concern.

Moreover, the direct participation of children as
soldiers in conflicts, their use as human bombs and
human shields and recurrent attacks on schools, as
well as their use for military purposes, are a source
of concern for the international community. It is
imperative to redouble efforts aimed at implementing
concrete measures to prevent and combat such
practices, which have disastrous, and often irreversible,
consequences for the well-being and development of too
many children. In that regard, the Secretary-General's
actions plans - while stressing the commitment of
parties to conflict, as well as the responsibility of
Governments to protect children affected by armed
conflict, in accordance with resolutions 1539 (2004)
and 1612 (2005) - constitute appropriate mechanisms
that have demonstrated their effectiveness in achieving
concrete progress on the ground.

Cote d'Ivoire, which was listed in the annex to the
Secretary-General's reports on the plight of children
in armed conflict from 2003 to 2006, following the
political-military crisis it experienced, was a pioneer
in the history of signing and effectively implementing
action plans for the protection of children affected by
armed conflict. As early as 2005, the Forces armees
des Forces nouvelles, an armed group opposed to the
Government at the time of the conflict, signed with
the United Nations the first-ever action plan for the
protection of children in armed conflict, thereby marking
the starting point for the signing and implementing
of such a document. In 2006, four pro-Government
militias followed in the footsteps of the Forces armees
des Forces nouvelles by signing other action plans.
Thanks to genuine cooperation with the United Nations
and partnering non-governmental organizations, their
implementation enabled the release of hundreds of
children with a view to their reintegration into society.
A strategy to combat stigmatization was put in place,
which involved bringing together former child soldiers,
who accounted for approximately one third of the
total number of participants, and another two thirds
of non-soldier children from the community - all of
whom were lodged in the same centre and received equal
treatment so as to facilitate their social reintegration.
That enabled training the older ones with basic trade
skills and enroling the younger ones in school.

With regard to progress made since 2007, Cote
d'Ivoire has been removed from the annex to the
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict. That delisting was the first ofits kind in history.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
welcome the full implementation of other action plans,
in particular in the Sudan, as well as the progress
achieved in protecting children through commitments
within the framework of the peace process in Colombia.
We also welcome the signing of new action plans in
Mali, Nigeria and the Central African Republic,
the implementation of which will undoubtedly help
reduce the suffering of children affected by conflict
in those countries. It has also been shown that well-
resourced reintegration programmes are effective tools
in peacebuilding. Cote d'Ivoire encourages the donor
community to support efforts to reintegrate former
child soldiers into society.

My delegation believes that the protection of
children in armed conflict must be an integral
part of any comprehensive strategy for conflict
resolution and peacekeeping, as part of a conflict
prevention strategy. In that regard, my country looks
forward with interest to the development of practical
guidelines on mainstreaming child protection issues
in peace processes, led by the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict.

My delegation remains convinced that such
mainstreaming requires the adequate training of all
relevant actors, including the defence and security
forces. In that regard, the authorities of Cote d'Ivoire
have been including child rights and protection
education in the training programme of military training
schools and combat units since 10 March 2004, with the
establishment of decentralized focal points throughout
the country. All military regions in Cote d'Ivoire today
have a child rights protection cell. Furthermore, the
promotion of children's rights and protection is now
integrated into the training curriculums for C6te d'Ivoire
police officers. I should like ot take this opportunity
to emphasize the important role of child protection
advisers, whose presence and capacities should be
strengthened within peacekeeping operations.

Cote d'Ivoire commends the commitment
of regional and subregional organizations in the
implementation of programmes for the protection
of children, and encourages them to strengthen their
commitment to supporting the efforts of Member
States, in accordance with the Secretary-General's
recommendations and resolution 2427 (2018), which we
have just unanimously adopted.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates the support
of cote d'Ivoire to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and her teams on the ground and
urges them to continue their efforts to protect children,
particularly those associated with armed conflict.

