Mr. Nsanze (Burundi) (spoke in French): It is my
honour and pleasure to take the floor following the
presentation of the seventh report (S/2010/608) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Office in Burundi (BINUB) to the Council. Allow me
to thank the Security Council and the Secretary-
General for having invited the Government of Burundi
to this meeting on the presentation of the report.

On the eve of the expiration of BINUB'S mandate,
the President of the Republic has entrusted me to
express to you, Madame President, and to the
Secretary-General the Government of Burundi's
gratitude for the support provided by the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi over these past
four years. The Government of the Republic of
Burundi is also grateful to the Secretary-General for
BINUB's efforts to ensure the success of the donors
round table of May 2007.
Indeed, through the United Nations integrated
support strategy for Burundi for 2007-2008, the
implementation of which extended into 2009, BINUB
was the Government's primary partner in
peacebuilding on the ground, which was the main
priority of the institutions emerging from the 2005
elections that followed the socio-political crisis, which
had lasted for more than a decade.

When the Government had asked the Secretary-
General for the Organization's coordinated support for
the electoral process, the primary responsibility for
carrying out that task at the country level fell to
BINUB. The Government highly appreciated BINUB's
excellent advocacy to ensure that the Independent
National Electoral Commission enjoyed all the
resources necessary to organize the various elections,
including the allocation of resources to women's
organizations, civil society and the Burundian media to
enable them to respectively participate in, observe and
cover these elections. As a result, the electoral process
in Burundi was successful with respect to participation,
security and transparency. All national, regional and
international observers noted this and so reported.

As to the post-electoral situation covered by the
Secretary-General's report, the Government is in no
way responsible for the exile of political party leaders
who boycotted elections. Almost all of them chose the
path of exile. Having gone into hiding outside the
country, they declared that their security had been
threatened.

On the issue of the forum for dialogue demanded
by political leaders, I recall that the parties themselves
created the Permanent Forum for Dialogue among
Political Parties, where all political parties can speak.
Most of their elected officials participate in the
political life of the communes through communal
councils in which they have chosen to participate and
where they are able to express their disagreements with
their leaders, who decided without consulting their
followers to boycott the last four elections. Therefore,
it begs belief that these political party leaders claim not
to have a framework for dialogue with the Government.

Turning now to residual insecurity, the
Government is aware of this. That is why it has
continued its campaign to disarm civilians and has
acquired equipment to mark and track weapons so as to
control their movement. It has also revised the law
establishing the national commission on land and other
assets and provided the Commission with additional
resources to enable it to settle land disputes more
effectively and as rapidly as possible.

It is unfortunate that overzealous media have
claimed the existence of a new rebellion without
naming its political leaders or objectives.

As far as human rights are concerned, the
Government wishes to recall that the issue of
establishing an independent national human rights
commission, which had been delayed due to the
electoral process, is on the current agenda of this
parliamentary session.

Technical and financial partners still harbour
differences with the Government in their interpretation
of the Paris Principles, but we hope to achieve a
compromise in compliance with the United Nations
Charter and national sovereignty.

It is also disturbing to read in the report that the
electoral period was marked by a lack of freedom of
expression and association, when the media freely
covered the elections and civil society deployed its
observers and monitors throughout the country without
hindrance. Furthermore, the Government always
punishes its officials if it has been established that they
are guilty of human rights or gender-based violations.
A toll-free telephone number was set up by the police
and a special unit established to punish those found
guilty of sexual violence. The independent expert on
the human rights situation in Burundi recently visited
Burundi and took note of this.

In the medium term, the Government will
continue to improve the professionalization of its
defence and security forces with the support of its
partners, first and foremost the Netherlands, Belgium,
France, Germany and Switzerland.

Along these same lines, the rights of children are
of great concern to us. One of the pillars of the
programme that UNICEF will carry out in Burundi
over the coming four years concerns better protection
for children. Parallel to this, the President of the
Republic recently expanded free education to cover the
three post-primary years in order to guarantee the
fundamental right to primary education and to ensure
that children resist the temptation to work before
reaching the legal age.

Another disputed issue is that of so-called
arbitrary or irregular arrests. Without denying that
some may occur, subject to the results of investigation
at each occurrence, I must point out that those detained
deliberately attempt to sow the seeds of confusion with
respect to their actions. Instead of assuming
responsibility for the crimes for which they were
arrested, they automatically claim that they are
members of a political party or civil society
organization, as if that characteristic should exempt
them from their civic duties.

Everyone knows that attempts to undermine
public order or to slander public institutions, inter alia,
are punishable under the law. The case of Mr. Jean-
Claude Kavumbagu - who denigrated our national
defence and security forces with regard to such a
serious situation as the terrorist threat posed by
Al-Shabaab i is typical of those sorts of cases.

In the area of justice, the report criticizes staff
movements in the Ministry of Justice done without
consulting the High Judicial Council. Unfortunately,
this confuses the competence of the management
bodies responsible for that staff. The High Judicial
Council manages the promotion of judicial personnel,
while daily management responsibility falls to the
Government entity involved.

We must also bear in mind that the reform of the
judicial system should produce the ethnic balance
foreseen in the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement. Moreover, the time required for the
preparation of certain cases, such as that pertaining to
the assassination of Ernest Manirumva, has led certain
partners to the conclusion that there is an atmosphere
of impunity. My Government believes that to be a
hasty conclusion, given that the General Prosecutor's
office has not finished its investigation. And given that
civilian cases can take several years to prepare, is it not
normal to take the necessary time in a murder case to
ensure that innocent people are not found guilty?

I should like to take this opportunity to inform
the Security Council, the Secretary-General and the
Peacebuilding Commission that the report on the
national consultations on the establishment of
transitional justice mechanisms was submitted to
Burundi's President by the tripartite steering committee
last Tuesday, 7 December. The report's main
recommendation was that the Government of Burundi
and the United Nations should finalize an accord on
outstanding issues and agree on a timeline for the
establishment of transitional justice mechanisms. A few
weeks ago, our Parliament elected an ombudsperson. In
short, therefore, there exists an institutional framework
for good governance, security sector reform and the
rule of law. There is now a need to strengthen its
capacities to improve its performance.

With regard to the economic situation in Burundi,
the report is pessimistic about the possibility of
eliminating hunger and extreme poverty. I would like
to say to the Council that Burundi will meet that
challenge. I should also like to point out that, at the
time that Burundi faced post-conflict instability, thanks
to the peacebuilding process and the implementation of
our first-stage strategic growth framework and poverty
reduction strategy, our country was able to achieve
tangible results, including reaching the completion
point under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt
Initiative, increasing our gross domestic product and
stabilizing the inflation rate.

My Government has just begun to prepare its new
strategic framework for growth and poverty reduction,
whose implementation will enable our country to
develop its agriculture, tourism, infrastructure, energy
and information and communications technologies
sectors. The Government has already adopted a
national agricultural policy and has identified
promising sectors, including tourism. An energy policy
is currently being developed. With regard to energy,
infrastructure and information and communications
technologies, Burundi will endeavour to benefit from
its integration into the East African Community, the
Economic Community of the Great Lake Countries and
other regional and continental organizations. I would
like to take this opportunity to inform the Council that
Burundi has just assumed the 2011 chairmanship of the
East African Community. We count on the support of
the United Nations to succeed in that regard.

There is also a need to begin to attempt to
permanently reintegrate populations affected by
conflict, which is another enormous challenge. A
strategy already exists, but implementing the plan of
action will require more than $250 million in financial
resources. The Government of Burundi would like in
advance to thank the Assistant Secretary-General
responsible for the Peacebuilding Support Office for
her promise to mobilize funds for an initial programme
that will begin during the first quarter of 2011.

The Government of Burundi very much
appreciates the consultations that took place with the
United Nations with regard to the end of BINUB's
mandate and the establishment of the new United
Nations Office in Burundi to continue our cooperation.
The Government is quite pleased with the consensus
reached with the Secretary-General's team with regard
to the mandate, format and name of this new
partnership structure between the Secretariat and
Burundi. As conceived, the United Nations Office in
Burundi will be a new body tailored to current realities
that will coordinate the work of United Nations
agencies in Burundi in connection with the
implementation of development support programmes
during the period 2010-2014.

However, the report does not define the
difference between previous international public
opinion on the situation in Burundi as being
precarious - namely, that the outcome of the elections
was uncertain - and public opinion today. What does
the report mean when it refers, in paragraph 60, to
establishing accountable and responsive institutions?
Will there be a need for the United Nations to issue
further reports with regard to the human rights
situation in Burundi, given that our country will soon
have its own national independent human rights
commission?

With regard to strengthening civil society, there is
a need to remind civil society that its role is, first and
foremost, to strengthen the ability of the population at
the local level, rather than to serve as an echo chamber
for certain opposition political parties. In addition,
elsewhere in the world, belonging to civil society does
not mean systematically being hostile to institutions or
behaving unpatriotically. Civil society must serve as a
stabilizing factor, rather than being a set of small
groups covertly financed by ill-intentioned backers.

With regard to the staff of BINUB, unfortunately,
the suggestion made by the report is very difficult to
implement. Stabilizing salaries is one of the conditions
for support from the Bretton Woods institutions for the
Government of Burundi. In addition, returning to
public service is governed by our country's civil
service statute and employment laws. With regard to
the private sector, it is not a function of the
Government to issue edicts about how it should
manage its human resources.

Lastly, I should like to request that those who
drafted the report correct the errors that have
unfortunately crept into the text and have the potential
to distort its interpretation. For example, in paragraphs
7 and 8 of the report the reference should be to the
CNDD-FDD, rather than simply the CNDD. Paragraph
13 of the French text contains a typographical error:
CNDD-FDP instead of CNDD-FDD. In paragraph 23,
Burundi has been mentioned as a new member of the
African Union Peace and Security Council, although in
fact this was not Burundi's first election.

I would like to thank the Council again for
inviting us to the presentation of the Secretary-
General's seventh report on BINUB. The Government
of Burundi is ready to cooperate with the new United
Nations Office in Burundi, for the good of the people
of Burundi.

It would be remiss of me to conclude without
conveying my heartfelt gratitude and that of the
Government of Burundi to Mr. Charles Petrie for the
quality of his work as Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General in 2010.

