Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes this debate and is grateful
to the South African mission for taking the initiative to
hold it. We are also grateful to the Secretary-General
for his important report (S/2011/634*), for his
statement today, and for the strong personal lead that
he has taken on this issue.

The rule of law is a term that was coined by the
great British constitutionalist A.V. Dicey in the
nineteenth century. It is a concept that lies at the heart
of the unwritten Constitution of the United Kingdom.
Our reforming ancestors recognized that the fairness
inherent in the rule of law was preferable to the rule of
man.

Since 1945, that principle has been systematically
extended into almost all areas of the international
sphere. In some matters that were once fertile sources
of potential conflict, the rules-based approach has been
comprehensively and universally adopted. Issues
related to diplomatic protection, maritime navigation
and trade tariffs are now almost exclusively settled in
negotiations guided by international law or, when that
fails, by international processes and tribunals.

That success should spur us to work harder in
other fields, such as climate change, where agreement
is possible on extending the reach of the rule of law in
the international sphere. For the United Kingdom, a
rules-based approach is at the heart of our foreign
policy. We are the only permanent member of the
Security Council to have accepted the compulsory
jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice. We
are also strong supporters of the International Criminal

12-2096]
Court (ICC) and one of only two permanent members
of the Council, alongside France, to subject ourselves
to its jurisdiction wherever we act in the world.

Together with the other international tribunals,
the ICC has ushered in a new era of accountability,
which should make some - including those acting in
Syria right now - think twice before ordering or
committing atrocities. We call on all members of the
Security Council that have not yet done so to become
States parties to the Rome Statute of the ICC, as 120
United Nations Members have already done.

It is particularly disappointing that some Council
members that express a commitment to the rule of law
are even now unwilling to recognize the achievements
of the ICC in the fight against impunity for the most
serious crimes of international concern.

The United Kingdom warmly welcomes the focus
of the Secretary-General's report on the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict countries. A defining feature
of the Arab Spring is the revolutionaries' clear demand
for the rule of law and justice, instead of the arbitrary
rule of autocrats. Across the world, ordinary people
cite insecurity and lack of access to justice as one of
the main impediments to a better life.

Collective efforts to strengthen rule of law
systems in countries affected by conflict are critical. It
is the bedrock of sustainable development. The United
Kingdom considers security and justice as a basic
service, on a par with health and education, and a
fundamental right, as recognized in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.

The United Kingdom is committed to spending
30 per cent of its growing development assistance in
countries affected by conflict, which among other
things will help 12 million women to access justice
through the courts, the police and legal assistance.

The United Nations is uniquely placed to play a
central role in strengthening the rule of law in
countries affected by conflict. The World Bank's 2011
World Development Report provided evidence that
there are crucial gaps in the international system in
support of the rule of law, specifically in police, justice
and corrections support. Those continued gaps mean
that countries emerging from conflict are often unable
to access the support they need in those critical sectors.

The United Kingdom recognizes the Secretary-
General's efforts to address those challenges. We

12-2096]

welcome the Secretary-General's report on civilian
capacity in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2011/527). That initiative has the potential to
improve the United Nations rule of law assistance to
countries emerging from conflict by broadening and
deepening its pool of deployable civilian experts. The
United Kingdom urges the Secretary-General to use
that process to delineate more clearly roles and
responsibilities within the United Nations system for
rule of law activities, and to develop better ways of
objectively measuring their impact on the ground.

National ownership is critical to the success of
any international assistance to strengthen rule of law
systems. The United Kingdom recognizes that building
national capacities and independent national
institutions is essential, and that local ownership and
leadership in that process should be encouraged.

There is no one correct way of implementing the
rule of law. There is much to be learned from the
experience of other traditions. That is why the United
Kingdom strongly supports the recent launch of the
"new deal" proposed by countries affected themselves
by conflict to guide the way in which the international
community works in fragile and conflict-affected
countries. We encourage the whole United Nations
system to adhere to its principles.

Those issues demonstrate the need to make
greater strides towards a common understanding of the
need to build and entrench respect for the rule of law in
post-conflict countries. As the Secretary-General has
reminded us today, this autumn's high-level meeting on
the rule of law will provide an opportunity to take
action to address those challenges.

