Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like others, I would like
to thank you, Sir, for convening this very important
meeting. I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx
for their informative briefings. Let me also express
my gratitude to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team, the Office of Counter
Terrorism and the other relevant United Nations entities
for the comprehensive report (S/2019/103) before us.

We note certain salient points in the report,
including that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) has transformed into a covert network and
currently carries out fewer attacks. However, despite
the enhanced efforts of the international community,
the recent heinous and cowardly attack that took place
at the Jolo Cathedral in Sulu province in the Philippines
demonstrates once again that ISIS remains a serious
threat. Indonesia once again condemns terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, no matter its origins or
motivations. No justification is good enough, and we
once again express our objection to any attempt to link
that menace to any specific religion, nationality, people
or civilization. With that in mind, this statement will
focus on three issues.

First, as it relates to the threat ofterror in South-East
Asia, with the defeat of ISIS in Syria we have observed
the shift to our region of, inter alia, its propaganda,
radicalization and recruitment. We also continue to be
concerned about the threat of returning, relocating or
released foreign terrorist fighters to various regions
and countries. One of the most alarming trends is the
recruitment and radicalization of women and children,
especially those who are well educated and come
from middle-class backgrounds. Another key concern
for us is the growing number of frustrated travellers
who were not able to enter the battlefield in Syria or
elsewhere. They are not only being redirected by ISIS,
as mentioned in the report, but some, of them have on
their own initiative, plotted attacks and become suicide
bombers as a means of demonstrating their existence
to ISIS leaders. It is also our assessment that terrorist
planning and logistics are shifting towards high-tech
and cyber activities, including online transactions and
fraud, social-media fundraising, crowd-funding and
donations, while not delving into the issues of easily
accessible digital wallets and other applications that
facilitate financing.

Secondly, it is important to develop adaptive
capabilities to confront increasingly dynamic and
complex challenges. Given the nature of the challenge,
we need to be not only decisive in our policies but also
innovative and practical in our approach. The pace of our
cooperation must match a wily opponent who is quick
to evolve. We should also be flexible in our strategies
and adaptive in our actions. But let us also not forget the
importance of a holistic and comprehensive approach
at every stage. We cannot undertake deradicalization
efforts that only lead back to prison, for instance. We
believe that in relevant cases those efforts must include
the post-detention phase and full integration into
society. We must avoid re-radicalization and future
re-involvement. Therefore, we urge the relevant United
Nations entities to continue to support Member States
in their efforts to develop comprehensive prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration strategies.

My last point concerns international cooperation.
Indonesia would like to underscore once again the
importance of international cooperation to address the
threat posed by terrorist activities. While continuing
with hard measures, including in the areas of the
exchange of intelligence and information, countering
terrorism financing, and border security, we should
invest further in soft measures to steer people away
from extremism. We need to change our mindset,
not thinking only of financing terrorists but also of
how to use financial tools to curb terrorist activities.
Changing mindsets is an important point. We need to
promote dialogue and tolerance and give a voice to
moderation as the best way to confront hatred, prevent
incitement and eliminate conditions conducive to
the spread of terrorism. I would also like to take this
opportunity to formally welcome the addendum to the
Madrid Guiding Principles, which was adopted by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee in December 2018, and
the valuable guidance it provides to Member States in
addressing the challenge of returning and relocating
foreign terrorist fighters. It is of the utmost importance
that we utilize all the existing tools in our arsenal,
including making full use of our sanctions regime
to deny funding to individuals and any entities that
continue to support ISIS.

For many years, Indonesia has held that the root
causes of terrorism must be addressed, including
prolonged, unresolved conflicts, poverty and injustice.
We do not justify terrorism, but ignoring those issues
do not make them any less relevant, let alone eliminate
them. The Security Council, as mandated by the Charter
of the United Nations, should devote its attention to
addressing those unresolved conflicts.

Let me conclude by sounding a note of caution
concerning our approach. It is critical to ensure that
all measures against terrorism be taken in compliance
with international law, human rights law and the
Charter of the United Nations. In the view of Indonesia,
measures or approaches that undermine the principles
of international law and human rights, for any reason,
would not only be counterproductive but also erode
the political legitimacy necessary to sustain the global
efforts to fight terrorism. ISIS remains a scourge for
humankind. Although its members' impact has been
hindered in conflict areas, the group continue to
have the ability to move its theatres to other parts of
the world. One bomber is enough to cause chaos and
suffering, and requires a meagre level of financing. We
need to be vigilant and resolute in our joint actions.
Only then will we succeed.

