Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's important debate at this critical
time. The Sri Lankan delegation associates itself with
the statement made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The year 2012 has so far turned out to be a year
of political stagnation for the Palestinian-Israeli peace
process, unfortunately overshadowed by momentous
international and regional developments. Even though
the objective of a comprehensive peace in the region
continues to be elusive, we must not give up on the
peace process. We are here in this Chamber not to pay
lip service but to ensure that the world does not forget
the plight of the Palestinians, as well as to urge both
parties to the Palestinian issue to commit to a peaceful
settlement. Hope endures if intentions and efforts are
true.

The United Nations Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories recently concluded its fact-finding mission
to Jordan, Egypt and Gaza. As the Chair of the Special
Committee, I will present the mission report to the
General Assembly in November, with its observations
and recommendations on improving the human rights
situation in the occupied territories. There are essential
steps that need to be taken to improve the situation on
the ground, as well as for confidence-building. In the
meantime, let me state that, in the light of the testimony
received by the Committee, the situation on the ground,
especially in Gaza, is unsustainable.

The blockade of Gaza, although marginally
alleviated recently, is having a devastating effect on
ordinary people, particularly the young. Approximately
80 per cent of families in Gaza are dependent on
humanitarian aid from the United Nations for their
survival. Prospects for long-term economic growth are
meagre, given the stifling restrictions on imports and
exports. Having to rely on illegal smuggling through
100 tunnels, essentially due to the blockade, is among
the indignities experienced by the Gaza Palestinians.
That is worrying, as the economic sustainability of the
Gaza Palestinians would be an essential component of
any peace plan, and the blockade is denying them any
possibility of developing their economy. We urge Israel
to lift its restrictions within the framework of resolution
1860 (2009).

Israel's illegal settlement activity is contrary to
international law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention, relevant United Nations resolutions and
the International Court of Justice advisory opinion, as
well as being contrary to Israel's commitments under
the Road Map. World opinion has called for a cessation
of settlement activity. That call must be heeded. At
the meeting of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People held on
16 May, we heard of the unfortunate developments that
continue to take place in the Jordan Valley, displacing
many Palestinian families and destroying their
livelihoods. The Bedouin are particularly affected.

We reiterate that the international legal framework
is the final guarantor of our rights. It protects all of
us. The marginalization and oppression of Palestinians
in their own land creates a charged environment. The
mass imprisonment of Palestinians, including children,
and the routine demolition of houses, which continues
unabated, are unacceptable. Such actions are eroding
the prospects for a two-State solution and sap away
necessary confidence. Israel is obliged by international
humanitarian law to protect the Palestinian civilian
population in the occupied territories. Violence
between Israeli settlers and Palestinians has become
more commonplace. We also note that the firing of
rockets from Gaza into Israel and indiscriminate
attacks against Israeli civilians will only further widen
the gap between the parties.

Against this background, there is an urgent need
for mutual confidence-building measures in support of
efforts to resume dialogue and substantive negotiations,
as the Middle East Quartet has continued to stress.
The political unity and economic advancement of the
Palestinian people will contribute to the viability of the
two-State solution. Palestinian internal reconciliation
efforts must continue, and regional support is Vital.
Therefore, we urge leaders on all sides, as well as
regional leaders, to infuse renewed vigour into the peace
process. Sri Lanka also supports the implementation
of the General Assembly's resolutions regarding the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to statehood
and the attainment of a two-State solution on the basis
of the 1967 borders. We hope that the State of Palestine
will soon be able to take its rightful place among the
Members of the United Nations and that peace, dignity
and security will be restored to all parties.

