I would like to thank the presidency for convening this meeting, and our briefers for their presentations. Their presence here is truly a privilege and a testament to the severity of the situation at hand for far too many civilians in far too many countries. We face a critical challenge. In our view, the first step to address it is to find out why we have failed to prevent this preventable dire situation. As our briefers outlined, the evidence shows that armed conflict is the primary driver of hunger and risk of famine in the countries under discussion today. There are also multiple other drivers, such as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its related economic impact, as well as extreme weather and other factors, but it is conflict and armed violence that we in the Security Council are mandated to address, and address it we must. Innocent civilians are paying the price for us collectively not doing enough here in the Council to protect them from conflict and for failing to protect them from economic hardship, hunger and sudden external shocks. We are not pointing fingers at anyone. We are simply reflecting on the fact that hunger seems to be a recurrent, persistent threat for conflict-affected countries, and yet - like in 2018 and many times before that - we continue to try to solve a problem that could have been avoided in the first place. We must do better. We need to make this a point of no return, from where we take concrete steps together here at the Council on a range of issues in the countries on our agenda in order to collectively avert the risk of millions of people facing the tragedy of hunger and the risk of famine forever. It is because we believe in the power of multilateralism and solidarity and in the Council's unique role in building bridges for peace that we are here today to help build a global, coordinated response that meets those challenges and makes up for our failures. We call for the Council and the States Members of the United Nations to take all the necessary steps, including supporting the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire, through supporting and encouraging peace processes and, where necessary, holding to account those who prevent humanitarian access. We can do all of those things here in the Council. The Council has a decisive role to play in ensuring that the parties to armed conflicts comply with international humanitarian law and the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence so that humanitarian organizations can reach affected people - wherever and whoever they are. We also call for humanitarian operations to be scaled up and for the further development and implementation of coordinated, joint efforts between the humanitarian, development and peace pillars so that we can effectively ensure strong, resilient livelihoods for people, enhance development and reduce humanitarian needs. That must all be done in the context of a strong and sustainable environment for building and sustaining peace. The COVID-19 pandemic has indeed highlighted the undeniable need to build local capacities in order to create resilience and break the dependency on humanitarian assistance, and we must do more to support those efforts. It has also shown that even humanitarian assistance can be subject to unexpected shocks and uncertainty. The evidence demands action now, in the midst of this crisis. It is time for enhanced solidarity and a strong and renewed sense of common humanity. Finally, in that spirit, I would like to encourage donor countries to increase their official development assistance and promote innovative financial and debt relief programmes for the countries most affected by food insecurity in the current global crisis.
