Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank the
Spanish presidency for having organized this debate on
the Security Council's working methods, including the
question of the appointment procedure for the future
Secretary-General. I also thank the Deputy Secretary-
General, Mr. Eliasson; the President of the General
Assembly, Mr. Lykketoft; and the Vice-President of
Economic and Social Council, Mr. Jurgenson, for their
statements.

Successive Chairs of the Security Council
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions have spared no effort to improve
the Council's working methods, promote greater
transparency in the Council's activities and strengthen
its interaction with States that are not members of
the Council. When looking at the statistics of annual
public meetings, resolutions adopted unanimously,
presidential statements and press releases, we note
that there has been undeniable progress. For example,
of 263 formal meetings held in 2014, 241 were public
and 15 were with the troop- and police-contributing
countries. Of 63 resolutions adopted that year, 60 were
unanimous. However, the increased frequency of public
meetings, which often do not lead to the adoption of
a concrete decision, should not obscure the absolute
necessity of further qualitative reform.

The Council's inability over several decades to
find a solution to the Palestinian issue and the absence
of any progress for nearly five years in resolving the
Syrian crisis clearly demonstrates that this organ is not
efficiently and responsibly fulfilling its mandate as it
addresses the challenges of the twenty-first century.
The effectiveness of the Security Council must be
assessed in the light of these results in terms of both
prevention and conflict resolution.

In this regard, Chad supports the proposal made
by France that the five permanent members adopt a
code of conduct to collectively refuse to exercise the
veto when the Council considers situations involving
war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide.
However, we remain sceptical about the effectiveness
of this too early restriction of the use of veto, given that
the holder of the right has the freedom to use it even in
those exceptional conditions if it considers that its vital
interests are threatened. Therefore, it is important that
the contours of this proposal be clarified. However, in
our humble opinion, the best way to limit the misuse of
the veto is through Charter reform.

Beyond this particular context, the principle of the
veto itself, granted to a membership category, deserves
special examination in view ofthe reform ofthe Security
Council. Africa, victim of historical injustice, home to
almost a billion people, is now the only continent in the
world that has neither a permanent representative nor
the veto power, nor, worse still, the possibility of being
heard. The legitimacy and credibility of the Security
Council and the effectiveness of its action will depend
in the future on the participation of all its members and
on equal footing. Chad reaffirms its commitment to the
African Common Position on this issue.

The elected members of the Council are doing
remarkable work in the subsidiary bodies and working
groups that they chair and whose work they direct. Given
the important role of these bodies, we are calling for a
more open and inclusive process in the designation of
their Chairs. It seems unfair that a facilitator appointed
by the permanent members choose them as he or she
wishes. Also, we think that increasing transparency
and improved interaction with other States is a function
of the latter's access to the subsidiary bodies and their
work.

Similarly, the role of penholder, reserved for
a category of member in charge of drafting the
draft resolutions and declarations, seems like an
anachronism and a form of guardianship that should be
banished. We believe it is high time that the African
members of the Council be allowed to fulfil this
penholder function on issues concerning Africa. That
should also be the case for other regions. Moreover,
it would also be wise to encourage participation of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Chairs of its
country configurations in the plenary meetings of the
Security Council, given their valuable contributions in
the post-conflict stabilization process.

In the same context, we underline the importance
of a greater involvement of regional organizations like
the African Union and its subregional mechanisms
in maintaining international peace and security in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. Similarly, the Council should further
promote preventive diplomacy to avoid the constant
need to turn to Chapter VII of the Charter.
At the centre of today's debate, inter alia, is the
cooperation between the Security Council and other
United Nations bodies, in particular the General
Assembly, in relation to the selection of the future
Secretary-General. In this regard, we welcome the
adoption of resolution 69/321 of 11 September 2015,
which constitutes a major step forward. Chad strongly
supports the principle of electing the future Secretary-
General by the General Assembly from a list of several
candidates for a single term of office. We hope that the
Security Council and the General Assembly will show
great mutual understanding on this issue. It is high time
that, 70 years after the creation of the United Nations,
the procedure for appointing the Secretary-General
take into account the new reality of the world and meet
the expectations of the 7 billion people on the planet.

