Mr. Nesho (Albania): We have followed with
deep concern the current events in the Middle East, as
well as the threat posed to the peace and security of the

region and the world by the evil nature of Saddam
Hussein's regime.

While the entire international community is
united in the fight to eradicate international terrorism,
Iraq, with its production of weapons of mass
destruction, continues to be a menace to the
international community. Today, we in the United
Nations face a reality in which one party is pursuing
the empty rhetoric of excuses and is in breach of
several Security Council resolutions, while the
international community has engaged in a long
discussion regarding the form and legality of an action
that is important and morally justified.

Albania is of the opinion that immediate action
by the Security Council is of the utmost importance.
We believe that the position of the United States, as
stated on 12 September before the General
Assembly -

"We cannot stand by and do nothing while
dangers gather. We must stand up for our security
and for the permanent rights and hopes of
mankind" (A/57/PV.2, p. 9) -

is the most realistic position. Albania restates its full
support for the efforts of the Secretary-General and of
the Security Council to find a fair solution to the Iraqi
question.

No dictatorial regime that has demonstrated an
aggressive nature in international relations, suppresses
human rights and commits crimes against its own
citizens has the moral right to represent the sovereignty
of the people of its country, whose will and ideas are
kept bound by the chains of a criminal authority.

Not long ago, Albania was under a dictatorial
regime. The results of elections under that regime were
99.99 per cent in favour of Big Brother. In reality, it
was a prison for the entire country and State
sovereignty was represented by the will of a single
dictator. Such dictatorial regimes generate continuous
crises to prolong their own existence. In averting such
crises in the future, the action of the international
community to secure peace and stability in the region
is as important as the establishment of freedom and the
legal rights of the people who suffer under such
totalitarian regimes.

Three years ago, we recognized the difficult
position of the Security Council in deciding on the
intervention of the international community against the
genocide committed by the criminal regime of
Milosevic against the Kosovar Albanians. Many States
were undecided with regard to intervention against a
sovereign State. Moreover, the propaganda of the
Milosevic regime presented the conflict as a clash of
civilizations and a threat to Christianity from the
Albanian Muslims of Kosovo. In the name of peace,
security and the protection of human rights, the action
of the international community proved to be right, vital
and far-sighted in preventing a human tragedy.

That intervention was meant not to demonstrate
prepotency, dominance or a unilateral stand, but to
defend the right of the people to live in freedom. It was
conceived not to protect Muslim Albanians against the
Christian Orthodox Serbs, but to save both from a
criminal regime that had kidnapped their rights. The
intervention was intended to preserve and guarantee the
future of the international system. The humanitarian
intervention of the civilized world in Kosovo not only
justified itself, but also introduced an important
precedent in international relations.

Today, we are facing a situation in which the pre-
emptive action of the international community is
necessary in order to avert a possible world catastrophe
precipitated by the use of weapons of mass destruction
by an uncontrolled regime. The strength of our actions
depends on the Security Council's decision and our
common responsibility towards the people of the
world.

