I thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations for his introduction, as well as the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States and the Special Coordinator for their briefings. I also welcome the participation of the Ministers of Palestine, South Africa, Indonesia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, Viet Nam and the United Kingdom. We are at a turning point in the history of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Almost 30 years ago, the signatories to the Oslo Accords had the courage to take the first steps towards resolving the oldest conflict on the Council's agenda. With one week to go before the deadline of 1 July, the hope of achieving comprehensive peace in the Middle East has never seemed so remote. France shares the deep concerns expressed today by the members of the Council and the Secretary-General of the United Nations, as well as those shared on several occasions by the High Representative of the European Union regarding the Israeli Government's declared threat to annex parts of the West Bank after | July. That would be a serious breach of international law, in flagrant violation of the principle of non-acquisition of territory by force, as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. Any annexation of territory in the West Bank, regardless of its size, would also irreversibly undermine the peace process and the two-State solution. Such a decision would further undermine the stability of a region beset by crises and Israel's relationship with its Arab neighbours. Our mobilization is therefore essential to prevent any annexation decision, which would be in the interests of neither the Palestinians nor the Israelis. France calls on the Israeli Government to refrain from any unilateral measures that could lead to annexation. France will not recognize any modification of the June 1967 lines except those agreed by the two parties, in accordance with international law, the resolutions of the Council and the parameters on which the two-State solution is based. As Minister Le Drian said, given its gravity, annexation cannot go unanswered. Specifically, it would adversely affect the European Union's relations with Israel. Unless we are able to relaunch a peace process immediately, our collective responsibility - and first and foremost that of the Council, which has defined and endorsed the parameters for resolving the conflict - is to preserve the conditions for future negotiations and the possibility of an agreement between the parties. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict will not be resolved through unilateral decisions. Together with its European partners, France will continue to promote the path of negotiations and, more broadly, multilateralism and the defence of a rules- based international order. We stand ready to play our full part in relaunching an ambitious political process and resuming credible negotiations based on international law, the relevant resolutions of the Council and internationally agreed parameters. Those parameters are clear and well-known - two States, living side by side in peace and security along secure and recognized borders, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States. Any annexation, regardless of its size, would undoubtedly be an irreversible step in the opposite direction - that of a single State - which would put an end to the national aspirations of the Palestinians and to the Israeli democratic project. We must collectively warn against that prospect and reaffirm our readiness to accompany the parties along the two-State path, which is the only one likely to lead to a just and lasting peace in the region.
