Mr. Zacharakis (Greece): At the outset, I should like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the office of President of the Security Council for the
month of December. I have no doubt that your professional
experience and skills will be of invaluable assistance in the
conduct of the affairs of the Council. I should also like to
thank your predecessor, Ambassador Al-Khussaiby of
Oman, for his effective performance of the duties of the
office, during the month of November.

My delegation is pleased to have this opportunity to
address the Council on the important issue of an improved
consultation mechanism between troop-contributing
countries and members of the Security Council.

I should like to join all other speakers who
emphasized the importance they attach to improving the
existing procedures of flow of information and views
between members of the Council and countries involved in
peace-keeping operations mandated by the Council. We
have supported this process as one which is desirable and
even inevitable, given the complexity of peace-keeping
operations in recent years. Troop-contributing countries
have a right to be consulted on the decision-making process
on peace-keeping operations in which, through the
provision of troops, they have a direct interest.

We firmly believe that intensified dialogue and more
regular interaction among all those concerned will increase
the efficiency and effectiveness of the efforts of the United
Nations in the crucial area of peace-keeping.

Therefore we are grateful to Argentina for its initiative
to bring about the follow-up to the existing mechanism,
which was established by the presidential statement issued
on 4 November 1994.

Greece fully associates itself with the statement made
by Argentina, which accurately summarizes the discussions
and the opinions expressed by a large number of
interested delegations on the need to further develop the
above mentioned system into a more formal and
institutionalized mechanism of consultations.

Without in any way wishing to infringe the authority
and prerogatives of the Security Council, but, rather, to
contribute to and enhance its credibility, Greece, which,
apart from its substantial voluntary contribution to the
peace-keeping budget, is currently participating in various
peace-keeping operations, has always supported improved
consultation procedures in the context of efforts to
achieve greater transparency in the operations of the
Council. The benefit resulting of such increased
transparency will be a generally higher level of political
support among Member States for the peace-keeping role
and activities of the United Nations. This support is an
essential factor in ensuring the continued participation of
troops in United Nations peace-keeping operations.

In concluding, I would like to express the hope that
the Security Council will adopt a comprehensive
resolution on this important issue as soon as possible as
a means to further strengthening the consultation
procedures with troop-contributing countries concerning
both ongoing and future peace-keeping operations.

