Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) (interpretation from Arabic): The Security Council is meeting today for
the second time, following the open debate held on the
request of the Group of Arab States for an open meeting
of the Council on the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including Jerusalem. At this second meeting
we are considering the complaint of the sister Republic of
Lebanon about Israeli aggression against Lebanon's
sovereignty and territorial integrity. Both cases show the
international concern over Israeli conduct and over its
aggression against Arab States.

On behalf of the United Arab Emirates and as
Chairman of the Arab Group for this month, I would like
to extend to you, Mr. President, and to the members of
the Council my thanks for having taken action in response
to the request by Lebanon in order to study the serious
aggression to which it has been subjected for the past
week. That arbitrary aggression by Israel has resulted in
half a million citizens from the southern part of Lebanon
fleeing their homes and in the destruction of the civil
infrastructure of dwellings.

We have heard the statement by His Excellency the
representative of the sister Republic of Lebanon. In his
statement, he spoke in some detail of Israeli aggression
against his country. I should just like to add that all of the
Arab States are monitoring the Israeli aggression with
great concern. We strongly condemn it, and we fully
support the Government and the people of Lebanon. The
Arab States also reaffirm Lebanon's right to defend its

 

territory. All necessary measures will be taken to help the
people of Lebanon stand up to this flagrant aggression.

Israel's bombardment of the capital of Lebanon,
Beirut, as well as of towns and villages, its blockade of
Lebanese ports and the killing of innocent civilians,
including women, children and elderly people, constitute
not just a blatant violation of the security, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon, which is a member of this
international Organization and of the League of Arab
States, but also a serious threat to peace and security in the
region and in the world. These acts are also an obstacle to
peace, an obstacle created by Israel because of electoral
considerations and extremism. These obstacles make the
situation more difficult and jeopardize the objective of
peace, which is the aspiration of the Arab States and of our
peoples.
The tragic pictures that one sees on television show a
gross violation of the principles of international law and of
the humanitarian covenants, pacts and principles governing
the treatment of civilians in time of war. The most obvious
example of this was Israel's firing at an ambulance,
resulting in the deaths of two women and four children.
The arbitrary bombardments of civilian regions are also a
violation of humanitarian law and of the Fourth Geneva
Convention. The International Committee of the Red Cross
issued a statement condemning those Israeli actions, which
led to the deaths of many innocent civilians.

The members of the international community, the
Security Council and the sponsors of the peace process
must fully shoulder their responsibility to deter Israel from
continuing its aggression against Lebanon. A resolution
condemning this aggression and including the necessary
measures to put an end to it should be adopted. Today the
new international order is trying to support efforts for
peace. However, these efforts for peace cannot lead to a
just and lasting solution if the bloodshed continues under
the pretext of securing Israeli borders and putting an end to
acts of resistance by Lebanon. Israeli troops must withdraw
completely from the territories in southern Lebanon that
have been occupied since 1978. The Republic of Lebanon
has resisted, and it is trying to establish its sovereignty over
all its territory, including the south. This is its legitimate
right under the Charter of the United Nations and relevant
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution 425
(1978). It is time for Israel to realize this and to withdraw
from all Lebanese territory, pursuant to that resolution.

I wish to take this opportunity to urge the international
community to provide emergency humanitarian assistance
to Lebanon to ease the suffering of its people, suffering
caused by the Israeli destruction of the economic and
social infrastructure, which is vital to life, and its
aggression against civilians, particularly children, the
elderly and women.

