Mr. Sautter (Germany): First of all, we warmly thank Special Representative Leila Zerrougui for her briefing. Germany confirms its support for the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), in particular for the Mission's leadership, and for all police- and troop-contributing countries. We believe that the work that the Special Representative is contributing to is important and indispensable under very difficult circumstances. I have two remarks to make. One is on the political and security situation and the human rights situation, the other is on the future of the Mission. I can certainly echo many of the remarks made by colleagues so far today. On the political situation, we are concerned about the ongoing political tensions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would call on all political actors to continue to resolve their differences by means of dialogue and in the spirit of compromise. In this critical time of transition, it is important to focus on necessary political reforms and security sector reform, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR), accountability and economic opportunities. None of the challenges can be met without strong and unified Congolese ownership. We remain concerned about the violence in the eastern parts of the country, especially in the Kivus and in Ituri, and about the activities of such armed groups as the Allied Democratic Forces. This violence is always accompanied by high numbers of human rights violations, including sexual and gender- based violence. It is clear that the protection of civilians has to remain a top priority. The humanitarian situation remains deeply troubling, with more than 21 million Congolese facing food insecurity. We therefore urgently call upon the international community to support the humanitarian response plan for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Germany has so far contributed approximately €72 million for humanitarian assistance measures in 2020, including measures in response to Ebola and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). It is also important to acknowledge helpful developments. Let me mention three: first of all, the improved security situation in Tanganyika province and the Kasais. It is worth recalling that we can now zoom our focus in on three to six provinces in the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is a hopeful sign, and it should be a reminder that now is also the time to support peacebuilding, stabilization and development efforts in post-conflict areas of the country. Secondly, the recent conviction of militia leader Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka for serious war crimes, to which the Special Representative referred, is an important step that shows that the fight against impunity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is ongoing. Thirdly, let me commend the Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities, MONUSCO and all humanitarian and health workers in successfully fighting off another Ebola outbreak, as well as successfully mitigating the COVID-19 pandemic. My second set of remarks is on MONUSCO. On the upcoming mandate renewal, we believe that the Mission's main tasks - the protection of civilians and support for the Democratic Republic of the Congo in State- and institution-building - remain key, especially in the eastern part of the country, given the challenging situation there. At the same time, it is time to take the next steps on the path towards a reconfiguration and transition of the Mission. Germany welcomes the joint strategy and the idea of a phased and realistic regional approach that is based on conditions on the ground. We reiterate the importance of clear and binding benchmarks that guide the Mission and the Democratic Republic of the Congo through the process. At the same time, we underline the importance of remaining flexible. Progress and conflict and post- conflict settings rarely follow a linear, or predictable, trend. However, it is crucial that the benchmarks now be developed rapidly and that the failure to meet them actually has consequences. The sustainable progress and success of the transition will depend heavily on strong national ownership and responsibility. We therefore call on the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to strongly engage in the next steps of the transition, especially with regard to the regional and provincial joint transition strategies. Inclusivity is crucial. Civil society, especially women and local peacebuilders, must be part of the conversation. The same is true for the much-needed progress on community-based DDR efforts, the creation of trusted institutions and the fight against impunity. That includes accountability for post- conflict and conflict-related sexual violence. We encourage the Mission to continue its internal reform process. More mobile and flexible troops will strengthen protection through projection. We call on the Mission to make further progress on the optimization of the force set-up, and we encourage MONUSCO and the Secretariat to draw as many lessons as possible from recent and ongoing transitions, such as that of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. In particular, we believe that cooperation with a country team will be important.
