Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like others, I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Sudan, Mr. Haile Menkerios,
and President Mkapa for their comprehensive briefings
and for the very significant work they have undertaken
thus far. We are encouraged by their analysis and
evaluation of the problems that still lie ahead.

Portugal welcomes the conclusion of the
generally peaceful and orderly polling process for the
referendum on the self-determination of Southern
Sudan, consistent with international standards, and
congratulates the Sudanese people on their patience
and peaceful determination to cast their ballots in an
orderly fashion. We also congratulate the leaders of the
Sudan on their historic accomplishment. This was
indeed a milestone, in terms not only of the
implementation of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), but also of underlining the Sudanese
people's attachment to the democratic process.

Let me also commend the work of the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission in Khartoum and in
Juba for its efforts to make the referendum happen,
despite serious time constraints and numerous
challenges. Portugal also commends the two parties to
the CPA for maintaining the political commitment
required to ensure that the peace process moves
forward.

Portugal would like to voice appreciation for the
support provided by the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan, and for the work of the observer groups,
including the very significant European Union election
observation mission, which travelled throughout the
Sudan to assess the situation. We also extend a word of
gratitude and appreciation to the Secretary-General's
Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan for its work.

The process is not finished, however. The
transmission of results from nearly 3,000 referendum
centres has only just begun. We call on the people and
the parties of the Sudan to exercise the necessary
restraint until the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission announces the final result of the
referendum, for which timelines have already been set.
We believe it essential that, during this period, all
citizens be kept well-informed of progress made
towards the final results. We call on all the parties to
respect the outcome of the referendum, which
translates the expression of the free will of the people,
and to refrain from any unilateral action.

While the Sudan awaits the provisional and final
results, the protection of the fundamental rights of all
Sudanese citizens is paramount. We therefore urge the
parties to the CPA to reassure people of all nationalities
in the Sudan, including Southerners in the North and
Northerners in the South, that their rights, safety and
property will continue to be respected.

Despite the remarkable operational and political
achievement that the referendum represents, the work
of completing the implementation of the CPA is not
over. It will require persistent, patient and methodical
negotiation by both parties and a spirit of compromise
and cooperation. We are encouraged by the public
commitments made by President Al-Bashir and first
Vice-President Salva Kiir to continuing negotiations on
outstanding CPA issues once the results have been
announced.

In that context, it is of the utmost importance that
the parties reach an agreement on Abyei, the absence of
which is responsible for ongoing instability and acts of
violence that we strongly deplore. Along with the future
of the Abyei region, my delegation also recalls the need
for timely and transparent popular consultations in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states.

Unfortunately, the peaceful climate of the
referendum cannot be extended to Darfur. We remain
deeply concerned by the increase in violence and
insecurity in Darfur. We condemn the kidnapping on
13 January of three members of the United Nations
Humanitarian Air Service and urge their immediate
release. Portugal calls on the parties to cease hostilities
immediately, to ensure full and unhindered access for
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur throughout the mission area, and to allow
humanitarian workers to provide assistance to all
populations in need.

My delegation continues to underscore the need
for a political resolution to the crisis and urge all
groups to join and actively engage in the peace process
without further delay or preconditions.

In conclusion, over the past two weeks, the
Sudanese authorities conducted the referendum on self-
determination for Southern Sudan, as envisaged in the
2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement that ended 22
years of civil war. The calm and orderly environment
in which it took place gives us renewed faith in a
peaceful and prosperous future for all Sudanese. To
achieve that goal, we need the continuing engagement
of all parties, including international and bilateral
partners. It is of fundamental importance that the
international community continue to support both the
North and the South, regardless of the referendum
outcome. Portugal stands ready to play its part.

