Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Let me thank the Secretary-General for his
interim report to the Security Council on the situation in
Tajikistan (S/2000/2l4), which includes important
assessments of developments in that country. We are
grateful also to the Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Hedi
Annabi, for his thorough briefing and his introduction of
the report, as well as for his useful comments on the item
before us today.

The Russian Federation shares the view that the 27
February 2000 elections to the lower house of the new
parliament were in many ways a landmark event, and that
the overall assessment of the election campaign is a
positive one.

We hear a great deal about the fact that there were a
number of violations and shortcomings during the
preparation and holding of the elections. Should we turn a
blind eye to this? Of course not. We hope that Tajikistan
will take note of the recommendations of the international
observers and that these will be incorporated into the
conduct of the elections to the upper house of the
Republic's parliament, which are to take place in a few
days' time. But it is not entirely justified to apply high
international democratic standards to Tajikistan, which has
just emerged from a protracted internal conflict. It is only
natural that there should be some rough edges on the first
free multi-party elections ever conducted in a country that
is in a period of transition from civil war to national
concord. As the saying goes, we must not fail to see the
wood for the trees.
Deficiencies in the conduct of the elections should
not eclipse the main point: their political significance as
an important milestone marking the imminent completion
of the implementation of the document signed in Moscow
on 27 June 1997: the General Agreement on the
Establishment of Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan.
The very fact that the elections were held is significant.
It is a unique achievement that they took place and that
the political parties of former belligerents in the inter-
Tajik conflict participated in them. This is to the credit
not only of the former participants in the armed conflict,
but also of the entire international community, which
under the auspices of the United Nations has provided
dynamic assistance to advance the peace process in
Tajikistan.

Nor is there any doubt that the elections were an
important step in the democratic development of
Tajikistan and in the establishment of civil society in that
country. On the whole, the elections unfolded in a free
atmosphere, without any serious acts of violence. We take
note of the pluralistic nature of the elections, reflected in
the participation of six political parties as well as a
number of independent candidates. As a result of the
elections, a permanent bicameral professional parliament
will be established. Nearly all members of parliament
have now been replaced, and the percentage of civilian
members has grown along with the number of women
deputies. In other words, we are quite simply witnessing
the progress of Tajikistan towards the formation of a
multi-party political system; democratically elected
parliamentarians will maintain the momentum.

We believe that Tajikistan has every chance of
becoming a positive example of United Nations
peacekeeping and conflict resolution. We are convinced
that the Organization should continue to provide
assistance in the consolidation of peace in Tajikistan.
Particularly worthy of support is the idea of establishing
in Tajikistan, when the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan has concluded its activities, a
United Nations office to help with post-conflict peace-
building, with the primary task of coordinating
international efforts to revive and develop the economic
and social life of Tajikistan.

 

