Mr. Antonio (African Union) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I wish to congratulate Luxembourg on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and to thank you, Sir, for having invited
me to address today's Security Council meeting, on
behalf of the African Union, on the important matter
of the situation in the Central African Republic.
Calendar constraints have prevented the Commissioner
for Peace and Security, Ambassador Ismail Chergui,
from attending as he would have wished to, given the
importance and high priority of the subject matter for
the African Union.

I would also like to thank Mr. Ladsous for introducing
the Secretary-General's very comprehensive report
(S/2014/142). I thank Ms. Valerie Amos for her personal
commitment, including the visit she paid to the Central
African Republic together with the Commissioner for
Political Affairs of the African Union. I should also like
to thank Mr. Antonio Guterres for the very complete
picture he painted of the situation on the ground.

This meeting is further testimony to the
commitment of the Security Council and its members
to effectively contributing to international efforts
aimed at addressing the serious crisis affecting the
Central African Republic. More importantly, the AU's
participation bears further testimony to the ongoing
efforts to strengthen relations between the United
Nations and subregional organizations. We are confident
that, through our combined efforts, the Central African
Republic authorities and other stakeholders will be able
to overcome the many and daunting challenges facing
their country.

Today's meetingis devotedto the considerationofthe
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
48 of resolution 2127 (2013). The report (S/2014/142)
builds on the assessment mission undertaken by the
United Nations to the Central African Republic in the
course of February. The African Union participated
in the assessment mission and subsequently had a
number of exchanges with the Secretariat to convey its
views and facilitate a coordinated and effective way
forward, as underlined by Mr. Ladsous. We commend
the Secretary-General for his continued commitment
and efforts. We reiterate our determination to continue
working with the Secretariat in furtherance of our
common objective of assisting the Central African
Republic to restore lasting peace, security and stability.

I would like to take this opportunity to inform
the Security Council that, since the Council's meeting
held on 20 February (see S/PV.7114), the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA), with the support of Operation
Sangaris, has continued to make sustained efforts
towards the implementation of its mandate. Further
progress has been made in the stabilization of the
situation. There is no doubt that things have improved
for the better. The number of security incidents has
significantly fallen, and many human lives have been
saved. Internally displaced persons are increasingly
returning to their original homes. In Bangui, life is
gradually returning to normalcy.

Furthermore, MISCA has been able to secure the
corridor linking Bangui to the border with Cameroon,
which is vital to both the provision humanitarian
assistance and trade flow. It is providing protection to
the transitional authorities, securing key infrastructure
and assisting humanitarian organizations in a variety
of ways. Steps have also been taken to disarm armed
elements of the ex-Seleka, the anti-Balaka and other
groups, and to support national efforts towards
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform.

In the report the Commission submitted to the
Security Council pursuant to paragraph 32 of resolution
2127 (2013), more detailed information is provided on
the implementation of MISCA's mandate, the progress
made to date with the support of Operation Sangaris,
and the challenges ahead.

As stressed by Commissioner Chergui when he
addressed this body a few weeks ago (see S/PV.7114),
many challenges remain ahead. The level of violence,
as underlined by those who have spoken before me
today, remains unacceptable and sustained action is
required to ensure more effective protection for the
civilian population. The AU, through MISCA, will
not rclent in its efforts and is determined to take all
measures required within the context of its mandate to
facilitate the attainment of the set objectives.

As we meet here today, and while fully cognizant
of the many problems we need to address on the ground,
it is critical that we acknowledge the progress achieved
and the significant difference made on the ground by
MISCA, with the support of Operation Sangaris. These
results demonstrate the clear value added and distinct
contribution of African-led peace support operations as
they are deployed in unstable areas to create conditions
conducive to the deployment of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We note with satisfaction the
acknowledgement in the Secretary-General's report of
the work accomplished by MISCA and the sacrifices
made.

I would like, at this juncture, to reiterate the AU's
appreciation to the troop- and police-contributing
countries for their commitment and to pay tribute to
the soldiers who have fallen in the line of duty, as well
as to the dozens of others who have been wounded. It
is only fitting for the AU to use this forum to express,
once again, its utmost gratitude to all partners that are
providing support to MISCA, including the European
Union, whose financial support has been so critical,
and its member States, the United States and other
bilateral partners, as well as to the Secretariat for
offering expertise to the Mission.

As we address the issue of the deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation, I would like
to indicate that the AU has always been in favour
of the deployment of such an operation once the
required conditions are created. This was emphasized
in the letter that the Chairperson of the Commission,
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, addressed on
17 February to the Secretary-General. Accordingly,
the Commission welcomes the recommendation for
the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, with a possible transfer of authority by
15 September, in the understanding that this date has
to be confirmed following a further joint AU-United
Nations assessment.

The complexity of the situation in the Central African
Republic and the daunting nature of the challenges to be
overcome are acknowledged by all. There is therefore
a need to ensure that the transformation of MISCA
into a United Nations operation is informed by sound
principles. Let me briefly articulate them, building on
in Chairperson Dlamini-Zuma's letter of 17 February.

First, while the international community will
continue to play an important role in the long-term
stabilization of the Central African Republic, including
through a United Nations peacekeeping operation, it
is clear that without national ownership no amount of
international support can bring about lasting solutions
to the challenges facing the country. In this regard, we
note the emphasis placed by the United Nations report
on the need for political commitment on the part of
national stakeholders. The role of the international
community should be not to substitute the Central
African Republic stakeholders and people, but rather
to complement and accompany their efforts, in full
respect of the country's sovereignty.

Secondly, there is need to acknowledge and strongly
support the role of the region and the AU in the post-
MISCA phase so that the envisaged United Nations
peacekeeping operation and other related efforts
can be anchored in a strong regional and continental
involvement. The region, working closely with the AU,
has demonstrated strong leadership in addressing the
crisis in the Central African Republic. Its continued
involvement, with the support of the AU, will be
crucial to the success of the envisaged United Nations
peacekeeping operation.

Therefore, it is important that the Security Council
continue to support the leading role of the region
through the efforts of the Chair of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and
the Chair of the ECCAS Follow up Committee on
the Central African Republic, as well as the role of
the AU, including through the International Contact
Group on the situation in Central African Republic.
In this respect, the Commission notes the relevant
paragraph of the Secretary-General's report. The AU,
in collaboration with ECCAS, will consult further with
the United Nations on the implementation modalities of
such support and how best to ensure close coordination
between the United Nations and AU efforts.

Thirdly, any United Nations peacekeeping
operation should be part of a broader and more
sustainable international engagement in favour of
the Central African Republic. As rightly pointed
out in the Secretary-General's report, the challenges
facing the Central African Republic are complex and
multifaceted. Addressing them effectively requires a
holistic approach and the involvement of a variety of
international actors on the basis of their respective
comparative advantages.

(spoke in French)

Perhaps this is an opportune moment to reiterate
that the African Union will welcome all the support
that bilateral and multilateral partners provide to the
transitional authorities of the Central African Republic.

(spoke in English)

Fourthly, the successful implementation of the
MISCA mandate is critical for the success of the
envisaged United Nations operation. In that respect,
every effort should be made to provide MISCA with
the much-needed logistical and financial support to
enable it complete the initial stabilization phase of the
situation within the envisaged time frame. While noting
the recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General, and in light of earlier experiences,
the Commission calls for a full-fledged United Nations
support package funded through assessed contributions
and provided to all MISCA contingents, as they all
contribute to the successful conduct of the mission's
operations.

Fifthly, we need to learn from the experience
of the transition from the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, as rightly acknowledged in the report of the
Secretary-General. That requires close consultation
between the AU Commission and the Secretariat, in a
spirit of transparency and partnership, including jointly
defining the terms of reference of the planned transition
team, generating forces and agreeing on the modalities
for the re-hatting of the contingents currently serving
under MISCA.

It also requires that the AU be adequately consulted
from the outset on the draft resolution that would
mandate the deployment ofthe envisaged United Nations
peacekeeping operation. Without compromising the
time lines envisaged for the deployment of the United
Nations operation, it is important that adequate time be
given for the consultation process to be carried out to
the satisfaction of all stakeholders concerned.

Learning from the Mali experience, and without
prejudice to the relevant United Nations rules, it would
be important to ensure that the African stakeholders,
including the region, are adequately consulted on the
appointment of the leadership of the envisaged United
Nations peacekeeping operation. In that respect,
the Commission recommends the appointment of
Africans to lead the mission and its military and police
components.

The deployment of a United Nations operation in
the Central African Republic should mark a new step
towards broader and more sustained international
engagement in the country, anchored on the principle of
national ownership and strong regional and continental
involvement.

Since the deployment of MISCA, less than three
months ago, the region and the AU, building on earlier
efforts by ECCAS, have relentlessly endeavoured to
assist the Central African Republic in overcoming the
many challenges confronting it. In so doing, Africa
has acted on the basis of the principle of solidarity.
Africa will not relent in its commitment to assist the
Central African Republic and its people in their hour of
need. No stone will be left unturned to ensure that the
mandate of MISCA is effectively implemented.

In conclusion, I would like to re-echo the African
Union's earlier calls on the need for the international
community to mobilize adequate support to meet the
humanitarian needs in the Central African Republic.
Timely and increased humanitarian support will go
a long way in alleviating the plight of the affected
populations and in enhancing the credibility of our
collective efforts.

