Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China wishes to thank Mr. Said Djinnit, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region, and Ambassador Raymond Bale' for their
briefings. China commends the efforts undertaken by
the Special Envoy to achieve peace and stability in
the Great Lakes region and will continue to actively
support his work.

In recent times, thanks to the joint efforts of the
international community and regional countries, the
peace process in South Sudan has been revitalized and
progress made with regard to elections preparation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and national dialogue
in Burundi. All of that points to an improvement in the
political situation of the Great Lakes region. However,
at the same time peace and stability remain fragile.
In particular, the rampant activities of illegal armed
groups, communal tensions and the lack of economic
and social development are seriously undermining
regional peace and development.

The Great Lakes region lies at the heart of the
African continent. Maintaining the peace and the
stability of that region has a direct bearing on the peace
and the stability of the whole continent and requires
the robust support and assistance of the international
community. First, it is necessary to respect the
leadership of regional countries and organizations.
China has always called for African solutions to African
problems and respects the sovereignty, independence
and the territorial integrity of the countries concerned.
China also respects the leading role played by regional
organizations in mediation efforts. My country
supports the full role played by regional and subregional
organizations - such as the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the East African Community and the Southern African
Development Community - in the mediation processes
and encourages the countries of the region to continue
to implement the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. China hopes that the international
community and regional countries and organizations
will strengthen their cooperation so as to work together
to find political solutions to the problems at hand.

Secondly, support should be given to security
capacity-building in the countries of the region. The
international community should increase the amount
of assistance they give to the Great Lakes region in
terms of peace and security capacity-building and help
the relevant countries to assume their responsibility for
the maintenance of internal peace and security as early
as possible. China welcomes the cooperation among
the countries of the Great Lakes region in response
to the threat from armed groups and encourages
those countries to implement the Nairobi Declaration
and promote disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.

China hopes that the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will, as per the Council's mandate, strengthen
coordination with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo so as to play an active role in
fighting armed groups in efforts to maintain peace
and stability.

Thirdly, the root causes of the regional conflicts
must be tackled. A lack of development is one the leading
causes of instability in the region. The international
community should honour its assistance commitment in
a timely fashion and increase humanitarian assistance.
At the same time, it is necessary to increase assistance
and investment in the infrastructure of these countries,
including health, education, trade and connectivity.

Efforts should be made to promote the economic
and social development of the countries of the region
and to find effective solutions with respect to youth
employment and refugees. China supports the peace
process in the Great Lakes region and has actively
participated in relevant United Nations peacekeeping
operations there. China has provided support to the
countries of the region in terms of infrastructure,
agriculture, the sustainable development of resources
and energy, and has played an active and positive role in
helping the countries of the region to enhance their self-
development capacity and the livelihood of their people.
We are ready, together with the rest of the international
community to continue to play a constructive role in
achieving peace and stability and the development of
the region.

