Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Prendergast for his briefing on the situation in
Afghanistan. We agree with his assessment that on the
whole the peace process is moving forward. The Bonn
Agreement is being successfully implemented.
Preparations for holding the all-Afghan Special
Independent Commission for the Convening of the
Emergency Loya Jirga are under way, and it will elect
the interim government in June.

Of course, not everything is going smoothly. A
lot remains to be done, including securing participation
in the assembly of the representatives of all segments
of Afghan society and adequate representation of all
ethnic groups of the country.

We learned with regret of the death in Ghowr
province of the candidate elected to the loya jirga, Mr.
Rahim. That assassination clearly shows that there are
still forces in Afghanistan that want to undermine the
peace process. The information that we receive
confirms that in a number of regions of Afghanistan,
particularly in the eastern part of the country, there are
groups that are unhappy with the current regime and
are biding their time, waiting to emerge from the
underground and actively join the struggle for power.

In this connection, I wish to reiterate once again
our appeal regarding the need to exclude the Taliban
and their followers from participation in the future
organs of State power. Clearly, after the loya jirga is
held, there will be people who are not happy about the
results of the elections to the interim government. But
it is important that that opposition remains within the
law and does not take up arms and create a coalition of
malcontents. In our view, Afghanistan's neighbours
could play a great role in preventing this kind of
scenario. They have enough leverage on the provincial
leaders for that. The potential of these countries should
not be underestimated and, particularly, they should not
be treated with disrespect.

We agree that the security situation in
Afghanistan remains acute. We receive regular reports.
Today, once again, we heard this in Sir Kieran's
briefing with regard to emerging pockets of conflict.
Various ethnic groups, residual Taliban and members of
Al-Qaeda terrorist groups participate in them.

We attach great importance to the work of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in
discharging the mandate adopted in Security Council
resolution 1386 (2001). Today the Council adopted a
resolution extending the mandate of this Force. We
believe that ISAF is playing an important role in
establishing tranquility in Kabul. We hope that it will
provide meaningful support and assistance in
establishing the normal functioning of the new
transitional Government of the country.

We need to focus over the long term on creating a
truly Afghan army. During the Geneva donor
conference specific thoughts were expressed regarding
the reform of the Afghan security sector. We welcome
the willingness of the international community to
provide assistance to the Afghans in creating their
army and security force. For its part, Russia has often
said that it would be willing to develop military and
technical cooperation, including participation in
helping to build a national armed force and the law
enforcement organs of Afghanistan. Again, we reaffirm
that work in this area should not become an arena for
competition, rivalry or any clash of interests.
Otherwise, the long-term prospects for the peaceful
rebuilding of Afghanistan could once again come to
naught.

We are convinced that the United Nations should
play a central role in establishing broad, international
interaction and coordination throughout the territory of
post-conflict Afghanistan. We attach great importance
to the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as well as the work done by
the United Nations Special Representative for
Afghanistan, Mr. Brahimi. They must provide this kind
of coordination and interaction in their day-to-day
activities.

Russia will continue to lend assistance for the
economic recovery of Afghanistan. During the first
stage of the humanitarian operation, we gave
Afghanistan assistance totalling more than $12 million.
The new stage will see the participation of Russian
specialists and companies in rebuilding and repairing
more than 140 industrial and agricultural facilities that
were built in Afghanistan from 1960 to 1980 with the
assistance of the Soviet Union.

