Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Ivan Simonovic', Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights, for his briefing.

The discussions ofrecent weeks in the Council have
shown that not all members have the same assessment
of the situation in Ukraine. We have often witnessed
here a dialogue of the deaf, while an information war is
raging on the ground. Given that backdrop, Luxembourg
welcomes the publication yesterday of the first report
on the human rights situation in Ukraine, including
Crimea, by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. The report, based
on eyewitness accounts, has provided an objective
picture of the situation. I thank Mr. Simonovie for the
topical information he has just provided the Council, in
addition to the report.

The report and Mr. Simonovie's briefing paint
a very bleak picture of the situation in Crimea. The
consequences of the annexation to Russia for people
living in Crimea are dire. That is especially true for
minorities, such as the Crimean Tatars, who have had to
leave the peninsula out of fear of violent repression, and
for Ukrainians themselves, who have are subjected to
flagrant discrimination if they refuse to adopt Russian
citizenship.

The report confirms that the referendum held on
16 March in Crimea, in violation of the Constitutions
of both Ukraine and Crimea, was held in conditions
devoid of any legitimacy. Crimea was occupied and cut
off from the rest of Ukraine, journalists and members
of civil society were intimidated, and freedom of
the media was severely hampered. Cases of torture,
forced disappearance and murder must be the subject
of independent judicial investigation. Urgent measures
are needed to restore the rule of law and protect human
rights and fundamental freedoms. I join my colleagues
who have stressed the importance of providing United
Nations representatives with access to the entire
territory of Ukraine, including Crimea. This applies in
particular to the members of the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission.

With the report of the High Commissioner, we
now have confirmation of what Mr. Simonovic' told
the Council on 19 March (see S/PV.7144) - there
have been no systematic or widespread attacks against
"the ethnic Russian community" in Ukraine. Yet the
unfounded rumors of threats of such attacks continue
to be exploited to foment unrest in eastern and south-
eastern Ukraine. Russian media are systematically used
to create a climate of fear and rouse local populations
against the Ukrainian Government. Luxembourg
therefore endorses the appeal launched yesterday by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Representative on Freedom of the Media,
Ms. Dunja Mijatovie, on measures to be taken to counter
propaganda and misinformation. The current situation
is explosive. It would be irresponsible to further fan the
flames.

Luxembourg condemns the actions carried out
since 6 April by armed groups in several cities in
eastern and south-eastern Ukraine, especially in the
Donetsk region. Those actions lack all spontaneity.
They are coordinated and well-orchestrated, akin
to what happened in Crimea. We are particularly
concerned by the targeted deployment of pro-Russia
individuals in the local demonstrations, as noted in the
High Commissioner's report. We are not challenging
the right to demonstrate freely, but the deployment of
pro-Russia elements has led to violent incidents and the
forceful occupation of Government buildings and local
law-enforcement institutions. We call on Russia to
publicly distance itself from the actions ofthe separatist
militias.

We pay tribute to the outstanding composure and
restraint shown by the Ukrainian authorities in the
face of these destabilizing actions. We understand that
they cannot fail to act in the situation. We encourage
the Ukrainian Government to proceed in a measured
and proportional manner, with full respect for human
rights.

Luxembourg still believes that a peaceful solution
to the crisis can be found. Such a solution would require
direct dialogue between Russia and Ukraine. We hope
that the four-party talks that will bring together chief
negotiators from Ukraine, Russia, the United States and
the European Union in Geneva tomorrow will allow for
a dialogue to be initiated and a way out of the most
dangerous crisis that Europe has faced since the end of
the Cold War to be found.

Pending a political solution, the presence
throughout Ukraine of impartial United Nations and
OSCE observers is crucial to establishing the facts and
countering warmongering rhetoric. We encourage the
human rights observer mission to redouble its efforts
in that respect. As the Secretary General of the OSCE
stated in Brussels today, to observe in a neutral manner
and report on the facts is to help establish the conditions
for a de-escalation of this dangerous situation.

