Mr. Brammertz: Once again, it is my duty and
pleasure to address the Security Council on the
progress of the Office of the Prosecutor towards the
completion of the Tribunal's mandate. We have our
eyes firmly fixed on the completion of our activities.
Our challenge is to finalize our work expeditiously
while at the same time preserving the integrity of our
proceedings and the overall interests of justice.
Everyone present today has a common interest in
striking the right balance between those two important
objectives.

I am conscious of the fact that the original
deadline for completion of the Tribunal's work - the
end of 2010 - will pass us by while we are still
occupied with multiple trials and appeals. As we have
explained in our completion strategy reports over the
years, culminating in our present report (see S/2010/588), there are many reasons for that.
International criminal justice is a complex and
unpredictable endeavour. Nevertheless, I take
responsibility for the delays that can be attributed to
the Office of the Prosecutor.

We assure the Council that we are continuously
reflecting on our performance and devising strategies
to further improve the efficiency of our work. We
understand that the international community has finite
resources and many competing priorities. We reiterate
our commitment to ensuring that the international
community's investment in justice and accountability
in the former Yugoslavia pays maximum dividends
within an acceptable time frame.

In my remarks today, I will emphasize our
Office's top four current priorities.

First, we are focused on the successful and
efficient completion of our trials and appeals. The
Council has a large volume of information on the
progress of the Tribunal's cases before it in the reports
submitted by the President (ibid., annex I) and by our
Office (ibid., annex II). We are moving ahead, and
several milestones were reached in the current
reporting period. Two trials and one appeal case were
concluded. Two other trials reached their final stage
and are scheduled for completion early next year, and
the Prosecution concluded the presentation of its
evidence in two further trials. Another case, Haradinaj
et al, has been remitted for a partial retrial. To cope
with the extra work, we have had to stretch thinner the
existing resources in our Office and use them in a more
flexible way.

Our Office is working at maximum capacity. The
increasingly frequent rates of staff departures,
particularly in the critical final phase of our cases,
means that we must ask more and more of those who
remain. The dedication of staff in our Office is notable,
and through their efforts we have been able to proceed
with our cases as required.

The second priority I want to mention today is
securing the cooperation of States.

When it comes to Serbia, cooperation in our
ongoing cases is proceeding well. Serbia is facilitating
our requests for access to documents and archives, and
witness related issues are being handled satisfactorily.

However, Serbia's failure to capture the two
remaining fugitives - Ratko Mladie and Goran
Hadiie - is one of our foremost concerns. Serbia must
bridge the gap between its stated commitment to the
arrests and the effectiveness of its operations on the
ground. Time is passing, and we are not seeing results.
In our last completion strategy report (S/2010/270), we
made a number of recommendations aimed at
improving the effectiveness of Serbia's efforts to
capture the fugitives. In my trip to Serbia this past
November, I saw that the authorities are working on
the implementation of our recommendations. But there
is still much left to be done, and the progress must be
faster.

Overall, Serbia needs to adopt a more proactive
approach to arresting the fugitives. At the heart of that
more proactive approach should be a comprehensive
strategy that integrates all relevant actors and covers
all possible angles for exerting positive pressure
towards the arrests. For example, in addition to the
search activities, there must be a rigorous approach to
dealing with individuals or networks that support the
fugitives in their efforts to evade justice. The Serbian
authorities must clearly signal that those who harbour
the fugitives will be punished. Serbia holds the key to
arresting Ratko Mladie and Goran HadZie. Those
fugitives can be brought to justice if all relevant actors
are sufficiently committed and effectively work
together to bring it about.

When it comes to Croatia, the authorities are
generally responsive to our requests for assistance. The
key outstanding issue remains our request for
important military documents relating to Operation
Storm. The task force established by the Government
to locate or account for the missing military documents
has now started working on exploring new
investigative avenues identified by my Office more
than one year ago. However, the reports sent to our
Office by the authorities reveal inconsistencies and
raise questions that have not been resolved. After I
submitted my written report to the Council, the
authorities sent an additional report to our Office
identifying a number of the problematic areas. We
encourage Croatia to address those problems and to
account for the missing documents.

When it comes to Bosnia and Herzegovina, again
we have seen satisfactory responses to our requests for
assistance. However, we ask the authorities to redouble
their efforts against fugitive networks. We continue to
support the full implementation of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina National War Crimes Strategy. While an
important development, we encourage courts dealing
with war crimes cases at all levels of the judicial
system to further improve their working relationships.

Coordinated strategies for war crimes
prosecutions are also important among the States of the
former Yugoslavia. Currently, barriers to extraditing
suspects and transferring evidence across State borders
are impeding efforts to establish accountability for war
crimes throughout the region. Solutions must be found
to these problems as a matter of urgency.

This brings me to the third priority, namely,
building the capacity of our counterparts in the region
of the former Yugoslavia. We want to be sure that, by
the time the Tribunal closes its doors, we have done
everything possible to transfer information and
expertise to courts in the region of the former
Yugoslavia so that they can successfully manage the
large number of remaining war crimes cases.

A key component of our efforts in this regard is
our European Union-funded liaison prosecutors
project, whereby three prosecutors from the region
work as liaison prosecutors in our Office in The Hague.
The liaison prosecutors are integrated with our staff
and have a unique opportunity to consult with in-house
experts and to access mainly Tribunal databases for the
purposes of their local war crimes investigations and
prosecutions.

The fourth and final priority I want to mention
today is our commitment to downsizing our Office and
ensuring a smooth and effective transition to the
proposed residual mechanism. During the reporting
period, our Office abolished 30 professional posts and
12 general service posts. This reduction of posts is part
of a process that will continue and gather further
momentum in the next reporting period as more trials
end.

At the same time, our Office continues to engage
in and contribute to discussions on the establishment of
a residual mechanism to take over the outstanding
aspects of our work when we close our doors.
Designing an appropriate mechanism is a complex
exercise, and we are making every effort to ensure that
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
established by this Council to carry out this task has
our support and the benefit of our experience.

In concluding, I return to the theme I mentioned
at the outset, namely, our common interest in striking
the right balance between the expeditious completion
of our activities and the integrity of our work. We are
unquestionably focused on the end of our activities but,
at the same time, we need the support of the
international community more than ever. We need its
commitment to ensuring that we have the resources
necessary to complete our mandate. After 17 years of
groundbreaking work and important accomplishments,
we must not falter at this final hurdle.

Crucially, we need the international community's
help in securing the arrest of the two remaining

fugitives. We have an obligation to ensure that those
two individuals face the charges brought against them.
We cannot abandon the Victims of some of the worst
crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia -
including the genocide in Srebrenica - and leave them
without full redress. More generally, the failure to
arrest Ratko Mladie and Goran Hadzic impedes
reconciliation in the region and damages the credibility
of the international legal system as a whole.

While the key to the arrests lies in Serbia, the
international community also has an important role to
play. With its assistance and the effective
implementation of conditionality policies, positive
incentives can be given to Serbia to precipitate the
arrests. With the concerted effort of all relevant actors,
we can prevail over the fugitives and their support
networks.

