Mrs. Booto (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me to congratulate you, Sir,
on behalf of my delegation, for the effective way in
which you are guiding the work of the Council for the
current month, and we thank you for convening today's
meeting. I would particularly like to thank Secretary-
General Kofi Annan, who, since the outbreak of the
war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, has been
personally committed to the search for ways to restore
peace in the country. My congratulations and thanks
also go to the members of the Security Council, who,
under the enlightened leadership of Mr. Jean-Marc de
La Sabliere, the Permanent Representative of France,
visited Central Africa from 7 to 16 June 2003 to carry
out the mission that is the topic of the report just now
presented by the Ambassador of France. I am
convinced that the correct implementation of the
report's recommendations will clear the way to peace
and enable the Congolese parties to overcome the
remaining obstacles in order fully to implement the all-
inclusive agreement on the transition in the country,
signed in Pretoria in December 2002.

Since the signing on 2 April 2003 in Sun City of
the final document on the inter-Congolese political
negotiations, my country has spared no effort to
implement its share of obligations. It will be recalled
that on 7 April 2003, the head of State, General Major
Joseph Kabila promulgated the Constitution of the
transition and took office as President of the Republic
for the period of transition. After taking office, he
promulgated a decree granting amnesty for all acts of
war and offences of political expression and opinion.
He also suspended the court of military orders.

We must also note the unwavering resolve of my
Government to accelerate the movement towards
transition through the recent appointment of the first
President of the Supreme Court and the State
Prosecutor of the Republic, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the global and all-inclusive
agreement.

Finally, I would like to remind the Council that to
make the establishment of the transitional institutions
irreversible, since 14 April 2003 the President of the
Republic has convened in Kinshasa the first meeting of
the Commission national de suivi tasked with preparing
the establishment of the new institutions.

However, the dynamic of war, which has become
permanently installed in the east, hinders the search for
a political solution. In fact, the obstacles to the peace
process continue. I think the Council was informed of
that during its mission's visit to my country. It does not
seem to us to be difficult to identify the authors behind
those obstacles. The observable lack of progress on the
problem of the structure of, and the distribution of
appointments in, the integrated Congolese army are the
result of the intransigence of certain elements, in
particular the Rassemblement congolais pour la
democratie-Goma (RCD-Goma), whose endless
demands risk jeopardizing the entire process. Once it
had obtained the Ministry of Defence, RCD-Goma then
wanted control of the army.

The mission of the Council will undoubtedly
recall that during its passage through Kinshasa, RCD-
Goma forces decided to launch a large-scale offensive
in the east, taking control of the town of
Kanyabayonga. That behaviour is not only a Violation
of the all-inclusive agreement; it also constitutes a
brake on the establishment of the transitional
institutions. We can only deplore the fact that the
resumption of hostilities initiated by RCD-Goma has
jeopardized the chances for success of the DDRR
operations led by the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). It is important for the Security Council to
maintain pressure on the leaders of RCD-Goma and
their supporters, in particular the Rwandese
Government, so that the RCD-Goma will honour their
commitments in accordance with the global and all-
inclusive agreement and so that the Rwandan
Government will desist from exercising its negative
influence on the RCD-Goma and all other Congolese
parties. No one is unaware of the negative role that
Rwanda plays in that part of my country. No lie uttered
by the representative of Rwanda could conceal the
truth.

We hope that the interest generated by the Visit of
the Security Council mission will be maintained so that
the trouble-makers can be prevented from derailing the
process of the country's normalization, for the people
of the Congo aspire to peace and reconciliation.

I would like to stress that the situation in the east
of the country is a cause of ongoing concern and risks
jeopardizing progress at the national level. The
political process undertaken by the Ituri pacification
commission has stagnated as a result of the renewed
hostilities between the Hema and the Lendu in the city
of Bunia. The explosive situation prevailing there led
the Security Council to authorize the deployment until
1 September 2003 of an Interim Emergency
Multinational Force. Resolution 1484 (2003), which
gave that force a mandate, underlines the strictly
limited and temporary mandate of the Force, while the
situation in Bunia requires a successful long-term
solution.

That is why my Government, echoing the request
made to the Council by the inhabitants of Bunia and by
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as a whole, calls
for the invocation of Chapter VII in order to change
and to extend MONUC's mandate in order to restore
the peace and then maintain the peace.

In order to put an end to the cycle of violence in
Ituri, in the Kivus and in the rest of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, my Government would like to
recall the need for a mechanism to address the issue of
impunity, in keeping with paragraph 7 of Security
Council resolution 1468 (2003), adopted on 20 March
2003.

The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo fully supports the recommendations in the
report of the Security Council mission and hopes that
the Council will take a decision so that it is binding in
its application.

