Mr. Karlsson: I should like to thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this welcome opportunity
to address the Council. We appreciate the lucidity and
balance of the report of the Secretary-General and the
briefing by his Representative.
The World Bank is very concerned about the
situation in the Central African Republic, not just
because of the particular difficulties it has faced in the
past five years but also because it has been so affected
by events elsewhere in Central Africa, including, most
obviously, the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

In the past 10 years, Governments across Africa
have moved steadily - some of them boldly - to
introduce reforms which will strengthen growth and
ensure basic services for the poor. Unfortunately, the
Central African Republic has not kept pace with that
progress.

Internal conflict has been one of the reasons. So
has conflict outside its borders.

In its operational policy on development
cooperation and conflict, issued this month, the Bank
has committed itself to supporting economic and social
recovery and sustainable development in countries in
transition from conflict through investment and
development policy advice, with particular attention to
the needs of war-affected groups that are especially
vulnerable for reasons of gender, age or disability.

In trying to meet this mandate, the Bank has a
number of advantages in the Central African Republic,
including a Country Office in Bangui and a long
history of involvement in national development
programmes. However, there have been interruptions in
the Bank's programme in recent years, and a need to
update our knowledge of policy areas that are
important for economic growth and poverty reduction,
including livestock, cotton, forestry and rural transport.

But the path to strengthening the Bank's
programme there appears to be opening up. We have
confidence in the Prime Minister and his economic
team, not because they are always in agreement with
us, but rather because they have a clear sense of their
country's interests and are effective in defending those
interests internally and externally.

Despite day-to-day difficulties that would daunt
any of us, the Prime Minister and his colleagues have
been able to keep their focus on medium- and long-
term issues, which would only become more acute if
left alone. For example, during consultations in
Washington last month, the Prime Minister was as
concerned about facing the HIV/AIDS crisis head-on
and improving energy efficiency as he was about
solving the problem of salary arrears in public service.

Recognizing this focus and commitment, and the
special complications that external events - especially
the interruption of petroleum supplies - have caused
to economic management, the Bretton Woods
institutions have supported the Government's
stabilization and reform efforts in a number of ways.
Last month, on 27 December, the Bank's Board
partially waived a condition for the release of the
second tranche of budget support. This action was very
exceptional. The country was in arrears in its servicing
of its International Development Association debt, and
we would not normally ask our Board to approve a
tranche release, much less a waiver, in such
circumstances.

On 10 January, the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) approved the second annual arrangement under
the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility.

On 18 January - last Thursday - the Bank's
Board joined the IMF Board in endorsing the
Government's Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper as a sound basis for preparing a more complete
poverty strategy.

In the next six months the Bank will work closely
with the authorities to develop a more comprehensive
poverty strategy; help the Government to prepare the
case for debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries (HIPC) Debt Initiative; support the
preparation of an urgent project to fight HIV/AIDS, for
which a Bank preparation mission is currently in the
field; consider supplementary support for the energy
sector; and apply a grant from the Bank's Post-Conflict
Fund to fund activities at the community level.

Looking beyond the next six months, three points
deserve particular attention. First, a sound economy
built on strong and well-managed public finances and
the rule of law are essential for underpinning peace-
building efforts. Secondly, the alignment of the efforts
of the entire United Nations community, with ourselves
and our IMF colleagues focusing on the economic and
social dimensions, has never been more vital than now,
and we remain fully engaged. Thirdly, the international
institutions can provide some temporary relief for
pressing problems such as civil service salary arrears,
but only determined and unswerving efforts on the part
of the Government can address the root causes of the
crisis, especially weak governance, and provide a
lasting solution.

