The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Argentina, Australia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada,
Colombia, Croatia, Hungary, India, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Ireland, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Ukraine and Uruguay, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Ramirez
(Argentina), Ms. Millar (Australia), Mr. Misic (Bosnia and Herzegovina), Mr. Fowler (Canada),
Mr. Londono-Paredes (Colombia), Mr. Drobnjak
(Croatia), Mr. Nathon (Hungary), Mr. Shah (India),
Mr. Takht-Ravanchi (the Islamic Republic of Iran),
Mr. Campbell (Ireland), Mr. Takahashi (Japan),
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia), Mr. Keating (New Zealand),
Mr. Vilchez Asher (Nicaragua), Mr. Holter (Norway),
Mr. Kamal (Pakistan), Ms. Decerega Smith (Panama),
Mr. Bohayevsky (Ukraine) and Mr. Benitez-Saenz
(Uruguay), took the seats reserved for them at the side
of the Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, if I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to
extend an invitation to the Permanent Observer of
Switzerland to the United Nations to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Maurer

(Switzerland) took the seat reserved for him at the

side of the Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, if I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Peter
Kiing, Head of the delegation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda, "Demining in the
context of United Nations peace-keeping". The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/ 1996/621, which contains the
text of a letter dated 24 July 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Germany to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.

Before calling on the first speaker, I should like to
appeal to all speakers to observe the newly agreed-upon
practice according to which expressions of congratulations
to the President of the Council should be dispensed with
in order to save time. In the same spirit, the President of
the Council for the month of July has graciously indicated
that expressions of appreciation to the past President may
also be dispensed with.


