Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Today, the Security
Council had a chance to show that we would no longer
tolerate business as usual in South Sudan. Tragically,
for the people of South Sudan, we have been unable
to do so. For a long time it has been Clear to many
of us in the Chamber that a different approach was
needed, that different pressure needed to be brought
to bear. Despite repeated promises, repeated atrocities,
repeated warnings of ethnic violence, the fighting has
continued to rage and the fragile peace agreement has
continued to sour.

That is why the United Kingdom has long advocated
for an arms embargo on South Sudan. Today, we had a
chance to curb the flow of weapons and to save lives.
It is why we advocated targeting those individuals who
have fuelled the violence - individuals at the top of
both the Government and the opposition. We had a
chance today to show those individuals that there are
very real repercussions for their role in that war. But
instead, we have done nothing. We have done nothing
despite knowing what is really at stake. We can all
recall Adama Dieng's grave warning to this Council
just two weeks ago. He spoke of hateful rhetoric, of
ethnic divides. He spoke of possible genocide. If the
dire situation in South Sudan spirals into that tragic
place, we will all need to examine our consciences.

And Adama's warning was just the tip of the iceberg.
We should not forget that atrocities have already been
committed in South Sudan. Sites established for the
protection of civilians have instead been the scenes of
murder, robbery and rape. Millions have uprooted their
lives and fled their homes. Families have been destroyed
and tens of thousands have been killed in a country that
went from one civil war to another. We have done nothing
to reduce the number ofweapons at the disposal ofthose
who would choose to commit those unspeakable acts.
We have welcomed the repeated promises and offers of
the Government and the opposition to stop fighting and
to work towards a political process. We welcomed the
Government's announcements to conduct an inclusive
national dialogue and we welcomed their commitment
to the deployment of a regional protection force.

But the reality does not reflect kindly on those
promises. In reality, the United Nations Mission
continues to face chronic restrictions. In reality, the
humanitarian situation has gotten worse, not better and
people are suffering. In reality, they are voting with
their feet. Up to 6,000 people per day fled for Uganda
this month.

That is the reality that we needed to change. Words
are not good enough. We must now see concrete action
resulting from those promises. Today we had a chance
to take a small step towards changing this reality, and
yet we have been failed to do so. Inaction today does not
abscond us all of our responsibilities. In fact, it places
an even heavier burden on us. The Security Council,
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and all parties to the conflict in South
Sudan have a responsibility to redouble our efforts for
peace in the year ahead. The people of South Sudan
have asked for it for long enough.

