The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

We thank the Force Commanders for their
substantive briefings. We have listened with great
interest to their ideas and assessments. The Russian
Federation views peacekeeping as one of the most
important functions of the United Nations and actively
participates in it. Russian peacekeepers are taking part
in operations in the Middle East, in various regions of
Africa and in Haiti. We provide considerable logistical
and transport support for peacekeeping operations.
The peacekeeping activities of the United Nations
are in a process of constant evolution, conceptually and
operationally, as they respond to new political realities.
Given the growing list of complex peacekeeping
operations, in recent years the United Nations has seen
growing demand for its resources and as a result is
facing unprecedented challenges that it has to address.
The growing diversity and complexity of those tasks
requires enhanced military expertise for the steps that
must be taken within the framework of United Nations
peacekeeping.

Russia's proposal to further revitalize the
activities of the Military Staff Committee is still on the
table. The Committee is drafting recommendations on
operational aspects of peacekeeping activities; its
participation in measures to determine the readiness of
contingents and infrastructure for peace operations
would allow it to supply the Council with reliable,
timely information, as well as to enhance the quality of
military expertise available to United Nations
peacekeeping as a whole.

Particular attention should be given to ensuring
the appropriate preparation of peacekeeping
contingents on the basis of common standards and
coordinated national programmes, and to providing
comprehensive support for their activities. The task of
enhancing United Nations peacekeeping also calls for
tapping more effectively into resources of regional
organizations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.

Obviously, operational mandates should be clear,
feasible and adequate to the situation. The shortfall of
financial, material and technical resources dictates the
need for making the best use of existing capacities.
Given the growing demand for police contingents, we
need to seek a rational division of labour between them
and military peacekeeping contingents. It is important
to demarcate peacekeeping and post-conflict
peacebuilding functions in peacekeeping mandates.
United Nations peacekeepers should be given only
initial tasks in the area of peacebuilding; the process of
social and economic reform should more actively
involve specialized structures of the United Nations
system and regional organizations. Effective
coordination among all components of complex
peacekeeping operations - military, police and
civilian - should be conducted under the leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
while fully maintaining his policy oversight of
activities of such operations, in strict compliance with
Security Council mandates.

When sending peacekeepers into areas of
conflict, the international community should pay
particular attention to ensuring their security. Recently,
there has been a regrettable increase in the number of
attacks on peacekeepers, which is totally unacceptable.
Our hope is that today's meeting will reaffirm our
shared interest in further improving the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations carried out in
accordance with the Charter and with standards of

international law, while necessarily maintaining the
primary responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security. That is
our policy guarantee that operations will be carried out
successfully. We believe that today's meeting has been
extremely useful, and we suggest that such exchanges
of View with Force Commanders of United Nations
peacekeeping operations be held on a regular basis.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Canada.

