Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
Mr. Vieira de Mello raised a number of important questions
that the Security Council must consider. In this connection,
we attach particular importance to continuing the practice
of holding briefings and discussion meetings on
humanitarian activities relevant to the Security Council.

The statement made by Mr. Vieira de Mello rightly
stresses the role that the Security Council can play in
support of measures to protect civilians in time of armed
conflict. This is not mere theory: since we took up our
position in the Council at the beginning of January, the
Council's deliberations have dealt mainly with conflicts that
threaten civilians and humanitarian personnel. Let me give
as an example Angola, Iraq, Kosovo and Sierra Leone.

(spoke in English)

The recent tragic history of Sierra Leone is especially
instructive. It underscores the fact that the Security Council
needs to consider threats to security in a broader context -
beyond what States do or threaten to do to each other -
and to consider threats to security in the context of broad-
based threats to individuals caught up in all kinds of armed
conflict.

Lawless banditry, acute violence against innocent
civilians, the employment of mercenaries, the use of child
combatants, vast numbers of hungry and sick displaced
persons: these are the challenges which the international
community must confront in Sierra Leone and in all too
many other circumstances. The sad fact is that the Security
Council is only beginning to define appropriate responses.
This small country of 4.5 million people contains, in
microcosm, many of the conceptual challenges to which the
Council must find answers if it is to remain relevant,
credible and effective.

Humanitarian, refugee and human rights law provide
the international community with a legal framework which
enshrines the protection of war-affected civilians. Yet it
remains evident that this legal framework is not evenly
applied or enforced, and that violations are often
committed with impunity. The establishment of an
International Criminal Court and the two ad hoc
Tribunals, for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, are
concrete examples of how we have begun to address such
gaps. Much remains to be done. In this context, allow me
to express my very deep concern that Madam Justice
Arbour continues to be prevented from fulfilling her
responsibilities in Kosovo.

Peacekeeping operations have been employed as a
mechanism to separate warring factions, monitor ceasefire
agreements and support the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. As Mr. Vieira de Mello suggests, however, we
have not adequately considered how peacekeeping forces
could be used to better protect civilians from the conflicts
which rage around them.

In carrying out humanitarian operations, the
international community has tended to place emphasis on
the delivery of assistance to affected populations. Less
attention has been devoted to how we ensure the safety
and security of displaced and other war-affected
populations or to considerations of how we curb threats
to humanitarian workers and others who act at great peril
in the service of peace. The passengers and crew of the
United Nations-chartered aircraft recently shot down over
UNITA-controlled territory in Angola are a tragic
reminder of that grim fact.

The Council has begun to address such issues - for
example, insecurity in refugee camps, the impact of
armed conflict on children and the protection of personnel
seeking to provide humanitarian assistance, often in
desperate and dangerous situations. This is welcome
indeed, but much remains to be done. In particular, the
Council should build on its efforts thus far and focus its
attention on the broad issue underlying Mr. Vieira de
Mello's concerns: the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Only by dealing with the issue in a
comprehensive manner can the Council begin to acquit its
responsibility for reducing the vulnerability of civilians
where international peace and security are at risk.

We take careful note of Mr. Vieira de Mello's
conclusion regarding the need for the Council to examine
practical ways in which we can ensure greater levels of
protection for civilians. We agree with him that this issue
is of direct relevance to the Council's core

 

responsibilities. From our perspective, this is indeed a
pressing task for us in the weeks and months ahead.

The Canadian delegation would like to thank you, Mr.
President, for making it possible for Under-Secretary-
General Vieira de Mello to address the Council this
morning. His eloquent, forceful and persuasive presentation
is, we believe, a timely and effective reminder of the
importance of widening our appreciation of the broader
dimensions of security.

