Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Mr. President, my delegation wishes to
acknowledge your work as Chair of the Committee
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and thanks you for
your briefing on the Committee's work.
My delegation would also like to welcome His
Excellency, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Regional Integration of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mr. Leonard She Okitundu.

Bolivia welcomes and highlights the work of the
Group of Experts for their efforts to promote lasting
peace and stability in this brotherly country, in
accordance with the provisions of the Council. We
recognize and extend our deepest sympathy to Michael
Sharp and Zaida Catalan, the experts who lost their
lives in the fulfilment of their duties. We express our
condolences to and solidarity with their families, who
are present at this meeting.

We are concerned about the lack of results in the
investigation, which should provide the information
necessary to identify those responsible for that tragic
crime, so that they may be tried and punished by the
competent courts.

Bolivia takes into consideration that the challenges
faced by both the Group of Experts and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have increased
exponentially. Both face the violence of local armed
groups that, according to the final report of the
Group of Experts (S/2017/672/Rev.l), has started up
again. Moreover, they face foreign armed groups that
maintain alliances with local groups, encouraging
the recruitment of new and ex-combatants, and
putting at risk the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process. Furthermore, the Group of
Experts has identified that, although the mechanism to
track minerals such as tin, tantalum and tungsten has
prevented the benefits of mining from going to armed
groups, there are still deficiencies in its implementation.
We therefore encourage the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to continue to work on the effective operation of
this mechanism.

The report also points out that the gold sector does
not have a tracking mechanism; as such there is no
effective monitoring of the trade in this mineral, which
facilitates contraband and generates illegal financial
flows that are later legitimized. Bolivia reiterates the
need to fight against tax havens that allow the integration
of illicit gains into the world financial system.

The challenges of managing natural resources are
reflected in the history and the current situation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Such resources are
among the factors that influence the prolongation and
changing dynamics of the conflict, which are reflected
in the fragmentation of armed groups that operate in
an increasingly coordinated manner, with humanitarian
consequences for populations that, in many cases, are
forced to abandon their homes.

Bolivia expresses its concern over the systematic
looting of natural resources in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo by armed groups, some members of the
armed forces and multinational companies that exploit
areas rich in diamonds and gold without oversight.
Monitoring areas rich in natural resources and their
sovereign administration is critical to promoting a
cessation of hostilities and economic development.

When a country maintains effective control of its
resources and there is political, it is possible to undertake
a structural change leading to stabilization and the
strengthening of the rule of law. The lack of control
over natural resources, added to political instability, are
challenges that should be resolved in the first instance
by the Congolese people. In that respect, it is important
to work to harmonize and coordinate the efforts of all
actors in respect of the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

With respect to the effectiveness of the sanctions
regime, Bolivia believes that the latter should not be
an end in themselves. Sanctions should be used as
the last resource following a failure to implement the
provisional measures set forth in the Charter of the
United Nations, and should be imposed only when
there is a threat to international peace and security
or an act of aggression. Bolivia also believes that the
design and preparation of sanctions must be regulated
by just and transparent procedures, allowing the clear
establishment of the conditions required of the States
or parties on which they are imposed. These measures
should be subject to periodic evaluations that allow
a balance to be struck between their effects and the
adjustments necessary to modify them in connection
with the evolution of the situation.

We stress that the only entity encharged with this
task is the Security Council, which must do so with the
aim of improving the desired results and to guarantee
the maintenance of international peace and security. The
tendency to implement and impose unilateral sanctions
seriously jeopardises multilateralism and threatens the
international order, undermining the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.
We believe that the commendable initiatives
undertaken by the African Union Peace and Security
Council, in the framework of the strategic concept for
the joint operations of the Group of Five for the Sahel,
could be replicated in Central Africa. The Group
addresses terrorism and transnational organized crime
by operating in border areas, based on a strategy and an
institutional framework supported by the international
community. We believe that this is a viable option
worthy of consideration.

With respect to the political agreement signed on
31 December 2016 between the Government and the
opposition, Bolivia commends the efforts ofthe Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Maman
Sambo Sidikou, to implement the agreement, including
the meeting held with the Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Bolivia encourages the efforts to build consensus
in the Rassemblement des forces politiques et sociales
de la Republique democratique du Congo and the
Majorite presidentielle. We call on the parties to
engage in inclusive dialogue focused on respect for
the Congolese Constitution, taking into account the
points of view of all and including the establishment
of the follow-up mechanism and the implementation
of confidence-building measures. The best tribute we
can pay to Michael and Zaida is to continue to work
for peace, stability and development in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

