Mr. Helder Lucas (Angola): At the outset, on
behalf of the Angolan delegation, I should like to
express our thanks and our recognition to the Executive
Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC),
Mr. Hans Blix; to the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr.
Mohamed ElBaradei; and to their personnel, who have
been working on the Iraq disarmament inspections.
Indeed, the commitment that they have shown in
fulfilling the task entrusted to them by the Security
Council, their competence and their dedication deserve
our recognition.

We deplore the fact that the inspectors were
unable to complete their task of disarming Iraq of its
weapons of mass destruction, and we also deplore the
fact that Iraq was unable to seize the last opportunity
afforded it by the Security Council. Angola made
repeated pleas to Iraq to cooperate fully and honestly
with the United Nations in complying with the Council
resolutions relating to its unconditional
disarmament - particularly resolution 1441 (2002) -
and to convince the international community as a
whole that it was making genuine and determined
efforts to disarm.
In the diplomatic process of trying to find a
peaceful settlement to the Iraqi crisis in the Security
Council, Angola consistently defended a peaceful
solution to the conflict and reiterated that the use of
force should always be a last resort. We also expressed
the position that the decision to be adopted should be
within the United Nations framework in order to count
on the international community's full support. This
position was based on our awareness that we derived
from our long experience of four decades of conflict in
Angola and of war's extremely negative impact on
society and populations.

Angola also has advocated the principle of
safeguarding the Security Council's primacy as the
most appropriate mechanism for regulating crisis
situations and for imposing international law through
compliance with its resolutions. For this to happen, we
always have defended the necessity of the Council's
unity so that the final settlement of the Iraqi crisis
could count on the full support of the international
community.

The main concern of the Angolan Government at
this moment when a diplomatic solution seems
definitely excluded, and war an inevitability, concerns
the immediate humanitarian consequences that war will
surely engender. Our main preoccupations are with the
innocent people, who will endure a huge sacrifice, and
for whom it is necessary to do something. It is our
belief that the international community should mobilize
all its efforts and resources in order to assist the
civilian populations when the conflict is over.
Moreover, it is our expectation that the Security
Council will remain seized of the matter and that it will
play its role, together with the entire United Nations
system, in facing the immense tasks of the post-conflict
period for the political, social and economic
reconstruction of Iraq.

