Mr. Wittig: I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate and for inviting me to
participate in my capacity as Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Japan, in its earlier
capacity as Chair of the PBC, contributed immensely
to building a strong case for the need for a
comprehensive, integrated and multidimensional
approach to peacebuilding. I will be brief, as I do not
want to keep Council members any longer from their
well-deserved lunch.

The Security Council should consider ways to
maximize the use of the Peacebuilding Commission's
advisory role. To this end, a stronger, organic and more
dynamic linkage between the Council and the
Commission is required throughout the various phases
of the Council's consideration of certain situations on
its agenda. Concretely, the Commission's advice on
early peacebuilding activities carried out by
peacekeepers could help the Security Council to clarify
and monitor progress in the implementation of the
mandates of peacekeeping missions.

By capitalizing on this Viable mechanism for
advice and monitoring, the Council would be able to
focus on the most immediate threats to international
peace and security while maintaining a closer and
substantive watching brief on countries which have
moved ahead on the continuum of peace. In doing so,
the Council would be able to capitalize on the PBC's
flexible working methods, thus enabling the Council to
reach out more broadly to relevant actors at the country
level.

Today, I would like to be put into practice some
form of the Commission's advisory functions to the
Council by sharing with the membership a few points
emanating from the most recent activities undertaken
by the PBC at the policy level.
A peacebuilding approach should be based on a
common vision among the multiple actors usually
engaged in a post-conflict situation. In promoting a
common vision, and in addition to strengthening its
linkages with the Security Council, the PBC is
increasingly focused on forging partnerships with the
international financial institutions and major regional
actors in order to help build coherence. We need to
promote longer-term political and financial support
that bolsters the nexus between security and
socioeconomic development, and to ensure the delivery
of concrete peace dividends. We need to support
national ownership by focusing early attention on
national capacity development, particularly in core
Government functions. We need to deepen analysis of
critical peacebuilding challenges and consistently
identify potential threats to peacebuilding processes.
And we need to focus attention on and address
complex regional challenges to peacebuilding, such as
narcotics and small arms trafficking.

Around each of these objectives, we need to take
forward the work and tailor our responses to the
specific needs of the country concerned and the will of
its people. Our actions need to be demand-driven and
their results must be nationally owned. For example,
we will focus on and divide labour around critical such
peacebuilding priorities as the security sector, the rule
of law, reintegration, economic revitalization and youth
employment.

The PBC will therefore continue to explore
concrete measures to deepen the United Nations
collaboration with the main actors at the country level.
34

It will promote mutual accountability between host
Governments and partners, and monitor progress
towards meeting critical peacebuilding objectives. This
work will require visible and sustained support from
the Security Council, the general membership and the
United Nations leadership. To this end, the PBC will
continue to improve its working methods, sharpen and
diversify its tools of engagement, and promote broader
and more coherent engagement by its individual
members.

We all know by now that peacebuilding is not a
linear process and that it takes many years to build the
national will, capacities and institutions needed to
sustain peace. The lack of a common vision and
coherence among the multiple actors in post-conflict
situations is a real challenge that undermines our
collective efforts to support countries on the path of
sustainable peace. While the United Nations is only
one among these actors, it carries the legitimacy and
political weight that confer leadership upon its role in
many post-conflict situations. We must live up to this
image and to that expectation.

