Ms. Rodriguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We support the statement delivered by delegation of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Cuba expresses its deep concern about the dangerous
deterioration of the situation of the Middle East since
the last open debate on the issue (see S/PV.8244). It
is extremely regrettable that, because of the repeated
obstruction of one of its members, the Security Council
has been unable to condemn the escalation of violence
and the tragic events that have occurred in the Gaza Strip
since 30 March and led to the deaths of dozens ofpeople
and more than 4,000 wounded. Cuba has repeatedly
condemned the use of excessive, disproportionate and
indiscriminate force by Israeli forces against civilians
in occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and especially the Gaza Strip, in serious and
flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and international humanitarian law. Like the majority
of members of the international community, Cuba
supported resolution ES-10/20, adopted by the General
Assembly at the resumption of its emergency special
session on 13 June, pursuant to which the Secretary-
General must present recommendations concerning an
international protection mechanism for the Palestinian
civilian population under Israeli occupation.

We once again condemn the illegal construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements in occupied Palestinian
territory, including the advancement, approval and
tendering of 3,500 homes in settlements in the West
Bank, moving forward plans to build 2,300 units and
the demolition and seizure of at least 84 Palestinian-
owned structures, while affecting the livelihoods of
Palestinians and resulting in their forced displacement.
All those cruel and destructive measures, along with
the criminal and illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip,
are not only grave violations of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, but also diminish the prospects of a two-
State solution and undermine the legitimate interests of
the Palestinian people and Arab nations.

Cuba reiterates its impassioned plea for the Security
Council to assume its responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations, in the interest of international
peace and security, by adopting the necessary
measures and demanding that Israel immediately end
its occupation of Palestinian territories, its aggressive
policies and colonizing practices, and that it comply
with Council resolutions on the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question - particularly resolution 2334
(2016).

We express our solidarity with the Palestinian
Government and people. We reiterate our unwavering
support for a broad, just, peaceful and lasting solution to
the Palestinian question - the centre of the Arab-Israeli
conflict - on the basis ofa two-State solution that will
allow the Palestinians to exercise their right to self-
determination, their right to an independent sovereign
State, with its capital in east Jerusalem and within pre-
1967 borders, and their right of return for refugees. We
will continue to support the accession of Palestine as a
full-fledged member of the United Nations.

Cuba reiterates its deep concern about and rejection
of the unilateral declaration of the President of the
United States recognizing Jerusalem as the capital of
Israel - a serious and flagrant violation of the United
Nations Charter, international law and relevant United
Nations resolutions. We call for an end to intervention
in other States' internal affairs, foreign aggression
and the support, financing and supplying of weapons
to terrorist groups in order to promote instability and
conflicts in the Middle East. We call for an end to
pretexts and arguments in the Council attempting to
legitimize the unilateral use of force and aggression
against sovereign States.

We demand the total and unconditional withdrawal
of Israel from the Syrian Golan and from all occupied
Arab territories. Any action taken or to be taken in order
to modify the legal, physical, demographic condition
or the institutional structure of the occupied Syrian
Golan, or any measures taken by Israel to exercise
its jurisdiction and administration in that territory
are violations of international law, international
agreements, the Charter and resolutions of the United
Nations, including resolution 497 (1981), and the Fourth
Geneva Convention.

Finally, Cuba expresses its total rejection of the
decision of the United States Government to withdraw
from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, the
nuclear agreement with Iran, and to reimpose sanctions
against that country, which represents a clear breach
of international commitments, undermines the norm
of coexistence among States and could provoke
grave consequences for stability and security in the
Middle East.

