The Secretary-General: Today, the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) comes to an abrupt end for reasons that are
unrelated to the vitally important work that it is
performing to implement the Dayton Peace Agreement.
The United Nations Mission has made a universally
recognized contribution to the re-establishment of the
rule of law and political stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina by transforming a 40,000-strong wartime
militia into a 14,000-strong professional police force.

But the State and its institutions are still fragile
and are under pressure from nationalist forces. Unless
an agreement can be reached on an orderly wind-down
of the Mission, the police in Bosnia will be left
unmonitored, unguided and unassisted. Key
programmes, including the control of the borders by a
professional State Border Service - a key instrument
for fighting contraband activities and illegal
immigration - will be left uncompleted. Further, the
long-planned handover to the European Union Police
Mission scheduled to take place at the year's end, when
UNMIBH would have successfully completed its
mandate, will be severely compromised.
I take this opportunity to express my sincere
gratitude to all men and women in UNMIBH for their
exemplary work, and to the nations which have
generously contributed their civilian police officers to
this critical and complex mandate.

The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina are
beginning to reap the fruits of the international
community's assistance after the country was ripped
apart by war from 1992 to 1995. It would be most
unfortunate if the premature termination of UNMIBH's
mandate were to set back that process. It would be
perceived throughout the Balkans as a diminution of
the international community's commitment to stability
in the region.

More generally, I remain convinced that United
Nations peacekeeping is an indispensable tool for the
international community's promotion of global peace
and security. I appeal to members of the Security
Council to intensify the high-level negotiations,
including in capitals, of the past weeks so as to find a
solution acceptable to all concerned that respects the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
treaty obligations of Member States. The world cannot
afford a situation in which the Security Council is
deeply divided on such an important issue which may
have implications for all peace operations.

