Mr. Kubis: On 10 July, Prime Minister Al-Abadi
announced the liberation of Mosul, attributing that
victory to the Iraqi security forces' planning and
execution as the only fighting force present on the
ground. Praising the Iraqi security forces, including the
popular mobilization forces, as well as the Peshmerga
and tribal and local volunteers, he also thanked all the
countries that supported Iraq in the war on terrorism.

Our prayers and thoughts go to all those killed and
wounded, military and civilians both, and to their loved
ones. It is critical that the families of the martyrs and
wounded receive the necessary support.

Per Prime Minister Al-Abadi's directives, the
liberation operation was marked by an exceptional
effort on the part of the liberation forces and their
international partners to save and protect the civilian
population. By adopting a humanitarian concept of
operations, they reduced civilian losses and suffering.
They also showed a readiness to hold themselves and
others accountable for any Violations.

In stark contrast, Da'esh terrorists have shown
absolute disregard for human lives and civilization. They
booby-trapped and destroyed houses and infrastructure
as well as religious and cultural monuments, including
the iconic monument of Islamic civilization, the
Great Al-Nuri mosque and its Al-Hadba minaret.
They deliberately targeted civilians, indiscriminately
shelling them in the liberated areas, using them as
human shields, locking them in their homes and using
rooftop snipers to kill people - women, children and
men - attempting to flee to safety. They butchered
them by using suicide bombers, who included females
and brainwashed children, including in camps for
internally displaced persons (IDPs).

The fighting in Mosul has also claimed the lives
of numerous local and international journalists. Their
sacrifices have not been in vain; free and impartial
media are essential to safeguard the public interest
and to ensure the necessary degree of transparency
and accountability. Here I wish also to acknowledge
the access that the Iraqi authorities, including those of
the Kurdistan region, provided for both national and
international media during the Mosul campaign.

The historic liberation of Mosul should not
overshadow the fact that the road ahead is extremely
challenging. Reclaiming the remaining territories still
under Da'esh control in other parts of Ninawa and
Anbar governorates; in Hawijah, Kirkuk governorate;
and in pockets in other governorates will not be easy.
Moreover, Da'esh supporters continue their vicious
terrorist activities against civilians in Iraq and beyond.

Hand in hand with liberation comes demining,
stabilization and reconstruction so as to enable the
return of IDPs as well as the elimination of Da'esh
cells, criminal gangs and militias operating outside of
the control of the Government. The enforcement of law
and order, the rule of law, justice and accountability,
as well as reforms, good governance and development,
including in the southern provinces, is also crucial.
To turn the gains of the military victory into stability,
security, justice and development, the Government
will have to do everything possible to give the people
back their lives in security and dignity. To achieve
that, Iraq will continue to need substantial regional and
international support. Victory cannot be achieved by
just supporting the military campaign.
It is encouraging that the recent regional tour of
Prime Minister Al Abadi in June to the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Kuwait
confirmed the willingness of those countries to
continue and enhance their support. I pay tribute to all
Iraq's partners, including those from the international
anti-Da'esh coalition, and urge them to continue
to stand with Iraq and its people and to continue
providing support.

Da'esh's ultimate defeat can be secured only through
inclusive solutions and by addressing the grievances,
needs and aspirations of the Iraqi people. A national
settlement and societal reconciliation are indispensable
parts of a broader comprehensive effort towards
achieving long-term unity, stability and prosperity.

I applaud the guidance of the Marja'iya religious
authorities who, in their victory sermons, stressed
that Iraqis need to learn from what happened in the
years before Da'esh and remedy the long-standing
problems. Furthermore, they stated that using Violence,
oppression and sectarianism as a means to an end only
causes destruction and leaves the country vulnerable to
interference by regional and international actors, where
there is no winner and Iraq is first among the losers;
that all those in positions of power and Government
have to work according to a principle that sees all
citizens as equal in their rights and duties regardless
of religion, sect, ethnicity or nationality. Were that
approach implemented strictly, it would restore the
people's trust in the Government and its institutions.
The Marja'iya's statements also mentioned the need to
combat financial and administrative corruption, and
sect- and party-linked quotas, and to ensure standards
of competence and professionalism in the appointment
of Government officials.

The United Nations is committed to further
facilitating processes of national settlement and
grassroots societal reconciliation, in full coordination
with the Government of Iraq and in cooperation with
all Iraqi stakeholders, including women and youth, to
address the concerns of all components, communities,
groups and citizens in a manner that is just and fair.

At a meeting, on 7 June, of political parties in
the Kurdistan region of Iraq, chaired by President
Barzani, a decision was made to hold a referendum
on 25 September with the question: "Do you want the
Kurdistan region and the Kurdistani disputed areas
outside the administration of the Kurdistan region to
become an independent state?" On 11 July, President
Barzani reiterated, during his address to the European
Parliament in Brussels, the determination to hold the
referendum as planned, while maintaining that no
country had clearly opposed it.

Such an important issue ought not to be pursued
without a common understanding between the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government.
In line with the recommendations of Secretary-General
Guterres, I urge both parties to enter into negotiations
without further delay, in the spirit of genuine
partnership and based on the Constitution, to urgently
find common ground and a road map to address this
and other critical topics, notably the implementation of
article 140 of the Constitution, on disputed territories,
including the status of Kirkuk, budgetary issues, oil
and revenue sharing, and other areas and principles that
determine the relations between the federal Government
and the Kurdistan Regional Government. The absence
of meaningful political dialogue and negotiations
could turn a conflict of interests into a different kind
of conflict.

Complex electoral processes loom in Iraq,
including in the Kurdistan region of Iraq, this and
next year. On 21 June, the Independent High Electoral
Commission informed that it will not be able to conduct
the governorate council elections as scheduled on
16 September. It is of primary importance that all the
necessary measures be taken to ensure, first, that the
Council of Representatives elections be held at the
latest in May 2018, as required by the Constitution,
and, secondly, that the governorate council elections
be rescheduled.

The cumulative number of people displaced since
military operations began in October is now nearing
1 million individuals, although the rate at which people
are fleeing the fighting has slowed in recent weeks.

Under the United Nations Development Programme
Funding Facility for Immediate Stabilization, by July
2017 more than 1,050 projects were under way or had
been completed in 23 liberated towns and districts
in Anbar, Ninewa, Salah al-Din, Diyala and Kirkuk
governorates. Now that Mosul has been fully liberated,
the scope of projects there will increase exponentially.

Of particular concern is the rising popular
sentiment in favour of collective punishment of families
perceived to be associated with Da'esh. Countrywide,
Iraqis perceived to have links with Da'esh are being
increasingly subjected to evictions, the confiscation of
homes, and other retribution and revenge measures. The
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
has recommended that the Prime Minister take urgent
steps, within his prerogative, to maintain the rule of
law and order and halt evictions and vindictive acts.

UNAMI has prioritized accountability to provide
justice to individuals affected by human rights
violations and abuses committed in the ongoing armed
conflict. Given the large scale of serious crimes,
UNAMI is pursuing a strategy at the national level with
a view to allowing domestic courts to have jurisdiction
over international crimes. That would also complement
international initiatives to gather evidence on the most
serious crimes committed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant.

As the fight to eliminate Da'esh from Iraq comes to
a close, the United Nations is repositioning its responses
to sexual violence with a focus on supporting survivors
of sexual violence in reintegrating back into their
communities. I welcome the renewed commitment of
the Government of Iraq to ensuring the implementation
of the joint communique and the national action plan.

The United Nations, at the highest levels, has
engaged with senior Iraqi officials on the establishment
of the Interministerial Committee on Grave Child
Rights Violations. The Committee is expected to
provide a forum to coordinate a response by the Iraqi
authorities with regard to issues pertaining to children
in armed conflict, including occasional reports of
recruitment and the use of children by pro-Government
forces. Furthermore, we urge the Government of Iraq
to ensure that children arrested by security forces,
including for terrorism-related charges, are transferred
to juvenile institutions.

The Mission continues to work with the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government
towards the implementation of the Iraqi national action
plan on resolution 1325 (2000) where funding limitations
have impeded its implementation. I call on international
partners to pledge support in particular to specialized
programmes for women and female-headed households.

The issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals and missing Kuwaiti property was one of the
key topics of the visit of Prime Minister Al-Abadi to
Kuwait on 21 June. In a meeting with the Amir of the
State of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah,
the parties discussed means to settle all outstanding
issues related to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990.

On 22 and 24 May, Iraq, for the first time in 14
years, successfully hosted in Baghdad the ninety-ninth
session of the Technical Subcommittee of the tripartite
mechanism, and the forty-fourth session of the
Tripartite Commission. I echo the statement (SC/12870)
issued by the Security Council, on 14 June, calling on
Iraq and Kuwait to continue their cooperation through
the tripartite mechanism and to depend on steadfast
commitment, action and the adoption of new and
innovative ways to push this file forward.

