I would like to thank Special Representative Shearer for his dedication to South Sudan and for his briefing today. Under-Secretary-General Lowcock's briefing on the humanitarian situation is a reminder that we all need to come together to fight hunger in South Sudan. We also appreciate the update from our Vietnamese colleague on the activities of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan. Today the United States welcomes the progress that has been made in implementing the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, forming the Transitional Government of National Unity and building institutions. We also welcome the announcement on 9 December by South Sudan's presidency of an agreement to promptly appoint officials to state- and county-level Government positions and to the Transitional National Legislative Assembly. The United States looks forward to those appointments being completed as soon as possible. We fully recognize the domestic, regional and international efforts in support of achieving peace in South Sudan. However, for many in South Sudan, peace remains elusive. My colleagues met with a group of displaced persons in South Sudan only last week. They were just a few of the more than 1.6 million who remain unable to return to their homes due to the unstable security situation. A representative from that group told us, "Everyone is saying peace, peace, peace, but we don't see it. There is no peace." Violence at the subnational level continues to cause civilian casualties, women and girls continue to be subjected to conflict-related sexual violence and humanitarian workers, as was noted earlier, continue to be killed. Floods and violence continue to threaten the civilian population, particularly in Jonglei state, where humanitarian actors will need full, safe and unimpeded access to address the famine that is happening today. As the recently released Integrated Food Security Phase Classification data tells us, hundreds of thousands of people in South Sudan are in immediate danger of starving to death in conditions we have not seen since 2017, when famine was last declared. Now is the time for all of us, particularly South Sudan's leadership, to redouble efforts to ensure the purposeful implementation of the peace process. The Government must work quickly to build trust, consolidate the gains of peace and continue to make progress, particularly in the areas of governance, security arrangements and transitional justice. Implementation must take into account the needs and perspectives of women and girls, young people and internally displaced persons, and it must yield tangible benefits for the people of South Sudan. That must include the full, effective and meaningful participation of women in all spheres and at all levels of political leadership and the peace process. It must also encourage full implementation of the chapter V provisions of the Revitalized Agreement relating to transitional justice, including the establishment of a hybrid court, a compensation and reparation authority and a commission for truth, reconciliation and healing. Such justice efforts are critical to stopping the cycle of violence and supporting recovery. We encourage a greater leadership role for the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and other regional partners that continue to have a vested interest in the stability of the region. The United States remains the largest provider of humanitarian assistance funding in South Sudan and we have increased that assistance during the coronavirus disease pandemic. During the 2020 fiscal year the United States provided nearly $982 million in humanitarian assistance to support the response to the crisis in South Sudan and for South Sudanese refugees in neighbouring countries. However, needs clearly outpace the funding. Donors will have to immediately and significantly increase their contributions to South Sudan in order to save lives there. We continue to be a steadfast supporter of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and its life-saving work to protect civilians in conflict. We welcome and encourage continued UNMISS deployments in Jonglei and elsewhere to provide protection and deter violence against civilians. The protection of civilians, including displaced persons, remains an essential task. As UNMISS continues to transition protection-of-civilian sites to camps for internally displaced persons and to turn security responsibility over to the Government of South Sudan, we urge for meaningful coordination and transparency with the humanitarian community and with the displaced themselves. Any future transitions should be based on security conditions, as well as the wishes and needs of displaced persons. We look forward to beginning the process to renew the UNMISS mandate next year. We plan to work closely with South Sudan and all members of the Council to ensure that UNMISS can respond to and address the current challenges in the country. On sanctions, the Security Council has committed to an ongoing review of all sanctions measures on South Sudan and is working to establish a clear benchmarking process to assess the arms embargo. Repeated public statements by South Sudan's leadership that the arms embargo should be removed to allow for the purchase of weapons to supply the unified forces are disingenuous. There is already a clear exemption procedure for the arms embargo that the Government of South Sudan can use if it requires any arms or materials to support the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement. I do not need to remind the Council of the devastating consequences for stability in the region and for the people of South Sudan when Government and opposition forces used their weapons to wage the deadliest civil war Africa has seen in decades, often using such weapons against civilian men, women and children. We call on South Sudan's leadership to engage in a serious conversation about the tangible steps it can take to assure the international community that any weapons in the Government's possession will not be turned against civilians or used to undermine the peace process. The United States stands ready to support South Sudan in that endeavour. In conclusion, the United States is committed to a better future for the people of South Sudan. We are here to work with the transitional Government as well as the other members of the Council to help the country and the region achieve peace and prosperity.
