Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for
his precise and enlightening briefing, as well as for the
clear warning bells he has sounded today. We also thank
him and his team for their exemplary commitment.

We have been saying for years that the reality on
the ground is wrongly described as the status quo; it is
in fact marked by a daily deterioration of the situation,
which could erupt into an open crisis at any time in
Gaza, Jerusalem or the West Bank. Decade after
decade, peace has given way not only on the ground, but
also in speeches, in minds and in hearts, as successive
generations of Palestinians and Israelis lose hope for
a resolution of the conflict. The ongoing occupation,
the intensification of settlement activities in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem and the blockade imposed
on Gaza, as well as the inter-Palestinian division and
the continued violence, are creating an untenable
and unstable situation, as demonstrated by the three
conflicts that have struck Gaza over the past decade. In
that context and for the reasons Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
outlined, May will be a month of grave danger. The
elements for escalation and even conflagration are
present. It is therefore urgent for us to coordinate our
efforts to convey the right message to the stakeholders.

The ongoing situation in Gaza - on which my
first and main point will focus - is yet another tragic
illustration of the human consequences resulting from
the stalemate in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In
addition to the ongoing risk of an armed escalation
that those tensions are fuelling, the outcome of the
repression of the weekly demonstrations that have been
taking place for a month is tragic. After four consecutive
Fridays of protests in Gaza near the border with Israel,
at least 35 people have been killed, including two
minors and two journalists, as well as several hundred
wounded by bullets.

We are extremely concerned by those developments
and their recurrence, which aggravate an already tense
situation in the Gaza Strip. A line was crossed in the
violence from the first Friday of protests, and the level
of violence has remained constant since then. The very
heavy toll of the demonstrations in recent weeks, which
we deplore, is directly linked to the inadequate and
disproportionate response now regularly offered by
the Israeli security forces. Full light must be shed on
these serious events. We take note ofthe announcement
made by the Israeli Defence Forces concerning the
establishment of a fact-finding mechanism. Beyond
those first steps, we recall the Secretary-General's
request for an independent and transparent inquiry.

Two fundamental requirements must immediately
be put in place in order to avoid having the same causes
produce the same dramatic effects during the next two
Fridays and around the dates of 14 and 15 May. The first
requirement is respect for international humanitarian
law, which is fully applicable in the Gaza Strip, in
particular the responsibility to protect civilians.

The second requirement is respect for human
rights, in particular the right to demonstrate peacefully.
The measures taken to preserve the security of Israel,
which is a legitimate concern and one that we share,
must fall within the framework of international human
rights law. We therefore call on the Israeli authorities
to exercise judgement, restraint and the proportionate
use of such force as is strictly necessary. We condemn
the successive, indiscriminate firings on protesters
over the past month. Israel is a democracy and as such
must apply standard international rules of engagement
in the maintenance of order. The use of lethal weapons
must be rejected when facing unarmed demonstrators
who pose no serious or imminent threat. Several Israeli
and Palestinian non-governmental organizations have
conveyed the same message. At the same time, we call
on protesters to refrain from all outbursts and violence,
and we caution those, in particular Hamas, who would
seek to take over and exploit the demonstrations
or use them to challenge Israel's security along the
security fence.

In Gaza, but also in the West Bank and Jerusalem,
where the protest movement threatens to spread in
the coming weeks, the risk that the situation will
degenerate and escape control is extremely high, and
this is taking place in an already tense regional context.
Everyone must therefore show restraint and a spirit of
responsibility. It is up to the Council to speak with a
strong voice so as to prevent escalation. The silence
of the Council since the beginning of the crisis must
immediately give way to a sign of unity and a clear
public expression.

I come to my second point. The violence of recent
weeks cannot be dissociated from the more general
situation in the Gaza Strip, which itself must not be
separated from the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as a
whole. The deterioration in the humanitarian situation
in Gaza over the past year, characterized in particular
by an unprecedented energy crisis and the worsening of
the wage crisis, is closely linked to the inter-Palestinian
division. That deterioration adds to the structural
humanitarian crisis imposed by the Israeli blockade,
which has lasted for more than a decade. It feeds
the ongoing protest movement among a very young
population, which feels it has nothing to lose.

Beyond the de-escalation that is required in the
immediate future,there willbe nolasting solutionin Gaza
without Palestinian reconciliation under the principles
endorsed by the Palestine Liberation Organization, and
without the exercise by the Palestinian Authority of the
full extent of its authority in Gaza. In that regard, we
call for the implementation of the agreement reached
in Cairo on 12 October under the auspices of the
Egyptian authorities. That process must lead to a rapid
improvement in the living conditions of the population
in Gaza. We encourage the Palestinian Authority to
take concrete steps in that direction. Beyond that, only
a lifting of the blockade and the restrictions imposed on
Gaza, with the necessary security guarantees for Israel,
will meet the needs and expectations of the population.
France stands ready to support those efforts.

In the current extremely fragile situation, the
presence of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) among the population, two-thirds of which
is comprised of Palestinian refugees, is one of the last
remaining stabilizing elements in Gaza. An interruption
of UNRWA services, which could take place as early
as this summer, would hasten the Gaza Strip's falling
into chaos. We therefore once again call on the United
States not to give up the historic and essential role it has
played with UNRWA. We also call for increased efforts
on the part of all donors to the Agency, which were
announced last month during the Rome Conference and
which will have to continue. As you know, France is
playing its part in those efforts.

Turning to my final point, we must not separate
the situation in Gaza from the Palestinian question
as a whole. Gaza is an integral part of the Palestinian
territories. There will be no Palestinian State without
Gaza, and therefore no viable peace agreement with
Israel without Palestinian unity. Neither will there be
a peace agreement between Israelis and Palestinians
outside the internationally agreed parameters, the
principal elements of which I shall recall here once
again: two States living in peace and security along
secure and recognized borders; frontiers based on
the 1967 lines, with exchanges of mutually agreed
territories; Jerusalem as the future capital of the two
States with, in the meantime, no change in the status of
the city, as required by resolution 478 (1980), including
the location of embassies; and a concerted, realistic and
fair solution for Palestinian refugees.

Any negotiation must be within that framework,
which itself is based on international law and Security
Council resolutions. Those parameters are not options
or a menu from which we may choose; they are the
bedrock ofany peace plan and ofany future negotiations.
In that context, we have a collective responsibility
within the Council to ensure the respect of those
parameters, which we have defined together and which
are recalled by resolution 2334 (2016), adopted a little
more than a year ago. The Gaza Strip is once again
on the edge of the abyss. A new conflict, beyond the
devastating consequences already mentioned, would
aggravate regional tensions, which have reached an
unprecedented level along Israel's border. The ongoing
escalation in Gaza is also strengthening radicals and
providing all terrorist movements with additional
recruitment arguments.

Finally, with the approach of a high-risk May in
Jerusalem, current tensions contribute to the ongoing
shift from a political conflict that can be resolved
through concessions made by the parties to a religious
conflict in which it would be impossible to reach a
compromise. France will never allow such a dramatic
prospect for Israelis, Palestinians and regional security
to become a reality. That is why we remain determined
to act. We all know that the destinies of Israelis and
Palestinians are linked: neither of the two peoples will
achieve their national aspirations at the expense of the
other. France is not choosing sides. It is the friend of
both Israelis and Palestinians, and it is in that capacity
that it pursues its clear goal: the implementation,
through dialogue, of a political solution for a just and
lasting peace between Israel and Palestine.

