Mr. Escalante Hasbl'in (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Indonesia for convening this open
debate and today's briefers for their statements.

As we all know, this debate is being held in a
context of major challenges. As a country committed to
peace, we reiterate our strong support for the initiatives
led by the Organization. The United Nations has been
undertaking peacekeeping missions for more than
70 years in various conflict zones around the world.
We take this opportunity to honour the heroic work
of the tens of thousands of uniformed and civilian
peacekeeping personnel who have faced numerous
dangerous situations over the years.

El Salvador has a historic commitment to
peacekeeping operations and is currently contributing
to eight of them through military and police
contingents, with a total of 289 troops, in support of
various tasks helping to maintain international peace
and security and in seeking to promote human rights
and protect humanitarian aid. We are committed to
the effective fulfilment of the specific mandates of
each mission and to complying with United Nations
performance standards and the codes of conduct agreed
among Member States. Therefore, in order to fulfil this
commitment to the best of our ability, we consider it of
great importance to provide peacekeeping operations
personnel with the necessary capabilities. This will
ensure that they have the necessary tools to guarantee
that each mission is conducted professionally, capably
and effectively in resolving short-term conflicts and
sustaining long-term peace.

In that connection, it is important to train, build
the capacities of and equip our uniformed and civilian
personnel prior to their deployment and, as far as
possible, build the specialized capacities needed for each
case. These include language skills and approaches to
improve force generation, the operational availability of
equipment and the sustainability of existing equipment.

At the same time, we believe it important to enhance
understanding of the application of international law
and human rights, including international humanitarian
law, with the particular aim of protecting civilians
and with a special emphasis on protecting the most
vulnerable groups. Of course, we cannot overlook
the essential need for the gender perspective here,
including the empowerment of women, so as to
address the perceptions, situations, experiences and
specific abilities of women. We believe that educating
staff on a broader gender perspective will provide
a complementary and fundamental approach to this
mechanism, so as to better understand and confront the
different challenges that we all face on the ground.

We would like to highlight that, at the national level,
we are making huge efforts to improve training for
our personnel through our Peace Operations Training
Centre, which is an institution attached to El Salvador's
Ministry of Defence. We provide comprehensive
training for our military personnel and, through
internal agreements, also train elements of our national
civil police, military observers and future trainers.

In addition, and in coordination with the Department
of Peace Operations (DPO), our police staff were
assessed by the Selection Assistance and Assessment
Team in late 2018, which prepared police officers
for rapid deployment and ensured they were ready to
execute their mandates successfully on the ground. We
are grateful to DPO for its collaboration in organizing
the assessment and we are working with it on follow-
up activities. As complementary measures, we are also
continuing to train our staff in language skills, with
courses through public and private partnerships, as well
as in other pertinent disciplines, such as marksmanship
and handling various kinds of vehicles.

We must promote innovative approaches to achieve
these aspirations. At the same time, we must strengthen
traditional approaches such as partnerships and
triangular cooperation among States and other relevant
stakeholders, as well as countries' joint contributions.
At the same time, we underscore the need to increase
financing to better enhance capacity-building. We take
this opportunity to thank those partner countries that
have supported us over the years in order to increase our
participation in terms of the number and capabilities
of our staff. We are currently the largest contributor
of the Central American region. We also call on those
countries that are in a position to continue making these
contributions to do so for these initiatives.

El Salvador would also like to reiterate its support
for the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, which we believe plays an important role in
the development and implementation of training on the
matter. We have no doubt that this initiative will make a
vital contribution to the activities of the United Nations
in this area.

Finally, we wish to stress how essential it is to
ensure training for peacekeeping personnel enjoys
greater predictability and sustainability. This will help
them to bolster their performance and achieve their
objectives, including those in mission mandates. The
Organization can therefore count on my country to
formulate initiatives that seek to take practical, realistic
and effective action and to ensure that peacekeeping
personnel are given the necessary resources so that
they can reach their maximum potential.

