Mr. J a'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): It gives me great pleasure to congratulate the
sisterly country of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya on its
election to the Security Council and on the great trust
that Member States have placed in it. I should also like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. I wish
you every success in your new responsibilities. I would
also like to thank the Permanent Representative of the
friendly country of Italy for his excellent leadership of
the Council in December.

When a given issue is put before the Security
Council on an urgent basis it is because that issue has
been, as it were, admitted to the intensive care unit.
That is precisely the case today. Israel's escalation of
military aggression and its collective siege against the
Palestinian people in Gaza, which reminds us of dark
chapters of humankind's history, both require the
urgent attention of the Security Council. The Council
must act in a manner that will serve to restore the trust
of the international community in the rule of law in a
way that does not exclude anyone. The Council must
also protect the unarmed Palestinian people against the
irresponsible Israeli war machine. In so doing, the
Council would foster the desire of peoples for peace.

Israel's decision to declare the Gaza Strip a
hostile entity constitutes a unilateral interpretation of
international law that has been rejected as riding
roughshod over the principles of international law,
which hold that collective punishment is a war crime.
Israel must be held accountable for that crime and bear
its legal and political consequences. Israel's
irresponsible decision gives free reign to its occupying
forces in occupied Palestinian territory to commit war
crimes against the unarmed Palestinian people,
implement its policy of collective siege, continue its
assassinations and closures of crossing points, establish
hundreds of military checkpoints and cut off electricity,
fuel, food and medical supplies from the residents of
the entire Gaza Strip.

Israel's claim that it has withdrawn from Gaza is
a blatant distortion of the facts. Israel controls
international borders and all crossing points. It violates
Gaza hourly. It controls the flow of food, medicines,
water and electricity. In short, Israel, the occupying
Power, as defined under international law, has
transformed Gaza into a sealed ghetto and the West
Bank into besieged bantustans.

It is self-evident that Israel would not have dared
to commit those inhuman violations, continue to
violate international law, persevere in its defiance of
international public opinion and move ahead with its
feverish quest to undermine the already shaky peace
process in the Middle East, had it not been for the huge
vacuum in terms of commitment on the part of
influential countries vis-a-vis the launch of a genuine
peace process to establish a just and comprehensive
peace, in accordance with the well-known international
terms of reference. Its obstinacy is also due to the lack
of active pressure on Israel to abide by its legal
obligations under the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention
and international humanitarian law.

The Security Council and the international
community must break out of their impotence and
paralysis and deter Israel from its bloody policies.
They must take urgent steps with regard to those illegal
Israeli policies and abandon double standards, so as to
preserve the credibility of their role in the maintenance
of international peace and security.

Because the Security Council has yet to do that,
Israel continues to refuse to implement the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice (ICJ)
regarding the need to stop construction and to demolish
what has been built of the racist wall of separation that
Israel is building on occupied Palestinian land. Israel
also continues to refuse to halt the building of
settlements on occupied Arab territories and imposes
terms on the peace process that are impossible to meet.

Between 2000 and 2007, Israel killed 4,437
Palestinians, of whom 867 were minors. That is in
contrast to the 119 Israeli minors killed in the same
period. Those figures, provided by an Israeli human
rights centre, prove that Israel is a terrorist country that
is eight times more violent than the Palestinian
resistance, which Israel claims is a source of terrorism
against it. We must keep in mind that the Palestinians'
firing of rockets was initially a Palestinian reaction to
Israel's assassination of Palestinians in Gaza. Given
this situation, it is therefore not surprising that former
United States President Jimmy Carter and Bishop
Desmond Tutu have described Israel as a racist State.

When the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) issues an urgent call for relief, it must be
heard by the Security Council as a loud alarm, for it
signals a great imbalance in terms of the reaction of the
United Nations, and of the Council in particular, in the
face of the tragic situation in Gaza as a result of
Israel's criminal actions against the Palestinian people.
When hundreds of intergovernmental and non-
governmental organizations and numerous United
Nations specialized agencies call for urgent action to
save the people of Gaza and the cities of the West Bank
under Israeli occupation, it means that there is
something wrong in some international moral and
political decision-making circles.

There is something wrong, and it is causing more
despair, tension, frustration and violence and damaging
the prospects for peace. Some might wonder what
prompts a certain group to issue one resolution after
another on a marginal issue that has nothing to do with
the maintenance of international peace and security,
while that same group resists any genuine and honest
international effort seeking to hold Israel accountable
before the Security Council for its criminal practices
and its barbaric aggression against the Palestinian
people. That aggression is clearly intended to deprive
Palestinians of their rights, bring them to their knees
and create chasms in their national defences. The only
result of such negativity by some parties will be to
push the region towards an explosion, to convince the
people of the region that resisting Israeli aggression is
the only solution and that any talk of a futile peace
serves only the continuation of Israeli occupation and
aggression.

The current escalating situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories can withstand no further silence
or disregard on the part of a Security Council that
exempts Israel from abiding by the principles of
international law. It requires strong intervention in
order to put a stop to that exemption and to make
Israeli policymakers and decision-makers understand
that they are not above the law and that they are
accountable for their transgressions, for their worship
of violence and for the extremism and racism to which
they have fallen prey. Those decision-makers must
understand that the continued occupation, over
decades, has left the Palestinian people with no other
choice but to resist the occupation, through legitimate
means guaranteed by international legitimacy and
international law.

Israeli aggression against the Palestinian people
started decades ago, long before the emergence of the
Hamas movement. Throughout that time, Israel has
continued its daily assassinations, daily violations,

daily arrest campaigns, daily siege, daily starving of
the Palestinian people, daily building of settlements
and daily provocations.

Anyone who listened to the statement of the
Israeli representative would immediately understand
that Israel's interpretation of its occupation of the
Palestinian territories is unique and without parallel.
He believes that the Palestinians must accept the
occupation, worship its practices and the oppression it
brings and praise the daily assassinations carried out
around the clock by Israel. The practices of the Israeli
Government against the Palestinian people constitute
true terrorism and must be stopped.

The Israeli representative's claim that his country
desires peace is not substantiated by Israel's actions,
which include settlement-building; the imposition of
sieges; assassinations; the building of the wall; the
forcible annexation of other people's lands; the closing
of crossing points; the cutting off of electricity, water,
and supplies of food and medicine; and the arrests of
leaders of the Palestinian people and members of their
Legislative Council, who have been democratically
elected for years. The fruits of true peace and true
security must be enjoyed by everyone in the region, not
just the Israelis, because peace and security are human
rights belonging to all, regardless of colour, religion or
race. The right to self-defence too applies to all,
including the Palestinians; self-defence cannot be a
racist principle tailored to Israeli measurements and the
occupation's standards.

The Security Council today is urgently required
to take immediate measures to compel Israel, the
occupying Power, to abide by the principles of
international law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949, by putting an end to the practice
of holding millions of Palestinians hostage to political
greed that aims at collectively punishing that people
for having made a political choice to reject Israeli
occupation.

