Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): First let me
thank the Secretary-General for his report and Under-
Secretary-General Miyet for his briefing on the
modalities of a possible United Nations role in the
implementation of the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities signed by Ethiopia and Eritrea. Ijoin other
delegations in commending you, Mr. President, for
having convened this open meeting. I also wish to
express my delegation's appreciation for the crucial
role played by the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and its Algerian presidency. We welcome the
close cooperation envisaged in the report between the
United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE) and the OAU.

Obviously, we are also grateful to Ethiopia and
Eritrea for having signed the Agreement on Cessation
of Hostilities. We agree with the Secretary-General's
assessment that to date, the parties have shown the
commitment required to ensure the implementation of
that Agreement. But implicit in this assessment is the
reminder that we are only at the beginning of the peace
process. It is the depth of the continuing commitment
to real peace on the part of both countries that will
determine the success or failure of the operation we are
invited to support.

In that respect, we believe that much more can be
done. Both countries now have it in their power to take
concrete steps to restore confidence in each other. One
such step would be to put an end to all mutual
recriminations and other forms of propaganda and to
start treating each other's nationals in a more decent
and humane fashion. The Secretary-General's report
contains extensive provisions on UNMEE's public
information component, and we are gratified to read
that both the Ethiopian and Eritrean authorities have
expressed their willingness to provide UNMEE with air
time on their national radio and television stations. But
that will be effective only if the remaining air time is
not clogged with poisonous propaganda against the
other country.

We endorse the Secretary-General's appeal to
Ethiopia and Eritrea to sustain the political will they
have displayed in concluding the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities, and it is clear that the real test
of that political will lies in the progress achieved in the
proximity talks. It may be inevitable that the Secretary-
General's report contains only scant information on
this matter, and we also appreciate the constraints of an
open Security Council meeting in this respect, but if
the Security Council is expected to pronounce itself on
the expansion of UNMEE, it will have to know more
than what is contained in paragraph 4 of the Secretary-
General's report - that is, that during the latest round
of proximity talks in Washington "the parties discussed
modalities for the delimitation and demarcation of the
border and the issue of compensation".

It is precisely this very brief summary that gives
rise to further questions as far as my delegation is
concerned. The Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities
presupposes that the United Nations peacekeeping
operation will terminate with the successful conclusion
of the delimitation and demarcation of the border. This
seems a logical presumption, as disagreement on the
course of the border supposedly was the sole cause of
the conflict. But then my delegation would like to
know exactly how the question of compensation comes
into play. Does a successful conclusion of the
delimitation and demarcation of the border hinge on
prior agreement on compensation? And what is it that
needs to be compensated for? What kind of claims, and
whose claims, are we actually talking about? We agree
with the Secretary-General that it cannot be expected
that UNMEE would be deployed indefinitely, but this
is precisely why we feel the Security Council should
insist on greater clarity, both with regard to the
outstanding issues in the proximity talks and on the
extent to which a solution of these issues would be a
prerequisite for the termination of UNMEE. Without
that information, my delegation would find it difficult
to act on the Secretary-General's recommendations. In
this connection, it is indeed important that the
Secretary-General's special representative will be
given observer status at the proximity talks. We hope
that his appointment is imminent.

As to the composition of the military component
of UNMEE, we welcome the inclusion of a training
cell in itself. But recent experience has demonstrated
the crucial importance of taking on only well-trained
units in United Nations peacekeeping operations. We
would be grateful for assurances from the Secretariat
that this time only adequately trained and adequately
equipped units will be selected.

It is clear that the human cost of the conflict has
been huge. As much as peacekeeping is now on our
agenda, we should not lose sight of the complex
humanitarian operations that are awaiting us. The
Secretary-General, rightly in our view, proposes an
interface, the civil/military coordination centre, to align
peacekeeping tasks and activities with those of the
humanitarian organizations. We hope that in its future
reports to the Council the Secretariat will continue to
include a substantive humanitarian segment, including
references to vulnerable categories of persons, such as
Eritreans previously expelled from Ethiopia and
Ethiopians who are to be repatriated to Ethiopia.

Our relief over the present positive outlook for
peace should not make us oblivious to the fact that on
17 May the Council adopted resolution 1298 (2000)
imposing an arms embargo on the parties. So long as a
final peace agreement has not been concluded, the
international community should remain vigilant to
ensure that the current peace process is not endangered
by illegal arms supplies. Paragraph 12 of that
resolution requests United Nations bodies and other
organizations and interested parties to report to the
sanctions Committee on violations of the measures
concerned. We would like to know whether UNMEE is
supposed to report on possible violations of sanctions
wherever they come to its knowledge.

In conclusion, let me stress again the importance
of the attitude of the parties themselves. Both countries
face a deplorable economic situation which would
greatly benefit from rapid demobilization and
demilitarization. Both Governments should now focus
on development. They owe that to their peoples, who
have been led to the slaughter for no good reason, and
certainly with no results to boast of. This was a war
that neither country could afford and that should never
have taken place.

