Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin my statement by congratulating Japan on
its ascension to the presidency of the Security Council
and by thanking you, Sir, for your invitation. For
me, it is always a pleasure and honour to address the
Security Council on behalf of the of the Peacebuilding
Commission in my capacity as Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration.

I thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Herve Ladsous, for
his exhaustive briefing on the situation in the Central
African Republic following the recent successful
strategic review of the Mission's mandate, and take
this opportunity to pay special tribute to him for his
tireless efforts and high-level of cooperation with the
Peacebuilding Commission. We believe that the report
ofthe Secretary-General (S/2016/565) is comprehensive
and take note of the proposed recommendations.

At the national level, less than six months after
the presidential election the country is on the road to
recovery and a wave of hope is spreading alongside that
movement throughout the country. The President enjoys
strong popular support, which needs to be maintained
through international community support. Despite the
many challenges that remain in the face of today's new
political reality, we must recognize and emphasize
that there are also new, unprecedent opportunities in
the Central African Republic that we must build upon.
An inclusive and transparent political process will be
one of the main aspects needed to ensure that the entire
population is committed to facilitating the rebuilding of
the social contract.

At the regional level, the Central African Republic's
neighbours, which played a key role during the transition
period, continue to play an important role in several
areas, including migratory movements and the fight
against the illicit trafficking that affects the region.
In this regard, the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa is well placed to coordinate efforts in
the region. We encourage the neighbours of the Central
African Republic and other countries of the region to
continue to offer their full support to the new authorities
through positive and constructive involvement.

Beyond the region, it is important to note the
various initiatives undertaken by such partners as the
United Nations system, through the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic and the Central
African Republic country-specific configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, the World Bank, the
European Union and several other bilateral partners.
Based on the road map I outlined in my last briefing to
the Security Council on this subject (see S/PV.7671), the
Peacebuilding Commission will continue to focus on
the consistency and coordination of the aforementioned
actions, and we will continue to advocate for increased
support from the international community.

I would like to turn now to what we see as key
peacebuilding aspects that need to be addressed as
a priority in the coming months. First, the security
situation remains extremely volatile, and, as
Mr. Ladsous mentioned, recent events in many parts
of the country, coupled with the risk of worsening
violence, are a reminder that the country is still not free
from the possibility ofrelapse. Accordingly, the success
of the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and
reintegration process and the regional security system
will be key to a return to stability. We welcome the
efforts made to address the security situation and
prevent armed groups from challenging the country's
democratization process. The President of the Republic
has made a clear commitment to making the process
a priority of his Government, and the international
community's commitment will be needed to get there.

Secondly, the lack of national capacity is often
cited as one of the major challenges to the country's
development. We appeal to all Member States - be
they in the region, on the African continent or in other
parts of the world - to consider paying particular
attention to the Central African Republic by providing
opportunities through training or in the context of
triangular or South-South cooperation programmes.
Although the needs are urgent in many areas, it is never
too late to start investing in capacity-building.

Thirdly, as we have stated on many occasions, there
can be no peace without reconciliation and there can
be no reconciliation without credible mechanisms for
fighting impunity. I am very pleased that Mr. Ladsous
also stressed this point, as it is fundamental to the
political process. In this context, the capacity of the
national judicial system and the establishment of the
Special Criminal Court are of paramount importance.
The creation of the Court is fraught with multiple
challenges, including with respect to funding and
the issue of protecting judges, witnesses and victims.
However, the establishment of the Special Court is not
only necessary for prosecuting cases of violent crime,
but will also have a beneficial, catalysing effect on the
country's judicial system. We urge the new authorities
to accelerate the ongoing bureaucratic process towards
ensuring a rapid implementation of this important
mechanism. Strengthening the national capacity of the
judiciary is of the utmost importance.

Fourthly, an assessment, recovery and
peacebuilding mission comprised of representatives of
the United Nations, the European Union and the World
Bank recently visited the Central African Republic at
the same time as the strategic review mission that was
in the country. The fact that these two missions were
in the field concurrently and were able to coordinate
some of their activities is a good example of the kind of
coherence that is necessary for our common approach
to addressing the pressing needs of the country.

Furthermore, we welcome the creation of an
interministerial commission to develop a mutual
accountability framework that would ensure national
ownership of the process and provide both the
international community and the Government with
higher visibility. As stated in the Secretary-General's
report before us today,

"It is essential that the framework of mutual
accountability and the national recovery and
peacebuilding plan be part of an integrated and
coherent package underpinned by a suitable
and unified follow-up architecture adapted to
the realities of the Central African Republic"
(S/2016/565, para. 64).

In this regard, we should heed the lessons learned
from previous experience to ensure the commission's
success. The country-specific configuration will work
closely with key stakeholders to achieve this end. In
the current context, we welcome the assessment of the
budgetary forecasts regarding the various streams of
funding to meet humanitarian, development, security
and recovery needs, keeping in mind the importance
of proper sequencing to the peacebuilding priorities of
the country.

Fifthly, unfortunately, the humanitarian situation
remains disastrous, with no signs of improvement.
The annual humanitarian appeal has been consistently
underfunded, reaching only about 15.4 per cent in
2016, according to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. In this regard as well, the
international community can and must do more - much
more. In addition, the number of refugees and internally
displaced people remains very high. We must not forget
that the international community has a responsibility
towards refugees who have fled their countries due to
the severity of a crisis. We must work harder to provide
them with an environment conducive to their return,
which is imperative.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to ask all States Members of the United Nations to
increase their support for the Central African Republic.
I can never say it enough - the country is at a critical
point in its history and will need our continued support
to ensure a return to stability. The situation in Central
African Republic is suffering as a result of a chronic
passivity of the donor community, as 90 per cent of the
aid comes from a handful ofpartners. We urgently need
to expand the donor base, taking into account the fact
that different types of support would be helpful.

With a legitimate Government to lead the country,
and a Government that has a clear vision of the task
assigned to it as set forth in the State policy document
approved by the Parliament on 7 June, we have before
us an opportunity to provide the population of the
Central African Republic with the support it deserves
and expects.

