Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Luxembourg for its initiative in convening
this open meeting on post-conflict peacebuilding.
I thank Mr. Eliasson, Deputy Secretary-General,
Ambassador Patriota, Chairperson ofthe Peacebuilding
Commission, and Ms. Clark, Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme, for their
briefings.

Peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of a
conflict has an effective role to play in eliminating the
root causes of conflict. It has an important bearing on
achieving lasting peace and sustainable development
in countries and regions emerging from conflict. In
recent years, the United Nations has been actively
participating in peacebuilding efforts in the countries
and regions on its agenda, where it has accumulated
rich experience and achieved significant results.

The United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone recently completed its work and
is hailed as a success story in the area of peacebuilding.
At the same time, peacebuilding is a lengthy, complex
and difficult task. Under the current circumstances,
peacebuilding faces new issues and challenges that
require the international community's in-depth
consideration and proper response. I would like to
highlight the following four points.

First, post-conflict peacebuilding must fully respect
the ownership of the relevant countries, which should
assume the primary responsibility for peacebuilding.
The international community should fully respect their
sovereignty and will and provide assistance pursuant
to the priorities identified by their Governments.
The United Nations and its agencies, in assisting in
peacebuilding efforts, should strengthen partnerships
with the countries concerned and help them to draw
up integrated peacebuilding strategies on the basis
of the local context. Owing to the different histories
and specific conditions, there is no one-size-fits-
all approach to peacebuilding. The international
community should fully respect cultural traditions and
the prevailing requirements of the countries concerned,
pay attention to the actual conditions on the ground and
not just automatically replicate past practices.

Secondly, post-conflict peacebuilding efforts
should focus on removing the deep-rooted causes of
conflict, with a particular emphasis on economic and
social development. In post-conflict peacebuilding, the
international community has long emphasized human
rights, the rule of law and security sector reform
without paying adequate attention to the economic and
social development of the countries concerned and with
limited input in that regard. We call on the international
community to focus more on the economic and social
development of the countries concerned. Only through
rapid economic recovery and recontruction will the
affected populations be able to enjoy the dividends
of peace and will a solid foundation for political
reconciliation, the stabilization of security and the
establishment of a political basis for the peace process
be laid.

Thirdly, post-conflict peacebuilding should enjoy
adequate and guaranteed resources. The international
community's swift and timely support in the form of
assistance to the countries concerned is an important
factor in smoothly achieving peacebuilding objectives.
The United Nations should continue to heed the
financing requirements of reconstruction programmes
in the countries concerned. The Organization should
also urge the international community to continue to
provide assistance to peacebuilding activities within
those countries and to work together to broaden the
channels for financing with no political preconditions
for assistance. In that regard, China commends the
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund for its active role
and supports its efforts to improve its work in enhancing
the evaluation of the projects that it has carried and the
efficiency of the utilization of resources. China will
continue to support the Peacebuilding Fund within its
abilities.

Fourthly, post-conflict peacebuilding requires
closer coordination and cooperation by all parties
concerned. The United Nations should continue to play a
coordinating role in post-conflict peacebuilding efforts
and should seek to establish a stable and cooperative
relationship with the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, the African Development Bank and
other international and regional financial institutions.
At the same time, it should make use of the unique
peacebuilding advantages of regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union, in order to
make progress in that regard. The relevant agencies
within the United Nations system should have a clear
division of labour and should strengthen cooperation.
The United Nations Peacebuilding Commission should
have a greater role in coordinating peacebuilding
activities.

China has always supported peacebuilding efforts
in post-conflict countries. We are ready to continue
to work with the international community in helping
countries emerging from conflict to achieve durable
peace and sustainable development.

