Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President,
and through you Her Excellency President Michelle
Bachelet, on the assumption by Chile of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January. We
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement this morning. Equally, we wish to express
our sincere gratitude to Ambassador Antonio Patriota
of Brazil, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
Ms. Leymah Gbowee, Nobel Peace Prize Laureate of
2011 and President of the Gbowee Peace Foundation
Africa, for their interventions.

The Group of 77 does not traditionally speak at
meetings of the Security Council. Our mandate as a
group is to focus on economic and social development
issues. However, today's discussion by the Council on
the topic of inclusive development for the maintenance
of international peace and security has prompted us to
request the floor in order to put on record the views
of more than two-thirds of the States Members of the
United Nations.

The link between peace and security and development
is undeniable. The fulfilment of development goals
would lessen the likelihood of conflict breaking out.
Internal conflicts in various parts of the world have
at their very core the plight of the population to their
development aspirations. Many Governments that have
failed to meet these aspirations have been threatened
by internal unrest. The failure to honour development
assistance, provide debt relief to developing countries,
opening of markets and transferring of technology have
all played their negative role in consolidating stability.
These are the issues that should be considered in their
appropriate forum where we, as Member States, should
make concrete commitments in this regard.

The Group of 77 and China would like to point
out that the primary mandate of the Security Council
is the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Charter of the United Nations clearly sets out the
roles and responsibilities of the principal organs of the
United Nations. As the Group has stated in this Chamber
before, the principle of separation of the mandates of
the United Nations organs must be respected.

The Security Council is considering the issue
of development in relation to peace and security at a
critical time when the intergovernmental process of
negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda
commences. In fact, the intergovernmental process,
which begins today, is getting under way as we speak.
The Group maintains its view that the mandate of
the different organs of the United Nations should be
respected as the General Assembly remains the highest
deliberative body that affords all Member States an
equal opportunity to participate in development-related
debates.

The President of the General Assembly has
appointed co-facilitators to lead a process of
negotiation on the post-2015 development agenda in
which all stakeholders will participate in accordance
with the rules of the General Assembly. As the G-77
we will engage in a constructive dialogue to ensure
that the United Nations remains central in addressing
these global development challenges. Our engagement
at the intergovernmental negotiations on the post-
2015 development agenda is intended to ensure that
the United Nations develops a global development
agenda which contributes to international development,
thereby resulting in long-term prosperity and peace and
security.

In conclusion, I should like to reiterate that the
Group of 77 and China will continue to pursue the
achievement of sustainable development and the
eradication of poverty, as well as the fulfilment of
the commitments made by developed countries in
all development-related relevant bodies. As Member
States we are under an obligation to ensure that these
issues in all their complexity are addressed in the
mandated United Nations bodies to ensure the broader
participation of Member States.

