First of all, many thanks to Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Sirkin for their presentations. As they reminded us, with the coronavirus disease pandemic and the economic crisis resulting from corruption and disastrous management, humanitarian needs have been steadily increasing in a country where more than 11 million people depend on humanitarian aid. Only a nationwide, immediate and sustainable ceasefire, under the auspices of the United Nations, will make it possible to protect the civilian population. It is essential as the truce between Russia and Turkey in the north-west remains fragile. We will never say it often enough - respect for international humanitarian law is an obligation for all parties. I am referring in particular to the protection of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel and their infrastructure. In that regard, we deeply regret Russia's decision to withdraw from the deconfliction mechanism. All parties, in particular the Syrian regime, must ensure humanitarian access. The cross-border humanitarian mechanism has never been so indispensable, both in the north-west and in the north-east. Cross-line aid is vastly insufficient to respond to the needs and, in any case, does not provide all necessary guarantees of transparency and impartiality. A renewal for 12 months of the cross-border mechanism, as requested by the Secretary-General, is essential. France fully supports the draft resolution prepared by Germany and Belgium, including the reopening for an initial period of six months of the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing, which fully responds to those humanitarian imperatives. I call on Council members to show unity and responsibility. The instrumentalization of humanitarian aid must stop. The Syrian population must not become hostage to it. The European Union (EU) and its member States are the main contributors of humanitarian aid, regardless of the beneficiaries, having allocated more than 18 billion euros to the Syrian people since 2011. The fourth Brussels conference will confirm that yet again. In addition, France will continue to strongly support all efforts aimed at preventing violations of international humanitarian and human rights law and punishing their perpetrators. Lastly, only a political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015) will end the humanitarian tragedy and bring long-term stability to the country. Today, our collective priority must be to address the emergencies and respond to the huge humanitarian needs in Syria before considering any development activity. We contribute to that everywhere in Syria. Until a credible political process is firmly under way, France and the EU will not finance reconstruction in Syria. The Council members know our position on the lifting of sanctions and normalization, which remains unchanged.
