Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this important debate and
wish you every success in fulfilling the highly
responsible duties of Security Council President.

Our appreciation also goes to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-
Leste, His Excellency Mr. Jose Luis Guterres, for their
insights into today's topic. Ukraine's long record of
participation in United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts in Timor-Leste and almost
20 other States, including most of the Group of Seven
Plus countries, makes this debate quite relevant for my
country.

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union. As a member of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission, my
delegation supports the statement delivered by the
Commission's Chair, Mr. Peter Wittig, the Permanent
Representative of Germany. I would also like to make a
few brief points in my national capacity.

First, we fully agree with the philosophy of the
concept paper (S/20ll/l6, annex) before us that
national ownership is an indispensable condition for
the establishment of effective core State capacities,
leading to the creation of a stable and viable State. My
delegation also recognizes that the purpose of
institution-building is to reduce the dependence of
post-conflict Governments on the international
community and to promote self-reliance. Yet the fact
that the majority of post-conflict countries relapse into
violence within 10 years leaves no doubt about the
need for extreme prudence in planning the transition of
responsibilities from the international community to
national authorities, especially in the security sector.

Secondly, consensus between domestic and
international stakeholders on a broad peacebuilding
agenda is a sine qua non for the success of the
institution-building and peacebuilding endeavour as a
whole. If there is a lack of understanding on either
side, there will be no chemistry between them and,
ultimately, no tangible progress in securing lasting
peace.

Thirdly, given the crucial significance of post-
conflict institution-building to the success of the
overall peacebuilding efforts, my delegation shares the
belief in the necessity of integrating the institution-
building perspective, tailored to each country and
situation, into the mandates of respective United
Nations missions from their early stages.

Fourthly, we believe in the transformative power
of the relevant regional and subregional organizations
in connection with peacebuilding. Nowhere are the

benefits of this soft power more evident than in
Europe, with the European Union as a case in point.
There is a great deal of transformative potential with
other European bodies, such as the Council of Europe
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). That is why we see merit in exploring
the idea of putting together the best practices and
lessons learned of these organizations and sharing
them, wherever appropriate, with interested partners in
other regions. As a prospective Chair of both the
Council of Europe and the OSCE, in May to November
2011 and in 2013, respectively, Ukraine is ready to do
its share.

Fifthly, the Peacebuilding Commission is ideally
placed to bring together external State and non-State
actors with the aim of securing the creation of credible,
legitimate, accountable and resilient institutions in
countries emerging from conflict. In view of this, the
Peacebuilding Commission should play a leading role
in enabling the United Nations system to establish an
integrated approach to institution-building. If the
Commission is to be fully up to this task, greater
synergy between the Security Council, General
Assembly, Economic and Social Council and
Peacebuilding Commission is needed.

Having a long, solid record of contributing to
peacebuilding through active military and police
engagement in missions under the auspices of the
United Nations, Ukraine could be instrumental in
assisting the advancement of the institution-building
agenda. My country has capacity and is open to
considering providing civilian expertise, particularly in
the areas of justice, security sector reform and
governance, and the training of domestic professionals
from fragile States with the aim of further boosting
their local civil service capacities.

The concept paper rightly notes the supporting -
yet in some cases instrumental - role of humanitarian
relief and rehabilitation assistance, especially in the
immediate aftermath of conflict or humanitarian
disaster. In this respect, Ukraine is proud of its
contribution to the Central Emergency Response Fund
in response to the United Nations appeal for Haiti.

Today's debate will be taken into account by my
delegation in the context of Ukraine's current
membership in the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Economic and Social Council, UN-Women and other
relevant organs. It will also serve as a valuable
reference in the case of Ukraine's election to the
Security Council for the term of 2016-2017.

