Mr. Mohamad (Sudan): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the African Group in the Security
Council's open debate on energy, security and climate
change. The African Group aligns itself with the
statements made by the representatives of the Group of
77 and China and the Non-Aligned Movement.

The African Group expresses its concern regarding

the decision of the Security Council to hold an open

debate on issues that do not fall within the Council's

mandate. The United Nations Charter has made it

explicitly clear that issues related to social and economic

development remain the domain of the Economic and
Social Council and the General Assembly.

The Group also stresses that the increasing and
alarming encroachment of the Security Council on the
mandates of other United Nations bodies - which the
Security Council tries to justify by linking all issues to
the question of security - compromises the principles
and purposes of the United Nations Charter and is also
undermining the relevant bodies. This situation is even
more alarming, since it is taking place at a time when
the process of system-wide coherence is gaining
momentum within the Organization.

The African Group cautions against attempts to
shift matters of interest of all Member States to a body
where a few members of the United Nations have been
vested with the power to take final decisions.

The African Group's statement today serves to
underscore that those issues do not fall within the
mandate of the Security Council. Energy and climate
change are both development issues and, as such,
should be tackled within the parameters of
development and the impediments to its achievement,
and should be addressed by the relevant specialized
mandated organs of the United Nations, not the
Security Council.

The African Group considers that if concerns and
challenges arising from climate change and energy are
more profound now than before, particularly in Africa,
the fundamental reason for it is the lack of fulfilment
of commitments and the absence of concrete actions, in
particular on the part of developed countries, to tackle
the adverse effects related to these respective issues.
Developed countries should honour the commitments
they have made during the major United Nations
conferences and summits in economic and related
fields by providing, especially to Africa, the most
vulnerable continent, adequate and predictable
resources and environmentally sound technology and
by providing access to energy, including through the
promotion of foreign direct investments in the energy
sector in Africa.
The African Group emphasizes that the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change

and the Kyoto Protocol are binding multilateral
agreements and offer sufficient provisions for actions
needed to address risks associated with climate change
on a global level. Thus, the solution to such constraints
resides in a broader adherence to those agreements and,
most importantly, in the fulfilment, especially by
developed countries, of all commitments, in
accordance with the principles enshrined in the
Convention, particularly the Rio Principles specifying
common but differentiated responsibilities.

Finally, the African Group hopes that the decision
by the Council to hold this debate on the issue of
energy and climate change does not constitute a
precedent, since the Council is not the appropriate
body to deal with such themes.

