Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should first like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his presentation
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/254) on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), and to welcome the Prime Minister
of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dacie, and Mr. Hashim Thaci.

I underscore the role of the United Nations in
Kosovo via UNMIK in promoting security, stability
and respect for human rights, as well as its cooperation
with the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), maintaining a
status-neutral position regarding the statute and under
the auspices of the United Nations. We welcome the
signing ofthe "First agreement on principles governing
the normalization of relations" in the context of the
high-level dialogue under European Union auspices.
We trust that the agreement will give a high profile
to the situation and that progress will be made on a
political solution to the outstanding issues through
compromise, trust and dialogue. Those in Serbia who
favour the normalization of relations deserve special
recognition. We urge the parties to pursue this agenda,
pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999), and to implement
the agreement strictly, overcoming past obstacles and
acting in good faith and peacefully.

We must continue to focus on the security
situation in northern Mitrovica. This will require
coordinated action to ensure that the problems can
be resolved in good faith and future tension avoided.
UNMIK's important work makes it imperative to find
practical solutions, prevent tension and ensure that the
Administration continues to play its role in conflict
prevention, mediation and facilitation.

We are concerned over the ongoing incidents and
tensions, particularly the destruction of religious and
cultural heritage, the prevention of which is an UNMIK
priority. We draw special attention to the desecration
of Orthodox Serbian cemeteries in Kosovo. Argentina
condemns such acts and calls for the conclusion
of investigations under way in order to punish the
perpetrators of these acts of vandalism and religious
intolerance, and to promote reconciliation between the
communities.

We must continue to work to ensure the return
and final integration of internally displaced persons
and in particular facilitate their access to housing,
basic services and jobs. We must also expedite the
documentation of their civil status and prevent incidents
of insecurity. UNMIK technical assistance is essential
in that regard. We support UNMIK as it supports the
rule of law, particularly by cooperating with EULEX
and the competent authorities in Serbia and Pristina.

In conclusion, I underscore the work of the
Special Representative to promote security, stability
and respect for human rights in Kosovo, pursuant to
resolution 1244 (1999).

