Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I wish to join others in
congratulating you, Madam President, and the delegation
of Nigeria for having convened this important briefing.
I wish also to thank Dr. David Nabarro, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General on Ebola; Dr. Margaret Chan,
Director-General of the World Health Organization;
His Excellency Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer
of the African Union; His Excellency Per Thoresson,
speaking on behalf of the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission; and Dr. Mosoka Fallah for their respective
presentations to the Council this morning.

Let me also take this opportunity to commend the
contribution and pledges made by various countries to
fight the disease and the many brave doctors and health-
care workers engaged in tireless efforts to counter this
deadly disease. We warmly welcome the successful
outcome of the recent International Ebola Recovery
Conference, on 10 July, at which the international
community pledged more than $5 billion for long-term
recovery efforts.

In associating itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Sweden on behalf of the members
of the Peacebuilding Commission, Malaysia wishes to
make the following brief comments.

From the United Nations Development Programme
report entitled "Recovering from the Ebola crisis" to the
recent International Ebola Recovery Conference and the
various meetings held at the United Nations concerning
the Ebola crisis, there are a considerable number of
lessons learned that we could gather from the Ebola
crisis. Many of them have been clearly outlined in the
concept note prepared for today's briefing (S/2015/600, annex). These lessons learned will be important for
future strategic planning to prevent future outbreaks
and enable early detection of potential crisis situations.

My delegation further believes that the Ebola crisis
has presented a unique opportunity for the international
community to reassess its approach to assisting post-
conflict countries. It also has provided valuable
perspective to the countries affected, particularly on
what else is needed to maintain stability and preserve
the hard-won peacebuilding gains made. Malaysia
continues to believe that there is a need to place further
emphasis on building resilience and strengthening
national capacity in consolidating support for post-
conflict countries.

Malaysia underscores that close coordination within
the United Nations system is crucial to maintaining the
focus of the international community on the recovery
period of the Ebola crisis, with the aim of generating
greater political commitment and contributions to
the countries affected. Continued coordination and
cooperation are equally important so as to ensure the
optimal and efficient use of resources. In addition,
proper planning between the United Nations and the
Governments of the affected region will be essential to
ensuring that the efforts towards recovery are carried
out in a safe and effective manner.

My delegation also wishes to underline the three
key priority directions for the engagement of the United
Nations system in peacebuilding, namely, inclusivity,
institution-building, and sustained international
support and mutual accountability. We believe that
these key priorities remain relevant in assisting the
Ebola-affected countries, particularly in developing
a coherent strategy linking the development, security
and political aspects.

Malaysia is further encouraged to note the strong
engagement and commitment of many regional
organizations, particularly the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Mano River Union, in the fight against Ebola. Certainly
a coordinated national and regional response has been
fundamental in easing the difficulties faced by the
Ebola-affected countries.

We also take this opportunity to commend the role
played by the Peacebuilding Commission in the fight
against Ebola. It has been instrumental in maintaining
the focus of the international community on the Ebola
crisis and coordinating efforts with all partners,
including regional and subregional organizations. We
believe that the Commission's role is equally important
at this point in time to build the capacity and resilience
of the countries affected.

While we have seen remarkable progress in the
efforts made to contain the disease thus far, Malaysia
concurs with others that we must remain vigilant and
continue to strive towards getting to zero and staying
at zero. At this juncture, it is vital to ensure the
unwavering support of the international community for
the countries affected to assist them to progress further
during the recovery period. We are of the view that
for the affected countries to come out of this process
stronger and more resilient, we need to invest not only
in hospital and medical facilities and infrastructure but
also in peoples and Governments in order to build a
sustainable future for the peoples of the region.

On our part, the Government of Malaysia, in
collaboration with Malaysia's private sector, has taken
the initiative to continue to contribute in kind as well
as financially to the Ebola-affected countries since the
beginning of the spread of this deadly disease, in 2014.
Recently we also contributed $100,000 through the
Ebola Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund. Malaysia
has also offered two of its public-health specialists to
Sierra Leone to assist in monitoring and controlling the
pandemic. The first specialist left Malaysia in April and
the other in June. Their roles are to monitor and give
symptomatic treatment to those who are not admitted to
the hospital. Malaysia sincerely hoes that these modest
contributions will help the Ebola-affected countries in
this important recovery phase.

In conclusion, we will continue to monitor the
situation closely to see how we can further support the
countries affected, whether in the immediate or longer
term. Malaysia wishes to assure the Security Council of
its full support and cooperation in working closely with
all partners in assisting the countries in this important
recovery period.

