Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the Japanese
presidency for the timely and important topic suggested
for consideration in the Security Council. My special
thanks go to Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav
Jenca and High Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid
Ra'ad Al Hussein for their substantive briefings.

Today, the Council meets for the fourth time to
discuss the situation of human rights in North Korea.
We reiterate our strong support for the idea of holding
such meetings. We do not share the position that
human rights are the exclusive purview of the Human
Rights Council.

Ukraine reaffirms its stance that systematic and
consistent gross human rights violations are a clear
early-warning sign and indication of a credible threat
to international peace and security, the maintenance
of which is the primary responsibility of the
Security Council.

Regrettably, the human rights situation in North
Korea over the past year has not changed for better. It
still remains dire. Ukraine welcomes the first visit since
1995 to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea since
1995 of a special procedure mandate-holder, the Special
Rapporteur on the rights of persons with disabilities, as
well as the strategic framework for cooperation between
the United Nations and the Government for the period
2017-2021, launched in January 2017.

Yet the facts mentioned today by the briefers and by
previous speakers prove that the human rights situation
in North Korea continues to deteriorate. Urgent steps
must be taken by the international community to
reverse the targeted policy of systematic human rights
Violations by the North Korean regime.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
highlights that

"serious and widespread violations of the right to
life, liberty and security of the person, and the
right to a fair trial remain of concern" (A/72/279, para. 4).

Indeed, even George Orwell, who thought he described
the extreme stage of totalitarianism, would be surprised
by the findings of that report.

We are deeply disturbed by the continuous reports
regarding grave violations of human rights in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, including
torture and other cruel, inhumane or degrading
treatment or punishment; rape; extrajudicial, summary,
arbitrary and public executions; extrajudicial and
arbitrary detention; the absence of due process and
the rule of law, including fair trial guarantees and an
independent judiciary; the imposition of the death
penalty for political and religious reasons; collective
punishments extending up to three generations; and
many others.

I would like to mention in particular the issue of
the abduction of Japanese citizens by North Korea.
Twelve Japanese citizens abducted in the 19705 and
1980s are still missing; no clarification of their fate has
been provided to date. In that regard, we fully support
the call of the Secretary-General to all stakeholders
to take all steps necessary to resolve the issue of
family separation, promote accountability for cases of
enforced disappearance and ensure that mechanisms
are in place for relatives in the two countries to remain
in touch and reunite.

We all know that the North Korean regime
continues to build up its military arsenal at the
expense of its own people and uses the country's
limited resources to support prohibited nuclear and
ballistic missile programmes. The impact of diverting
resources, including earnings generated by nationals
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea working
abroad, has already provoked a steady deterioration in
the quality of life of ordinary citizens, which is a matter
of particular concern to us.

We commend and fully support the establishment
of the group of independent experts on accountability
for human rights violations in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. Moreover, we advocate imposing
further pressure on those responsible for human rights
violations that may constitute crimes against humanity.
We also support the initiative of the group to consider
the scope for establishing an ad hoc international
tribunal for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

The engagement of a broad range of
actors - Governments, international organizations,
non-governmental organizations and civil society - is
important for effective synergy of diplomatic strategies
and actions, including the vigorous implementation of
existing sanctions, to push the North Korean leadership
towards changes not only in the sphere of protecting
human rights but also in the denuclearization of the
Korean Peninsula.

We call on the Government of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to fully cooperate with
the international community and to ensure safe and
unfettered access to the territory of the country for
United Nations monitoring mechanisms to fulfil their
mandates, in particular for the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, representatives of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in Seoul and other independent human
rights mechanisms.

