Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): On
15 August in the Council we adopted a press statement
(see SC/10360), in which we stated our support for the
holding of the consultative meeting on ending the
transition in Somalia. As we now hold this meeting, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate on the development of the
situation in Somalia, which remains of concern.

We welcome the presence among us of His
Excellency Mr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali, Prime Minister
of Somalia. We are grateful to him for his important
statement. We would like first of all to express our
satisfaction at the information that he has given us with
regard to the commitment of the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) to doing its utmost to implement
the road map adopted during the meeting at the
beginning of September.

We thank Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
for the information that he gave us in presenting the
report of the Secretary-General (S/201l/549). Finally,
we would like to welcome the presence of Ambassador
Boubacar Diarra, who represents the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission, and we thank him for
his statement.

Like all members, Gabon remains concerned
about the severity of the humanitarian crisis that
continues to prevail in Somalia. It certainly remains a
major challenge for the country and for the
international community. Today, five regions in
Somalia are affected by the famine. Children die every
day from malnutrition, disease and the lack of
appropriate care. The humanitarian efforts and the
funding provided have made it possible, however, to
provide greater assistance to the most vulnerable
populations, in particular those in the capital and in the
refugee camps in Kenya and Ethiopia. In addition, the
African Union conference held on 25 August in Addis
Ababa mobilized some $350 million for efforts to help
the Horn of Africa.

These actions demonstrate the willingness of
Africa and the international community to provide an
urgent response to the humanitarian crisis. For its part,
Gabon has contributed to those efforts by making a
modest contribution of $2.5 million.

Despite all these efforts, the needs on the ground
remain significant. In that regard, Gabon wishes to
reiterate the Secretary-General's call for sustained
assistance. We must move beyond emergency
assistance and create support mechanisms for
agriculture in Somalia. Since this is an urgent matter,
we have an opportunity to think about systemic long-
term actions to prevent food insecurity. We therefore
welcome the upcoming meeting of the Group of
Twenty, which will give the international community
an opportunity to mobilize its efforts to fight food
insecurity.

The onset of rains in southern Somalia should be
an opportunity for the international community to help
Somalis acquire better seeds and fertilizers, which
would in turn boost agricultural production. Thus, we
would be able to offer a sustained response to the
humanitarian crisis plaguing Somalia and the Horn of
Africa.
Regarding the political situation, we join other
Council members in noting the progress made. We can
never repeat this enough: the Somali crisis is above all
a political and institutional crisis, which is why a
sustained solution can be found only if greater
emphasis is placed on reconciliation among all
Somalis. In that regard, we reiterate the appeal made
by the representative of the African Union.

The solution also involves restoring State
authority and bolstering the peace process. We
therefore welcome the 6 September adoption of the
road map for the final stages of transition in the
country. That step will help to further build
cohesiveness among the Transitional Federal
Institutions. The road map is a basic document and a
further landmark in the implementation of the Djibouti
Agreement.

We are encouraged by the establishment of new
regional administrations comprised of former armed

l 1-49644

militia groups who stand ready to work with the
Transitional Federal Government. The willingness of
the armed movements to become political parties
exemplifies the positive evolution of the peace process
in Somalia.

Gabon stresses the need to consolidate this
political progress. We encourage the Transitional
Federal Government and the Federal Parliament to
carry out all tasks set out in the road map as soon as
possible. The drafting of the constitution, the
improvement of security and national reconciliation are
essential to efforts to end more than 20 years of
instability in the country. Thus, it is important for the
Security Council and, more generally, the international
community to continue supporting the Transitional
Federal Government with a view to strengthening its
authority throughout the country.

On the security front, Somalia has made
substantial progress, as evidenced by the withdrawal of
the Al-Shabaab militias from Mogadishu. Nevertheless,
threats to security persist. Attempted attacks against
humanitarian workers, continued fighting in southern
Somalia and the attacks of last July in Kenya remind us
of that fact.

In that regard, Gabon calls on the international
community to mobilize even further. The presence of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
remains essential. It must enjoy predictable funding
and achieve the force strength authorized in resolution
1964 (2010).

My delegation welcomes the announcement made
by Djibouti and Sierra Leone, which, despite their
difficult conditions, have agreed to provide troops to
AMISOM. We also wish to thank all countries that are
contributing in various ways to the viability of this
operation. However, as pointed out by the African
Union in its communique of 13 September, the United
Nations bears the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. That is
why we should consider the deployment of a genuine
United Nations peacekeeping mission, the modalities
of which could be determined in cooperation with the
African Union.

For the time being, we should attempt to improve
the United Nations support system for AMISOM.
Delayed reimbursements for contingent-owned
equipment and shortcomings in logistical support have
enormously hindered the timely deployment of

additional troops. My delegation remains prepared to
consider any proposal made by the Secretary-General
in that respect. We should continue to train the Somali
Police Force and the National Security Force. Peace
and stability in Somalia are first and foremost the
responsibility of the Somali people themselves. All
those measures are even more urgent and necessary as
they will help us to capitalize on the security gains of
recent months.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
highlight one point regarding the threat that piracy
represents to the entire coastline of Somalia. Every
time the issue has been raised in the Council, Gabon
has consistently stressed the importance of a global
approach, which must include efforts to address the
security and humanitarian threat on the mainland. We
therefore look forward with interest to the upcoming
report of the Secretary-General on this matter.

Finally, we take this opportunity to once again
welcome the effective partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union in support of peace and
stability in Somalia.

