Mr. Serrano: This is a day of deep grief. On
behalf of the European Union (EU) I wish to convey
heartfelt condolences to the Government and people of
Haiti, to the Governments of the countries that have
suffered casualties and to all the families affected. The
European Union and its member States are already
actively involved in rescue and relief efforts. We are
hopeful that our dear friend Hedi Annabi and members
of his staff will be rescued. I reiterate the full support
of the European Union for the Secretary-General in this
difficult moment.

Let me start by thanking you, Mr. President, for
inviting the European Union to this important debate. I
also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
the retreat just completed, which allowed for very good
exchanges.

The challenges facing the international
community - poverty, conflict, terrorism,
non-proliferation, climate change - are closely
interlinked and of a magnitude that requires collective
action. This is why the United Nations is at the centre
of the European Union's international engagement. It
was already recognized in the European Security
Strategy and is now enshrined in the Lisbon Treaty.
The close cooperation of the European Union and its
member States with and within the United Nations is a
powerful reality.

The European Union is working intensely with
the Secretary-General and with the Security Council to
support the maintenance of international peace and
security, in line with Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter and relevant Security Council
decisions, including resolution 1631 (2005). Currently,
the European Union is conducting ll crisis
management operations and is working together with
the United Nations in eight major crisis theatres in
Europe, Africa, the Middle East and Afghanistan. It
reports to the Security Council regularly on three of
those operations. It has succeeded United Nations
peacekeeping operations in a number of crisis areas
and is contributing to the final stabilization of the
Balkans after the terrible wars of the 1990s. Ultimately,
that will be achieved by the integration of that region
into the European Union, an objective to which the EU
remains firmly committed.

These European contributions have helped the
United Nations to concentrate its efforts in other areas,
particularly in Africa, but here as well the European
Union maintains a high level of engagement. In the
past, the European Union has deployed two military
operations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
support of the United Nations Organization Mission
there and is currently working with the United Nations
and the Congolese Government in the reform of its
security sector. The European Union has assisted the
African Union (AU) in Darfur and deployed an
operation in Chad at the request of the United Nations,
an operation now replaced by the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad.

The European Union is working very closely with
the United Nations and the African Union to contribute
to a peaceful solution to the Somali crisis. The
European Union is assisting in the fight against piracy
off the coast of Somalia with its naval Operation
Atalanta, cooperating with many naval forces of other
United Nations Member States. Atalanta is providing
escorts to United Nations chartered vessels that bring
to Mogadishu technical support and humanitarian aid.
Furthermore, the EU is assisting the Transitional
Federal Government in the development of its security
forces and is supporting the African Union Mission in
Somalia.

Besides its engagement on the ground, the
European Union is also ready to contribute to the
ongoing development of a forward-looking agenda for
United Nations peacekeeping that reflects the
perspectives of all stakeholders and, in view of that,
welcomes the New Horizon initiative launched by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support.

The European Union has 15 special
representatives and envoys who work together with
their United Nations, AU and other international
counterparts in negotiation processes and conflict
prevention endeavours. The European Union is also
actively supporting State-building efforts, including in
the field of security sector reform, and broader efforts
to promote democracy, human rights, good governance
and the rule of law. Through European Commission-
Humanitarian Aid - ECHO - it is a main provider of
humanitarian assistance. A network of 135 EU
delegations in third countries and at multilateral
organizations constitutes the institutional backbone of
all these efforts.

The European Union is working with partners
within the United Nations to protect civilians and
guarantee respect for human rights, to fight terrorism
more effectively and to ensure that the development of
peaceful uses of nuclear energy takes place in the best
safety, security and non-proliferation conditions.

The EU remains aware of the multidimensional
nature of security when dealing with other important
challenges. On climate change, the European Union
has set for itself ambitious targets, including in terms
of international assistance. The initial political
agreement reached in Copenhagen must now be
translated into firm obligations and followed by
effective implementation. We cannot afford to fail.

On development, the combined assistance of the
European Union and its member States amounts to
approximately 60 per cent of international aid. We will
examine later this year at the highest level progress
towards the Millennium Development Goals. We are
not on track. The European Union will engage
energetically with all United Nations Member States
and main actors, under the guidance of Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, in order to ensure that this
opportunity to redouble our collective efforts is not
lost.

In this context, I wish to reaffirm the European
Union's strong support for the regional integration
agenda as a favoured means to achieve economic
growth and peace. The European Union has developed
regional strategies in partnership with all world
regions, in full respect of the principle of ownership.
Regional organizations play a leading role in the
implementation of the substantial funds allocated by
the European Union in this context.

The Africa-EU Strategic Partnership adopted by
heads of State or Government in December 2007
deserves special mention. It covers all fields of
economic and political cooperation. It reveals an
untapped potential for developing further triangular
regional cooperation involving the United Nations. A
genuine trilateral relationship among the United
Nations, the African Union and the European Union is
already in the making.

The Lisbon Treaty has simplified the
international representation of the European Union and
given it continuity. The creation of an External Action
Service under the leadership of High Representative
Catherine Ashton will help to enhance the strategic
direction, coherence and effectiveness of the European
foreign policy. It will also help the EU improve its
cooperation with international partners, and in
particular the United Nations. We look forward to
working with United Nations Members and the United
Nations Secretariat to ensure that the new European
Union structures will work efficiently within the
United Nations.
