Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and for
the important briefings by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka and Mr. Smai'l Chergui
following the joint African Union-United Nations visit
to South Sudan in October.

Peru has been monitoring the peace and
reconciliation process in South Sudan with high
expectations and stresses the importance ofthe Council's
continuing support to the people of South Sudan at this
crucial time. We believe that the implementation of the
revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan will be a complex
process, requiring the sustained political commitment
of the parties and the support of South Sudan's citizens,
the international community and the relevant regional
and subregional organizations.

In our view, confidence-building is of major
importance, through concrete measures such as full
compliance with the cessation ofhostilities, unhindered
access for humanitarian aid throughout the country, the
release of political prisoners and full accountability
for the atrocity crimes that have been committed. We
underscore the need to improve the security situation
following the completion of the various transitional
agreements, as well as to form atransitional Government
of national unity within the established time frame. We
also emphasize the importance of concerted action by
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and the United Nations in
reconfiguring the Regional Protection Force.

We want to highlight the fact that the visit by the
senior officials who are here with us today focused on
the empowerment and participation of women. Women
have been the main victims of the conflict and their
voices have not truly been heard. Now they are called
on to play a key role in the peace process, as well as
in security-sector reform. The evidence has shown
that greater participation by women at every level of
social and political life tends to produce more effective
conflict resolution and consolidation of peace. Women
provide perspectives on the future and on unity that
are essential to building and sustaining peace. We
emphasize in that regard the importance of complying
with the 35 per cent quota established for women's
representation throughout the pre-transition and
transition phases in the Council of Ministers and other
Government bodies and institutions where political
decisions are made. That will undoubtedly enable more
effective progress to be made in tackling gender-based
sexual violence. We consider it essential to develop the
necessary capacities for ensuring that South Sudan's
many victims get the comprehensive care they need.

We also believe it essential to guarantee access to
justice. The recent convictions of 10 soldiers accused of
murder and rape in 2016 must set a precedent whereby
crimes and their perpetrators, direct or indirect, are
duly investigated, prosecuted and punished. We hope
that the peace process will enable a more effective
response to the current humanitarian situation,
particularly with regard to the acute food insecurity of
almost 60 per cent of the population, which requires
innovative mechanisms to address the serious situation,
such as rapid joint responses that combine support for
emergency food production and food assistance.

In conclusion, I want to reiterate how important it is
that the Council remain united in providing the political
support and follow-up required to continue making
progress on the South Sudanese peace process, as well
as working in close coordination with the African
Union and IGAD, which have been fundamental to the
progress that has been made.

