Mr. O'Sullivan (spoke in French): At the outset,
allow me to thank the Moroccan presidency of the
Security Council for organizing this important debate.
I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
invited the European Union (EU) to participate today.
High Representative Catherine Ashton is currently
presiding over the meeting of the Foreign Affairs
Council. Unfortunately, therefore, she could not
participate in this meeting, but I am speaking on her
behalf. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his statement; his Special Envoy for the Sahel,
President Prodi, with whom I had the honour to work
very closely in other circumstances; and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Antonio
Guterres.

(spoke in English)

Today's ministerial debate is a timely and a
necessary initiative. The European Union is extremely
concerned about the prevailing situation in the Sahel,
and in Mali in particular. That situation requires
urgent, coordinated and determined action by all those
concerned in Mali and in the region, with the support of
a united international community.

The Sahel is suffering not only a humanitarian
crisis, but also from the fallout from the conflict in the
north of Mali and the political crisis in the south. Time
is playing in favour of terrorist and criminal groups in
the north, who pose a threat to the entire region and
beyond. They are already perpetrating serious human
rights violations in Mali, for which they must be held
responsible.

The crises in Mali and the Sahel are interconnected.
Only a durable solution to the political and security
crisis in Mali will allow lasting peace and development
throughout the Sahel. However, lasting peace in Mali
will not be achieved if Sahel-wide issues are not
addressed.

We believe, like many members of the Council,
that a truly comprehensive approach is therefore
needed. We encourage the United Nations to finalize
and implement a United Nations integrated strategy
under the leadership of the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy.

Since 2010, in close coordination with the
Governments of Mali, the Niger and Mauritania, the EU
has been shaping and then implementing its Strategy for
Security and Development in the Sahel. The objective
is to promote simultaneously security, good governance
and development at local, national and regional levels.
The role of all neighbouring countries, including States
of the Maghreb, is recognized in the EU Strategy.

In the current circumstances, the EU is committed
to making special efforts on the security front. The new
EU mission EUCAP Sahel was launched in July to train
the internal security forces of the Niger and to reinforce
regional coordination with Mali and Mauritania in order
to tackle criminal activities, including drug trafficking
and terrorism.

The EU is also committed to addressing the official
request of the Government of Mali to help modernize
and train the Malian defence forces, under legitimate
civilian control. That future EU training mission,
which should normally be approved at the meeting of
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs today, should also
address the need to help restore the chain of command
and generate a credible leverage on the use of force,
with due respect for international humanitarian law.
That EU engagement is part of the global support
for the restoration of State authority and for political
transition, reunification and stability in Mali.

To complement the Malian defence forces, an
African-led international support mission in Mali has
a significant role to play, not alone but rather within
and subject to a comprehensive political framework
and a coordinated approach by neighbouring countries.
We await the Security Council's conclusions on the
African Union proposal. We will then assess what we
can provide to it.

We are conscious that the task facing Governments
in the Sahel region is enormous and that international
support is therefore essential. As in all other crisis
situations, it is equally critical that we, the international
community, all act in close coordination. The United
Nations, the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States all have crucial
roles to play in achieving those goals. I would like to
emphasize that the EU will work closely with all of
them to that end.

