Mr. Stagno Ugarte: Resolution 2286 (2016) was
a milestone that reaffirmed the principle that health
facilities and personnel must be protected during armed
conflict. Yet today, one year after its adoption, this is
no time for celebration. According to a recent report by
the Safeguarding Health in Conflict Coalition, attacks
against health facilities have continued at alarming
rates in 23 countries over the course of the past year.
Although former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
presented a strong set of recommendations for the
implementation of resolution 2286 (2016), the Security
Council has yet to affirm them.

Resolution 2286 (2016) warned that the prevailing
impunity for attacks on health facilities and personnel
in conflict could lead to a recurrence of such acts. As
the resolution indicates, accountability, in particluar
impartial investigations, prompt disciplinary measures
and fair prosecutions, is an essential element of any
strategy to end the widespread violations ofthe principle
of protecting health facilities and services in conflict.

Yesterday, Human Rights Watch published a
review of 25 attacks on health facilities that occurred
between 2013 and 2016 in 10 countries. We found that
little has been done to investigate such attacks or to
hold those responsible to account, where appropriate.
In such incidents, at least 232 people were reportedly
killed, including 41 health workers and more than

180 injured. We believe that 16 of those incidents
may have constituted war crimes, either because
they were intentional attacks on protected health
facilities, or because there is evidence of criminal
negligence. And yet, no one appears to have faced
criminal proceedings for any of the attacks. In fact,
based on publicly available information, it does not
appear as though 20 of the incidents that we reviewed
were ever investigated. Perpetrators either ignored
credible allegations about the attacks, publicly denied
responsibility or blamed another party, without
providing any supporting evidence.

Let me share an example. In February 2016, the two
largest hospitals of Maret al-Numan in Syria were hit
three hours apart. Those wounded in the first attack
were immediately transferred to a nearby hospital,
only to suffer a second attack. In all, 11 health workers
and 17 patients and other civilians were killed. Russia
and Syria, the likely perpetrators of both attacks,
denied responsibility and claimed that United States-
led coalition forces had carried out the strikes. The
United States denied that allegation, and none of the
parties investigated the incident. In three of the cases
we reviewed, authorities indicated that they would
investigate attacks but either failed to present any
findings or have not concluded any investigation.

Let me share another example. In February 2016,
Afghan security forces, reportedly accompanied by
international military forces, raided a clinic in Tangi
Saidan in Wardak Province. The soldiers handcuffed
staff members while they searched the premises
for Taliban fighters. They then took two patients,
including a 15-year-old boy, and shot them dead outside
the clinic. Both Afghanistan and NATO reportedly
opened investigations into the incident, but neither
has published any findings. NATO has stated that it
found absolutely no evidence to support that allegation,
without specifying which allegation it was referring to,
or whether international military forces were present in
the raid. Five of the cases reviewed were investigated,
yet all five investigations were flawed. Almost all of
them left critical questions unanswered, and many
arrived at conclusions that contradicted our findings.

Let me share another example. In August 2016,
an air strike hit the main hospital in western Hajja,
Yemen, killing 19 and wounding 24, including 11
health workers. The task force established by the Saudi-
led coalition forces to investigate potential violations
of international humanitarian law committed by the
coalition in Yemen investigated the incident and
concluded that the air strike was an error, but failed
to determine whether the attack violated the laws of
war. The task force also claimed that the coalition was
not aware that it was a hospital prior to the attack. Yet,
Medecins Sans Frontieres had clearly marked the roof of
the hospital and repeatedly provided the coalition with
the GPS coordinates of the facility, including just five
days earlier. To date, the Saudi-led coalition has neither
released further findings nor offered a public apology,
nor has it, to our knowledge, offered compensation
to victims.

Resolution 2286 (2016) also highlighted the
importance of international justice mechanisms when
domestic systems are unwilling or unable to respond
appropriately. In many conflict countries, however, from
Libya to the Central African Republic to South Sudan,
State justice systems have become largely defunct,
yet none of the incidents that we reviewed have been
referred to international accountability mechanisms.

The Security Council has, however, one important
accountability mechanism for the perpetrators of
attacks on health care, under the children in armed
conflict agenda. As part of the monitoring and
reporting on parties to armed conflict responsible for
recurrent attacks on schools and hospitals or related
personnel, the Secretary-General is mandated to list the
perpetrators in the annexes to his report. In the 2016
report (S/2016/360), the Secretary-General reported
more than 350 United Nations-verified attacks on
medical facilities or personnel in 10 States and listed
nine parties to armed conflict in six States in the
annexes to the report. Under Council resolutions, those
parties must enter into action plans with the United
Nations to end their violations, or be subject to possible
targeted measures. To date, none of the parties have
signed such action plans.

In order to enhance accountability for attacks on
health facilities and personnel, Human Rights Watch
therefore recommends that the Secretary-General
commit to alerting the Council of all future attacks
on health-care facilities on an ongoing, rather than an
annual basis. The United Nations system, consistent
with its Human Rights Up Front initiative, should
also prioritize the collection of information about
such attacks wherever they happen, push States to
hold perpetrators responsible and recommend avenues
for accountability.

In that regard, Human Rights Watch would also
recommend the following. In the light of some yawning
gaps in reporting, the Secretary-General should ensure
that all parties responsible for such attacks are listed
in the annexes to his annual report on children in
armed conflict. This is not the time - I repeat, not the
time - to freeze new additions to the list. The Council
should ensure that the list includes all perpetrators,
with no exceptions. The Secretary-General should
immunize the annexes to his annual report from
political redactions by States by strictly upholding
the technical merits of the monitoring and reporting
process, as well as exercise his powers under Article
99 of the Charter of the United Nations. United Nations
country teams should engage in dialogue with listed
parties and, wherever possible, negotiate concrete,
time-bound action plans to end violations, as stipulated
in previous Council resolutions. And, in the absence
of such action plans by persistent perpetrators, the
Council should impose targeted measures, as stipulated
in its previous resolutions.

In addition to medical facilities, schools have
also been bombed, burned and looted or converted to
military bases and barracks. Students and teachers have
been killed, injured, raped, tortured and kidnapped in
at least 21 States since 2013, according to the Global
Coalition to Protect Education from Attack. During
the same period, schools have been used for military
purposes in at least 24 conflict-affected States. By
endorsing the Safe Schools Declaration, 64 Member
States have made commitments to better protecting
schools during armed conflict and to refraining from
using them for military purposes. We welcome these
commitments and, as the Secretary-General does in his
recent report on protection of civilians during armed
conflict (S/2017/414), we encourage all Member States
to endorse the Declaration.

The Security Council has long been failing in
terms of early warning, which is the best strategy for
avoiding civilian harm. As early as 1985, speaking on
the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United

Nations, then Secretary-General Pe'rez de Cuellar had
already concluded that as

"crises have frequently been brought before the
Council too late for preventive action, it would
seem to follow that the Council might well establish
a procedure to keep the world under continuing
survey" (S/PV2608, para. 15).

Nothing except for political will has prevented the
Council from adopting such procedures. The Council
enjoys unfettered leeway in deciding, adapting or
amending its internal procedures or creating subsidiary
bodies to go about its business. Yet after major failures in
Rwanda, Srebrenica and Sri Lanka, and all of the reports
that followed on those failures, such common-sense
procedures are still struggling to find a firm footing
in the Council. As the 2012 inquiry into the Sri Lanka
debacle highlighted, there was a systemic failure based
on the absence ofboth an "adequate and shared sense of
responsibility for human rights violations" and a

"coherent strategy in response to early warnings
and subsequent international human rights - and-
humanitarian-law violations against civilians".

In drawing lessons and identifying improved
early-warning procedures, the inquiry called on the
Secretary-General to make more regular and explicit
use of Article 99 to bring situations of concern to
the attention of the Council. It also referenced the
horizon-scanning briefings to the Council by the
Department of Political Affairs as a welcome recent
initiative undertaken by the United Nations. In that
regard, while the Human Rights Up Front initiative
that emerged in response to the inquiry is full of good
intentions, it has failed - to date at least - to turn
the receding tide on horizon-scanning briefings and to
commit the Executive Office of the Secretary-General
to using Article 99 in order to tell the Council what it
needs to know and not what it wants to hear.

The Council has all the tools it needs, yet it sorely
needs to abide by the promise of the very resolutions
it adopts, resolution 2286 (2016) included. Otherwise,
it is not only failing in its duties to protect medical
facilities and services and to protect civilians trapped in
armed conflict, but surely condemning itself to making
devalued never-again apologies in future.

