Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to convey our gratitude for the convening of
this meeting. We also thank Under-Secretary-General
J can-Pierre Lacroix and the Force Commanders of three
important peacekeeping operations for their briefings.

As a troop-contributing country, Peru believes
that peacekeeping operations are essential tools of the
United Nations collective security system and that it
is the responsibility of the Security Council to provide
them with the mandates and to ensure that they have the
necessary capacities to deal with the conflict situations
in which they operate. Unfortunately, the Organization's
activities in Darfur, Mali and South Sudan frequently
face situations that determine the likelihood of
peacekeeping operations achieving the objectives for
which they were designed. I refer to situations in which
the proliferation of internal and external actors hinders
the viability of a political process.

In the light of that problem, we would like to
highlight three central elements to be considered when
establishing the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
on which we have some questions for today's briefers.

The first question concerns the cooperation of the
host country and the support of the relevant regional
and subregional organizations. In that regard, we
would like to ask the Force Commanders present what
additional measures could be deployed to promote
greater support from national and regional actors for
the respective peacekeeping operations?

The second question concerns realistic and flexible
mandates that are adaptable to evolving situations. That
implies having adequate capacities, including, inter
alia, training, equipment, modern technology, medical
services and transport. In that regard, we would like to
ask our guests about the best ways to bridge the gaps
between the difficulties facing them in their tasks and
their available capacities.

The third issue is the need to establish appropriate
exit strategies with aview to building a sustainablepeace.
On that point, we would like to know the views of our
guests about the possibility of peacekeeping operations
establishing a relationship with the United Nations
country team and the synergies that can be generated in
the transition towards a post-conflict situation.

Furthermore, we believe that independent reviews
of peacekeeping operations can help to better identify
the priority elements to improve those operations in
order to meet the needs observed on the ground. It would
therefore be interesting to know the views of our guests
about the usefulness and relevance of such reports.

Peru strongly supports the priority given by the
Organization and its Secretary-General to the security
of the Blue Helmets, and highlights the rapid reaction
of the Secretariat to adopt measures to deal with such a
situation as part of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.

Finally, we believe that it is necessary to approach
in parallel the work of peacekeeping operations and the
root causes of conflicts, such as human vulnerability,
corruption and organized crime, among others.

