Mr. Schori (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union-Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated countries
of Cyprus and Malta, as well as the European Free
Trade Association country member of the European
Economic Area, Iceland, align themselves with this
statement.

Six months ago, the Security Council adopted an
important declaration on enhancing the role of the
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security. Today we should ask ourselves how far we
have come, particularly in Africa. Have the Council's
intentions of September 2000 become real? Is the
understanding reached at the summit being translated
into practical action?

The answer is yes, but it is most definitely a work
in progress. In fact, over the past six months, we have
seen certain steps forward in strengthening United
Nations activities in peace and security. However,
much remains to be done.

Keeping our focus on Africa, let us recall that the
continent currently hosts three of this Organization's
most important peacekeeping missions. Of these, the
Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea has reached full
deployment, and the one in Sierra Leone is
experiencing major changes. In today's debate,
however, I would like to focus on the regional crisis
that was on the summit's agenda six months ago and
still remains a challenge for the Security Council, the
international community and the parties concerned: the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

There have been encouraging signs lately that the
parties to the conflict are finally committed to
implementing the Lusaka Agreement. The United
Nations, in particular the Security Council, has
responded to these changed circumstances in a quick
and flexible manner. However, in order for the process
not to derail, the parties must remain committed, and
the capacity of the United Nations to provide support
must be strengthened. Unless the well-known
constraints of United Nations peace operations are
addressed, the Organization will not be able to realize
its full potential in helping control and defuse crises,
whether in the Democratic Republic of the Congo or
elsewhere.
By the adoption of resolution 1327 (2000) in
November 2000, the Security Council acted quickly to
the reforms proposed by the Brahimi Panel. Work has
also been undertaken by the Member States in the
General Assembly to follow up on these
recommendations. So far, however, the reforms
proposed in the Brahimi report have received only
partial endorsement. The European Union considers
that the Brahimi proposals offer a unique opportunity
to improve the way the international community
approaches peacekeeping and strongly urges the United
Nations and its Member States to work towards full
implementation of its recommendations. The European
Union hopes that the resumption later this spring of
consideration of the Brahimi report will result in the
endorsement of a wider range of its recommendations.

One such recommendation - the improvement of
cooperation between the Security Council, the United
Nations Secretariat and the troop-contributing
countries-is now being looked at in depth by the
Security Council Working Group on peacekeeping. The
European Union notes that important lessons on the
need for closer consultations with troop-contributing
countries can be drawn from recent experiences and
welcomes the fact that the Working Group will engage
in this issue as well as other key themes of the Brahimi
report.

Let us not forget, however, that ultimately the
role of the United Nations cannot go beyond the will of
the parties. Unless there is a real desire for peace
among the parties involved in the conflict, there are
limits to what the international community can do to
help, and peace efforts will certainly fail.

As has been affirmed by the Council before, we
cannot deal effectively with conflict without tackling
its root causes. A long-term and comprehensive
perspective is necessary to prevent conflicts and
consolidate peace. Measures in this field should be all-
encompassing and include reducing poverty; improving
health, looking particularly at the HIV/AIDS crisis;
strengthening democracy; ensuring respect for human
rights and promoting gender equality; and increasing
humanitarian assistance. All these elements are
necessary and directly relevant to the responsibility of
the Security Council under the Charter. The European
Union looks forward to the Secretary-General's report
on conflict prevention due in May.

Let me now turn to some key areas of conflict
resolution addressed by the summit declaration,
particularly in Africa.
First, Africa is generally regarded as the region
most affected by the scourge of illegal flows and
destabilizing accumulations of small arms. The
upcoming United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects will play a vital role in focusing international
efforts to address this problem. The European Union
will do its utmost to ensure that the Conference leads
to prompt and decisive actions that foster early and
sustainable solutions. Additionally, programmes aimed
at disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants into civil society should, whenever
necessary and appropriate, be an integral element of
the mandates of peacekeeping operations.

Secondly, systematic and deliberate violations of
sanctions continue to fuel some of the long and bitter
conflicts in Africa. The reports of the Monitoring
Mechanism on Angola and the Panel of Experts on
Sierra Leone have shown that many of the same actors
are involved in violations of sanctions in those
countries. It is essential that the international
community show that such violations will not be
tolerated.

In this context, the European Union reiterates its
full support for the resolution on conflict diamonds
adopted unanimously by the General Assembly last
year. There is a clear need to give urgent consideration
to the establishment ofa global certification scheme for
rough diamonds. The European Union welcomes the
launch at Windhoek last month of the new phase of the
Kimberly process, and looks forward to rapid progress
and the presentation of clear recommendations to the
next session of the General Assembly. We must put a
stop to the use of diamond sales to fund continued
conflict and suffering.

On the issue of sanctions, the European Union
looks forward to the report of the informal working
group of the Security Council on improving their
effectiveness. We welcome recent efforts to ensure that
United Nations sanctions are effectively targeted, and
recall in that regard the valuable work sponsored by the
Swiss and German Governments on improving the
effectiveness of financial sanctions, travel restrictions
and arms embargoes. We strongly support moves by the
Council to make the objectives of sanctions and the
criteria for lifting them clear from the outset; to assess
the possible humanitarian impacts of sanctions; and to
ensure that appropriate mechanisms for reviews are
incorporated into sanctions regimes. The European
Union notes the ongoing discussions in the Security
Council on how to improve the monitoring of
sanctions, and stresses that effective steps should be
taken to support the Council and Member States on this
and all other aspects of sanctions.

Thirdly, let me mention one instrument that is
crucial for post-conflict reconstruction: international
tribunals. It is important that individuals who have
committed war crimes, genocide or crimes against
humanity during an armed conflict be held criminally
responsible for their acts. In the context of Africa, in
particular, the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda has served important functions of
accountability, reconciliation, deterrence and peace-
building. The European Union also wishes to underline
the importance of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, and to renew its call on all States to
become parties to the Statute with a view to its early
entry into force.

Measures in the fields of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peace-building are closely
interlinked and are crucial for building a solid
foundation for peace. The Council has recently
recognized the need to devise comprehensive peace-
building strategies and to mobilize all relevant actors at
the earliest possible stage to ensure that there is no gap
between peacekeeping and peace-building. In this
context, it is essential to give the Secretariat an
information and analysis capacity that will permit it to
understand the profound, as well as the immediate,
causes of conflict. This will provide the Secretary-
General with the necessary input to develop integrated
strategies for conflict resolution.

Of course, the Security Council has primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. But it is equally recognized today
that for peace efforts to succeed, the various relevant
elements of the international community must act in a
concerted manner. This makes sense not only in order
to better utilize resources, but also to tap into the
comparative advantages of each organization. The
recent high-level meeting of the United Nations with
regional organizations sought precisely to continue to
strengthen the cooperation between the United Nations
and regional or subregional organizations in the
implementation of peace strategies. The European
Union recalls its willingness to develop its cooperation
with the United Nations in elaborating and
implementing conflict-prevention and peace-building
strategies.

Six months later, the report card reads, "Steps
have been taken, but much more needs to be done".
This assessment should encourage the United Nations
to work more and harder to improve its role in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
particularly in Africa. The whole United Nations
membership should engage in this work, in accordance
with the commitment made by the heads of State and
Government last September in the Millennium
Declaration.

Let me end on a general note by expressing our
appreciation for initiatives taken by Security Council
members to arrange open debates, such as the one
being held today, on important thematic topics within
the field of international peace and security. The
European Union - in New York, in Brussels and in all
the other capitals - wholeheartedly supports efforts to
make these debates as interactive and as focused as
possible.

