Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, the Chinese delegation thanks you for
convening today's meeting. We thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his report on piracy in
Somalia (S/2009/590), as well as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould
Abdallah for his briefing this morning.

Piracy activities in Somalia have become ever
more rampant, posing a direct threat to the safety of
international humanitarian relief activities and
international navigation and a potential menace to
world economic activities. In his latest report
submitted to the Security Council, the Secretary-
General points out that since the beginning of 2009, 34
vessels have been hijacked and 450 seafarers abducted
in the waters off Somalia. China is also one of the
victims of the pirate activities of Somalia. We support
the collective efforts by the international community to
address the problem of piracy in Somalia and hope that
the international community will agree on an integrated
approach to doing so at an early date.

Since December 2008, the Chinese Government
has, under United Nations coordination and within the

framework of relevant Security Council resolutions,
taken an active part in international cooperation in the
fight against Somali piracy. The Chinese navy escort
flotilla will continue to fulfil our Government's
commitment to protect the safety of Chinese vessels
and people travelling through the Gulf of Aden and the
waters off the coast of Somalia and to protect the
safety of the vessels of the World Food Programme and
other international organizations that are delivering
humanitarian relief supplies.

Our effective fight against piracy in Somalia still
awaits an integrated solution. We believe that the
international community should pay attention to the
following priorities.

First, it is imperative to strictly observe
international law and relevant Security Council
resolutions. In fighting piracy in Somalia, we should
strictly observe the relevant rules of international law
as contained in the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea and the Convention for the Suppression
of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Maritime
Navigation; act in accordance with the requirements of
relevant Security Council resolutions in full respect of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the littoral
States in particular; and maintain communication and
consultation with the Transitional Federal Government
of Somalia.

Secondly, priority should be given to addressing
the domestic problems of Somalia. Without an end to
the domestic crisis in the country, the piracy problem
cannot be rooted out. Only by continuing to
consolidate the domestic process of political
reconciliation in Somalia and promoting its economic
development to enable the people to live and work in
peace and happiness can the security situation in
Somalia have any hope of gradual movement towards
stability and the piracy problem be gradually rooted
out. The fact that the political process of reconciliation
has remained stagnant and the security situation has
not fundamentally improved after so many years is a
cause for concern. The international community should
work harder in this area.

Thirdly, assistance should be rendered to the
regional States for their capacity-building. Ensuring that
peace, tranquillity and safety of navigation in the Gulf
of Aden and Somali waters has a bearing on the interests
of the littoral States and the safety of international
navigation. It also requires the mutual understanding

and full cooperation between the regional States and the
international community. China supports the joint
efforts made by the countries in the Red Sea, the Gulf of
Aden and the western Indian Ocean to address the
problem of piracy in Somalia through regional
arrangements. We welcome the signing of the Djibouti
Code of Conduct. The international community should,
through various means, help the countries concerned in
boosting their capacities.

For over a year, despite intensified efforts by
various naval forces to crack down on piracy in the
Gulf of Aden and off the coast of Somalia, pirate
attacks do occur frequently. We believe that, to put an
effective end to pirate attacks, the international
community should further expand maritime escort
operations. Meanwhile, the relevant participating
countries should also improve their coordination in
these escort operations. With that in mind, the
competent departments of China propose that the naval
forces that provide escorts in these waters define areas
of responsibility in order to improve the efficiency of
escorts and to lessen the possibility of pirates
succeeding in their attempts.

At the request of Working Group 1 of the Contact
Group on Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia, China
hosted a meeting from 6 to 7 November, on
international maritime escort coordination in the Gulf
of Aden with invited representatives from countries
and organizations that have participated in the fight
against Somali piracy. The meeting further discussed
cooperation in enforcing the concept of areas of
responsibility in the Gulf of Aden.

China has an open attitude towards international
navigational escorts. We are ready to engage in, within
the framework of international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, multiple forms of
bilateral and multilateral escort cooperation with all
countries and organizations concerned in a joint
response to the menace of piracy in Somalia.

