The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait.

At the outset, allow me to thank Secretary-General
Antenio Guterres for his valuable briefing. I assure him
that the State of Kuwait will spare no effort during its
mandate to be a good supporter to his efforts and vision
towards improving the mechanisms of the United
Nations, thereby strengthening its effectiveness in
reducing the dangers and threats facing our world today.

I would also like to thank former Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for participating in this
meeting and delivering a valuable briefing that is the
result of a decade at the helm of the United Nations.
This is a historic moment. We are in the presence of
two - the current and former - Secretaries-General
in one meeting. I am therefore deeply grateful that they
accepted the invitation to participate in this meeting.
We will not find a better person to address the Security
Council on the importance of our topic today than a
former and present Secretary-General.

It is appropriate to start this meeting on the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations in
the maintenance of international peace and security by
quoting the first lines of the Preamble of the Charter,
which illustrate the reason for our meeting:

"We the peoples of the United Nations
determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has
brought untold sorrow to mankind and to reaffirm
faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity
and worth of the human person, in the equal rights
of men and women and of nations large and small".

The State of Kuwait decided to convene
this important meeting to discuss our collective
responsibility and commitment regarding the purposes
and principles of the Charter, which represent a
constitution pertaining to multilateral and international
action. The members of the Council are gathered in
the Chamber today to examine the tools set out in
the Charter, which the Council has at its disposal, to
effectively maintain international peace and security
and address the challenges currently facing the world.

The Charter of the United Nations is an instrument
of an international legal nature that serves as a clear
framework for regulating relations among States. If we
abided by its provisions, threats undermining peace
and security would decrease. It is also necessary to
implement its provisions on an equal footing, effectively
and collectively, while committing ourselves to its
purposes and principles. It is essential that we work
together as one to end violence and aggression, establish
friendly relations among nations; ensure respect for the
principles of sovereignty and non-interference in the
internal affairs of others, as well as equal rights and the
right to self-determination; and promote and encourage
respect for human rights. Despite the fact that those
purposes and principles exist and that all Members of
the United Nations should abide by them, we find that
they are flagrantly flouted in ways that undermine not
only regional peace and security, but also international
security in general. We in the State of Kuwait underwent
a very trying situation, which everyone is aware of, as a
result of grave violations of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.

The State of Kuwait did not decide to choose the
purposes and principles of the Charter as the topic
for today's meeting at random. We are currently the
smallest Member State on the Council in terms of
our physical size. However, the issue of respecting
the provisions of the United Nations Charter and the
rules of international law is extremely important for
all countries, in particular the small ones. In fact, the
principles and purposes of the Charter represent the
first line of defence for small countries. The holding
of this meeting in February was also not based on a
random decision. Every year on 26 February, The
State of Kuwait celebrates its liberation from the Iraqi
occupation in 1991. That liberation was the consequence
of the international community's commitment to abide
by the purposes and principles of the Charter. In a few
days from now, we will celebrate the twenty-seventh
anniversary of our liberation.

The example of Kuwait's liberation clearly attests
to what we can do when the international community
pools its efforts under the umbrella of the United
Nations, as well as through the legitimate Security
Council resolutions supporting the rule of law and
upholding rights, justice, while combating tyranny
and injustice. The process leading to the liberation
of Kuwait is a historic and successful model that
highlights the Security Council's ability to set right the
situation caused by an act of aggression, the goal of
which was to undermine and violate the noble purposes
and principles of the Charter. In that context, I would
like to raise three important issues.

First, the tools that the Security Council has at
its disposal in order to shoulder its responsibilities.
Seventy years after the founding of the United Nations,
its Charter has in no way diminished in importance.
The Charter includes tools that enable us to confront
challenges, including Chapter VI, which provides an
important tool for resolving disputes through peaceful
means, negotiations, mediation and arbitration, to
name a few. This tool should be further activated.
In fact, measures adopted by the Council in times of
crisis frequently represent a delayed reaction to an
event. Often, the Council fails to consider preventive
measures to prevent emerging crises by addressing
them from the outset.

The root causes of crises are often attributable
to economic and social issues, such as poverty and
unemployment. The Security Council often forgets that
the third pillar of the United Nations Charter - after
peace and security, and human rights - is development.
Working to achieve sustainable development requires
an environment that is conducive to political stability
and security, and confronting the root causes of the
challenges that we are aware of. In this context, we note
that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
includes a very specific Sustainable Development
Goal - Goal 16 - which calls for peaceful, just and
inclusive societies.

Early warning and addressing conflicts before they
erupt requires the political will of the Council. Let us
recall some of the massacres and tragedies when the
Council failed to adopt the measures necessary to
save thousands and even millions of lives, such as the
Rwanda genocide and the Srebrenica massacre. Those
are examples that demonstrate the failure of the Council
and the international community to act to prevent such
crises in a timely manner. They are lessons for us all.

We are also aware that, in certain circumstances,
mediation, negotiations and other peaceful means
probably will not lead to resolving crises, but in those
cases Chapter VII allows for the use of force so as to
maintain or restore international peace and security.
The liberation of Kuwait demonstrated the effectiveness
and legitimacy of Chapter VII through a legitimate
military response to a despicable military invasion.
That response was mandated by resolution 678 (1990)
after all diplomatic means had been exhausted.

With regard to Chapter VIII, we firmly believe
in the constructive role that regional and subregional
organizations can play in contributing to the
establishment of peace and security regionally and
internationally. We call for greater cooperation between
the Security Council and such regional organizations.

My second point concerns the unity of the Security
Council. The Council has many tools at its disposal
for settling crises, including those that promote their
peaceful resolution before they erupt. However,
being able to use such tools successfully depends on
the Council's unity and ability to agree and reach a
consensus. Over the years and decades, we have seen
the Council sometimes unable to settle crises because
of divergent points of view among Council members,
above all regarding the use of the right of veto. Among
the issues that have been affected most negatively by the
failure of the Council to act is the Palestinian question,
which has been on the Council's agenda for more than
70 years and has yet to be resolved. There is also the
Syrian crisis, which is entering its seventh year and has
cost the lives of more than 400,000 people. The unity
of the Security Council, in particular its five permanent
members, is of the utmost importance ifit is to function
and take decisions effectively and decisively.

My third point relates to the Secretary-General.
We highly appreciate the efforts of Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres to improve the two pillars of peace
and security in the work of the United Nations organs.
We support his vision, in particular concerning
international diplomacy and the need to take all
preventive measures before emergency situations
erupt. We stress the important and key role played by
the Secretary-General in bringing any matter to the
attention of the Security Council, pursuant to Article
99 of the Charter.
In conclusion, I should like to emphasize that the
State of Kuwait has returned to the Council after 40
years with the same principles that it defended during
its first term in 1978 and 1979, despite the major
changes that the world has undergone over the last
four decades. That is the Kuwait that members have
known over the years: contributing in the efforts to
maintain international peace and security; believing
in dialogue over brute force; seeking good neighborly
relations and ensuring the best relations with its
neighbors; leading regional mediation and settling
conflicts through peaceful means; active in multilateral
diplomacy; leader in supporting humanitarian work;
and committed to the the purposes and principles of the
United Nations, both in letter and spirit.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Poland.

