Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we are
grateful to Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy ofthe
Secretary-General for Syria, and to Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
their respective briefings. We express our solidarity
with them in the tasks entrusted to them.

The situation on the ground has changed. It has been
possible to establish four de-escalation zones, and with
it a reduction in violence that has made it possible to
regain control of various cities and areas that were once
hard to reach. We believe that the most recent meetings
held in various formats help to continue the cessation
of violence. However, we must make progress in taking
specific decisions that will help to resolve the conflict
in Syria and enable its population to regain peace and
return to their homes. Among other efforts to that end,
those made by the Government and the people of Syria
in their fight against Da'esh are fundamental. It is also
important to take all the necessary measures in order to
avoid in the short-term the reconstitution or emergence
of new terrorist groups, but that in the medium- and
long-term also make it possible to rebuild Syria.

In that regard, we believe that any unilateral
military action is totally illegal and contravenes
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Fundamentally, however, such actions violate the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic and hinder the implementation of the road
map set out in resolution 2254 (2015). We reiterate that
it is imperative that we pool our efforts in order to bring
about the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015)
in its four aspects.

We stress the need for greater reconciliation
among the parties to the Geneva process, wherein the
participation of the Cairo and Moscow platforms are
essential to bring about a political solution. In that
regard, we would highlight those agreements that make
it possible to reduce violence, respect the ceasefire and
create conditions that help guarantee the secure and
dignified return of refugees and internally displaced
persons. We also highlight the efforts made to bring
about stability, promote trust between the parties
involved and to improve the humanitarian situation in
conflict zones. We welcome the efforts undertaken to
date in the various rounds of the Astana process, which
has now become an important forum for establishing
the de-escalation zones and, therefore, as we
reiterate, important in reducing violence and bringing
about stability.

We once again express our great gratitude for the
work of the staff of various humanitarian agencies,
and we demand that international humanitarian law
be respected as humanitarian workers carry out their
very hazardous work on the ground. We therefore again
remind the parties involved in the conflict that they
must permit unconditional access for humanitarian
assistance and guarantee and safeguard the security
and physical well-being of humanitarian workers,
particularly those in besieged and hard-to-reach areas.

Finally, we would reiterate that the only alternative
to resolving this conflict is through an inclusive
political process of dialogue and consultation, led by
and for the Syrian people, which would make it possible
to bring about a peaceful solution among the parties
involved. We reiterate that such political transition
process must always safeguard the sovereignty, unity,
territorial integrity and independence of Syria, through
all peaceful means provided for under the Charter of
the United Nations.

