Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, please allow me to congratulate Minister
Nasser Judeh and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
for its presidency of the Security Council for the month
of April. I would also like to thank the President for
convening this meeting at this crucial stage of the
history of the Middle East, when recent events have
taken place that threaten the existence of certain States
in general, and Palestine in particular. I am sure that
the professionalism of the Jordanian Mission and the
keen commitment of Jordan to defend Arab causes
during the past year or so has made our Jordanian
colleagues capable of guiding us towards establishing
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. I would also
like to extend my congratulations to Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov on his appointment as United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. I wish
him every success. He enjoys our full support in this
difficult task.

I said that the establishment of peace in the Middle
East was a difficult endeavour. Everybody knows that.
Numerous and serious challenges exist, and in certain
circumstances we feel that such issues are very difficult
to overcome. That might jeopardize the two-State
solution. We hear sceptic voices here and there rejecting
this solution as a basis for a comprehensive settlement.
Several times, over many decades, the international
community has demonstrated that a lack of political
will prevails in achieving such a settlement. Recently,
last December, this happened in this very Council. The
international failure is actually a threat to international
peace and security. The Palestinian people have become
convinced that perhaps the sole purpose of the talks
is to continue without the parties having any genuine
intention of establishing two States living side by side
in peace and as good neighbours. In Egypt we say that
the failure to establish peace in the Middle East is not
an option, and in that regard there is continued despair.

That will turn the occupied Palestinian territories into
a fertile ground for the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and terrorist organizations to prosper,
thereby increasing the sufferings of the Palestinian
people.

Indeed, we see how the Palestinians have been
victims of ISIL's atrocious acts in the Yarmouk
Camp. All other countries, including Israel, are facing
multiple threats. That should be an incentive for Israel
to embark upon serious endeavours to establish peace.
After six decades of this ongoing crisis, we are fed up
of the wasted opportunities. The world at large has
seen that certain opportunities have been wasted. We
are all responsible for ensuring the same mistakes are
not repeated after rounds and rounds of useless talks.
As Mr. Robert Serry said in his recent briefing (see S/PV.7417), the peace process was akin to a can that
is kicked down an endless road. The international
community should not stand by and just watch one party
that is not willing to establish such a settlement. Let
us build on the commendable efforts, especially those
made through the Arab Peace Initiative at the twenty-
sixth ordinary session of the Council of the League of
Arab States, held in Sharm El-Sheikh, which issued
resolution 614. Paragraph 3 of the resolution mandates
the Arab Ministers to continue their consultations with
the Security Council, the United States Administration,
the Russian Federation, China and the European Union
in order to continue to try and establish peace.

What do we need and what are we waiting for
to end the occupation and establish peace? We have
witnessed the erosion of the lofty aims on which the
United Nations was established long ago. We would
like to commend the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for
the efforts it has exerted. I would also like to refer to
the commendable efforts by France to move forward,
its urging the Security Council to extend its support
for the peace process and indeed for introducing a draft
resolution for the reactivation of the peace process. The
Arab Republic of Egypt, in its capacity as the Chair of
the Arab committee mandated to follow up on the Arab
plan to end the Israeli occupation, would like to urge
everyone to cooperate. Indeed, Gaza is part and parcel
of the Palestinian territories. I would like to request all
the parties that participated in the Cairo international
conference on Palestine and reconstructing Gaza to
provide the necessary assistance.

The crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic is now
entering its fifth year. There can be no solution other
than a political one, based on the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, anex), under which the integrity of the
Syrian territories is to be preserved. I would like to
reiterate that Egypt will continue its efforts to provide
the necessary political support to all Syrian parties
willing to come to an agreement.

Once again, Egypt calls for an end to the Israeli
occupation of the Golan Heights, in accordance with
resolution 242 (1967).

