Mr. Dauth (Australia): Allow me to reiterate, Mr.
President, the words that I was fortunate enough to be
able to offer yesterday in congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, as well as to express Australia's
pleasure at the steady hand that we know you will
bring to the Council at this crucial time.

We are at a historic moment for the Council and
for international security. The architecture of
international peace and security, in which we - all of
us - have invested so much over the past 50 years,
hangs in the balance. The Council's decisions could
either strengthen that architecture or gravely undermine
it. Members of this body face a weighty responsibility
to ensure both the disarmament of Iraq and the
continuing relevance of the Security Council in global
affairs.
Four months after the adoption of resolution 1441
(2002), Australia does not believe that Iraq has shown
a change of heart that will lead to its full and verifiable
disarmament. In his report to this body on 7 March, Mr.
Blix was unable to state that Iraq had taken the
fundamental decision to disarm. In fact, no one,
including United Nations weapons inspectors, has been
able to describe Iraq's cooperation as immediate,
unconditional and active.

We believe that Iraq has therefore fallen short of
what resolution 1441 (2002) required it to do. Its
actions so far do not permit any other conclusion. The
key question for the Council, as the primary
multilateral instrument of international peace and
security, is what it will do about this situation. Will it
accept the small, belated steps taken by Iraq as
adequate? We believe it should not. The
commencement of the destruction of Al Samoud 2
missiles is not a reason to relinquish the pressure on
Iraq to disarm. Developing missiles with a range
beyond 150 kilometres is something Iraq should never
have done in the first place: this very body expressly
forbade it. Iraq's belated discoveries of the R-400
bombs raise questions about why it was suddenly able
to find weapons. Other developments, such as the
handing over of some documents, are redolent of Iraq's
tired tactic of seeking to pacify the international
community, rather than signalling the beginning of true
cooperation.

Those reluctant offerings were only brought about
through the enormous pressure on Iraq created by the
massing of military forces in the region. Even that
minimum cooperation would stop if the pressure were
removed. We have seen that pattern before, and no
doubt will see it again unless the Security Council is
united and acts decisively.

The point is that the international community did
not ask that Iraq should put on a display of piecemeal
cooperation. The international community has
demanded Iraq's unconditional disarmament, verified
by inspectors. Very few outstanding disarmament
questions have been resolved and many remain. We
still do not know what Iraq has done with 6,500
chemical munitions, with a potential agent content of
1,000 tonnes of chemical agent; 8,500 litres of anthrax;
650 kilograms of bacterial growth media, which could
be used to make 5,000 litres of anthrax; 360 tonnes of
bulk chemical agent; 1.5 tonnes of VX and 3,000
tonnes of precursor chemicals. Without full Iraqi
cooperation, none of those and other questions will be
adequately resolved. The inspectors will never be able
to do their job properly. It is time that all the members
of the Security Council acknowledge that. Giving
inspectors more time, or giving them additional
capabilities, will mean nothing unless Iraq genuinely
cooperates.

We all have a fundamental interest in
strengthening the architecture of international security.
We want to see the Security Council reinvigorated, not
sidelined by the situation it faces. Avoiding a decision
or delaying a decision will undermine that objective.

The Security Council must recognize that threats
to international security have changed. It must deal
with the borderless scourge of international terrorism
and with the risk of illicit trade in prohibited and dual-
use items. The threat of terrorism is made worse by the
possibility that terrorists could get hold of chemical
and biological weapons. For that reason, it is urgent
that the Council confront this risk by disarming nations
that build those weapons and defy international non-
proliferation norms. Failure to do so will both increase
the immediate threat and set a precedent that we will
all come to regret.

Creating a more secure world and underpinning
our system of non-proliferation require resolve. The
Security Council must mean what it says, and countries
must live up to their obligations. The Council
expressed its resolve when, in its eighteenth resolution
on the issue, it decided to give Iraq one last chance in
resolution 1441 (2002). Iraq has failed to take that
chance. But even now, the best and perhaps last hope
of achieving a peaceful solution is for the Security
Council to send a clear message to Iraq through a new
resolution that it must disarm fully.

In September last year the Secretary-General
addressed the General Assembly, urging Iraq to comply
with its obligations and stressing that, if its defiance
continued, the Security Council must face its
responsibilities. Six months have gone by. Iraq has not
complied with its obligations. Difficult though it is, it
is time for the Council to face its responsibilities.

