Mr. Moriko (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, and Mr. Lamberto Zannier, High Commissioner
on National Minorities of the Organization for Security

and Cooperation in Europe, for their informative
briefings on the entry into force on 15 July 2019 of the
law establishing Ukrainian as the sole national language.

Whenever the Security Council has been seized
of worrying developments in the situation in Ukraine
and the region, Cote d'Ivoire has remained consistent
in its call on all stakeholders in the crisis to exercise the
utmost restraint and prioritize dialogue as a means of
resolving their dispute. My country remains convinced
that the lack of progress in the implementation of
the Minsk agreements and the unilateral initiatives
that exacerbate tensions reduce the prospects for a
peaceful solution to the current crisis in Ukraine. In
that especially volatile context, fuelled by a climate of
mutual mistrust, Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its conviction
that lasting peace and stability will be possible only
with ongoing dialogue that enables compromise among
all parties.

In that respect, it welcomes the telephone interview
on 11 July, which allowed Presidents Volodymyr
Zelenskyi and Vladimir Putin to discuss a number of
topics, including the situation in south-eastern Ukraine.
Cote d'Ivoire would like to express its hope that the
telephone exchange will pave the way for many more
consultations between the two Presidents with a view to
restoring the much-needed dialogue in the Normandy
format, including its possible expansion.

In conclusion, cote d'Ivoire remains convinced
that, despite the complexity of the current crisis, the
restoration ofpeace and peaceful coexistence is possible
in Ukraine. It is up to the political actors to work, through
dialogue, towards achieving that noble aspiration in
order to protect the entire region from a confrontation
with disastrous humanitarian consequences.

