Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): At the outset, Sir, I
would like to commend you and the delegation of
Belgium for the initiative to convene this open debate
on the implementation of the note by the President of
the Security Council of 19 July 2006 (S/2006/507) and
for creating this timely and welcome opportunity, when
the members of the Security Council and other United
Nations Member States are engaging in a direct
exchange of Views on how to ensure that the Security
Council is more open, more transparent, more efficient
and more effective and that, as a matter of principle,
there is more dialogue and better interaction between
members of the Council and other United Nations
Member States, especially those directly affected,
concerned and interested. I would also like to thank
you for preparing a very valuable concept paper
(S/2008/528, annex) containing many relevant points
as well as some very useful data.

We welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General at this open debate and thank him for his very
informative briefing. It goes without saying that the
Council and the Secretariat need to continue working
very closely together on a whole range of issues
pertaining to the Council's working methods.

I cannot start otherwise than by mentioning the
2005 World Summit Outcome Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1), especially its paragraphs
153 and 154, whereby our heads of State or
Government agreed on the need to adapt the Security
Council's working methods so as to increase the
involvement of States not members of the Council in
its work. Increased transparency, efficiency and
effectiveness are part and parcel of these efforts.

In 2006, as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council, Slovakia was actively involved in the
negotiation process stemming from the 2005 World
Summit Outcome Document, led by the Japanese
chairmanship of the Security Council Informal Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
which culminated in the adoption of the note contained
in document S/2006/507. On this occasion, I would
like once again to express our appreciation to the
Japanese delegation for their tireless efforts and
exemplary leadership in the process of agreeing and
adopting the note. In 2007, as Chairman of the
Working Group, Slovakia focused its efforts and
endeavours mainly on thorough implementation of the
note and on dealing with a range of practical issues
pertaining to documentation and other procedural
questions. We appreciate the efforts of the delegation
of Panama as the 2008 Chair of the Working Group.

We believe that many good results have been
achieved over the past two years through adopting the
note and striving to fully implement it. All Council
members have been actively engaged in this endeavour.
We are convinced that everybody who has been
following the work of the Security Council for some
time has to agree now that there have been
considerable improvements, for example when it
comes to the number of public meetings and open
briefings and as regards the availability and
accessibility of timely information about the work of
the Council. We are very pleased to see, inter alia, that
it has recently become much more common for
countries directly concerned to take the floor before
Council members and that representatives of regional
and subregional organizations are more often invited to
take part in various forms of the Council's work.

I will refrain from giving details about what
specific issues we focused on as 2007 Chair of the
Working Group; those details are part of the written
statement that will be distributed. I would just like to
highlight the fact that, in an effort to further facilitate
an exchange of Views related to the efforts to enhance
the efficiency, openness and transparency of the
Council's work, as well as of the Council's regular
dialogue and interaction with other Member States, my
delegation convened an Arria Formula meeting, which
was held on 13 December 2007. This was generally
seen as an innovative opportunity to discuss that
relevant topic. A brief summary of the meeting and the
related recommendations were set out in a document
issued under the symbol S/2007/784.

In spite of everything that I have said so far, we
do not believe that there is still time for complacency
or for a feeling that the job has already been done. We
have always seen the 2006 note by the President of the
Security Council and its implementation as works in
progress. The note and the agreed measures contained
therein are only first and fairly modest - although
very important - steps in the long term-effort to
increase the openness, transparency, efficiency and
effectiveness of the Council's work. We would like to
take this opportunity to encourage the members of the
Council to fully and consistently implement all agreed
measures, as well as to continue discussing and
assessing further practical ways and means to move
things further along. The views expressed by other
Member States, including at today's open debate,
should be taken duly into account.

In addition, on the basis of its own recent
experience as an elected member of the Security
Council, Slovakia believes that further efforts in the
near future should be focused on the following four
areas.

First, continuing efforts should be made to
enhance the transparency and openness of the
Council's work, including, and in particular, with
regard to the work of its subsidiary bodies.

Secondly, there must be continuing efforts to
enhance and widen the interaction and the dialogue
between the Council and other United Nations Member
States, in particular those directly affected, concerned
and interested. That issue is directly or indirectly
referred to in at least 22 paragraphs of the 2006 note
and is the sole topic of at least eight paragraphs. This
could also be achieved through better use of private
Council meetings, more regular use of Arria Formula
meetings and the holding of regular consultations
between members and non-members of the Council on
relevant issues.

Thirdly, there must be a revitalization of private
Security Council meetings with the troop-contributing
countries. Such meetings have recently become too
formalistic and have lost much of their original value,
as envisaged in particular in resolutions 1353 (2001)
and 1327 (2000) and in numerous presidential
statements, most of which were adopted between 1994
and 2004.

Fourthly, continuing efforts must be made to
maximize the relevance of the Security Council's
annual report to the General Assembly, including by
making the annual report more substantive and more
analytical and by holding an interactive discussion on
it with the General Assembly.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Slovakia remains fully committed to the cause of the
Council's openness, transparency, efficiency and
effectiveness. We stand ready to continue contributing
to the ongoing discussions and to concrete action
aimed at achieving that long-term goal.

