Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate
on children and armed conflict. Let me also thank
all today's briefers for their insightful and moving
statements, and commend Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ms. Leila Zerrougui's determined
efforts to protect the rights of children trapped in
conflicts.

As the briefers have noted, there has been some
progress in the protection efforts in various hot spots.
This includes the strengthened support to relative
normative frameworks in the crises-affected countries;
better integration of child protection in key mandated
areas of peacekeeping operations; and global advocacy
campaigning, such as that of "Children, Not Soldiers",
just to name a few.

Despite that progress, important though it is,
non-combatants, particularly children, continue to be
exposed to great risk. Much needs to be done. I shall
briefly outline a few key concerns. Once conflict
begins, children are among the first to suffer from
its effects and consequences. As long as a conflict
continues, indiscriminate and deliberate attacks, losses
and atrocities are inevitable. The Council should focus
on the prevention, resolution, and most importantly,
address the root causes of conflict.

All parties to a conflict should implement their
commitments under international humanitarian
law and cease violence against civilians, especially
children. Ceasefire agreements can be an important
practical step toward curbing violence; however, it is
only a temporary measure and does not guarantee the
safety and security of civilians. Twenty years after the
signing of the ceasefire agreement between Azerbaijan
and Armenia, that agreement is violated regularly. Our
children have been targets of both indiscriminate and
deliberate attacks.

As a result of sniper fire alone, Fariz Badalov,
a nine-year-old boy, was killed in Agdam. Aygun
Shahmaliyeva, a 13-year-old girl, was killed in
the Alibayli village of the Tovuz region bordering
Armenia, when a bomb implanted in a toy exploded.
In August 2014, five-year-old Mujan Ariba, 17-year-old
Farid Mammadov, l4-year-old Sahans Malov, 15-year-
old Shahlalah Tariba, lO-year-old Aushkara Basov were
seriously wounded by Armenian snipers. The list is not
exhaustive; it merely illustrates recent examples.

Combating impunity is important, not only for the
purposes ofprosecuting such crimes and bringing those
responsible to justice, but also for ensuring sustainable
peace, truce and reconciliation. We join the call for
efforts to be stepped up at all levels to reduce the grave
impact of conflicts on children, and to uphold justice
by bringing to account those who perpetrate crimes
against children, including non-State actors and those
who fuel them, both ideologically and financially.
Education and outreach campaigns can be effective
tools for protecting children from violence and abuse,
both during intensive and passive phases of armed
conflict. The promotion of hatred in speech, ideas of
ethnic incompatibility and racial superiority perpetuate
the vicious cycle of violence. Those who promote such
intolerance also entrap their population in poverty and
underdevelopment.

Particular consideration should be given to
internally displaced children in terms of ensuring the
inalienable right of return, and to the implication of
illegal policies and practices in situations of foreign
occupation, for the protection of children's rights. In
addition, determining the fate of children taken hostage
and reported missing in situations of armed conflict,
as well as searching for them and reuniting them with
their families are other aspects of the problem that
require urgent action.

Azerbaijan is ready to support efforts aimed at
safeguarding the rights of children. We will continue
to work with the international community to achieve
that objective.

