The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Yugoslavia in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahovic'
(Yugoslavia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its
continued commitment to the full and effective
implementation of Council resolution 1244
(1999) in Kosovo, Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, commends the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Commander of the international security presence
(KFOR) for the ongoing efforts to this end and
calls upon the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government, local leaders and all others
concerned to cooperate fully with them.

"The Security Council welcomes the
progress made in preparing the municipal
elections on 26 October 2002, calls upon all
eligible voters, including those from minority
communities, to seize the chance to have their
interests properly represented by taking part in
the elections. The Council expresses its firm
belief that wide participation in the voting is
essential to provide the best opportunity for
future progress towards the building of a multi-
ethnic and tolerant society."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2002/29.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.20 pm.

