Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to join others in expressing our sincere gratitude
to the Egyptian delegation and to you personally,
Mr. Minister, for convening this debate. Also please
accept our condolences in connection with the bloody
terrorist attack committed in Cairo on Sunday.

Our thanks also go to the briefers, who have
provided us with valuable information concerning
the current trends and policies applied in the field of
countering terrorist narratives and propaganda by the
United Nations, Member States and civil society actors.

Terrorist and violent extremist ideologies, which
have been propagated all over the world by terrorist
entities, the most well-known being the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and groups, nowadays pose a
serious threat to international peace and security, as
well as to stability in the world. They threaten our core
values and principles, including democracy, human
rights, the rule of law, equal opportunity and freedom.

Notwithstanding the recent tentative progress in
the suppression of those international terrorist threats,
especially by depriving the terrorist organizations
of some sources of their financing, there is still a
significant lack of cohesive actions with regard to
countering their propaganda while ensuring effective
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005)
and 2178 (2014). Achieving that goal will be possible
only through a comprehensive framework of concrete
strategies aimed at consolidating all existing efforts
and strengthening cooperation among all stakeholders,
including Governments, civil society and the private
sector, so as to improve their understanding of the ways
in which terrorists use information and communications
technologies (ICT) for terrorist purposes. That will
make possible the application of a unified approach
to deterring the use of the Internet and social media
to incite people to terrorism, train and recruit foreign
terrorist fighters, and plan and finance terrorist
activities.

To strike at the heart of the aggressive informational
campaigns of terrorists aimed at the recruitment
of new followers and sympathizers, the strategy of
the international community should involve not just
countering the ideologies of such groups, which
are being distributed through the Internet, but also
developing persuasive context-specific counter-
narratives and messages to neutralize the terrorists'
influence on persons belonging to the target audiences
and to eliminate the terrorists' focal points for
radicalization. That is where civil society and, in
particular, representatives of local communities and
religious leaders, could play a crucial role in raising
public awareness by revealing the truth about would-
be jihadists and by de-glorifying their activities. To
monitor the threat posed by the use of ICT for terrorist
purposes, to collect, identify and share good practices
developed in this field worldwide and to mobilize
resources for building required capacities, we need
to establish a strengthened international cooperation
mechanism that would engage relevant United Nations
counter-terrorism entities, acting within the all-of-
United Nations approach, together with regional and
subregional organizations.

It goes without saying that counter-measures would
not have long-lasting effects without removing the root
causes of the threat of violent extremism and terrorism.
Having put out the fire in one place in the world, there is
no guarantee that an outbreak will not occur elsewhere.
Our collective response should be focused on addressing
underlying factors that create opportunities for violent
extremist and terrorist ideologies to spread and thrive.

Only by combining more nuanced and comprehensive
countering and prevention measures that address
governance deficit, promote social development and
dialogue and respect for the rule of law and human rights,
develop strategic communications, engage women and
youth and expand public-private partnerships can we
reduce the appeal of and support for terrorist groups
and enhance resilience against them. In this respect, we
note with appreciation the Secretary-General's Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674), add
our voice in support of further consideration of the Plan
during the review process of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy this June, and look forward
to extensive discussions on how it can enhance the
existing comprehensive counter-terrorism architecture.

While addressing the need to intensify our common
work on preventing the spread of malevolent ideologies,
we should explore ways to engage young people, who
constitute one of the strata that are most vulnerable to
violent extremist and terrorist narratives. There are
many factors contributing to youth radicalization; one
of the most important is propaganda. Violent extremist
and terrorist groups actively exploit this tool through
media and social networks. In our opinion, the most
dangerous situation emerges when such manipulations
are elevated to the rank of State policies.

Under international law States are obliged to
refrain from engaging in acts of terrorism and to work
to prevent them. An essential element of both these
obligations is the necessity of countering terrorist
ideological propaganda. This observation should be
taken into consideration while assessing States' input
on combating terrorism.

For more than two years, Ukraine has suffered
from the aggression of its neighbour, the Russian
Federation. Russia has temporarily occupied and
attempted to illegally annex a part of the territory of
Ukraine - the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and
the city of Sevastopol - and continues hostile and
subversive actions, supporting terrorism in the Donbas
region. Russia employs a broad range of hybrid warfare
techniques, including financing terrorism, to promote
ideology of the so-called Russian world, which implies
an exclusive role for the Russian Federation in the
internal affairs of the countries that were once part
of the Russian empire or the former Soviet Union as
well as in shaping their foreign policy priorities. This
neo-imperialist ideology tolerates and encourages
violation of international law and human rights and
the perpetration of serious crimes, including terrorists
acts. Fierce, deceitful propaganda disseminated by
the State-controlled Russian media is one of the key
elements of the ongoing hybrid aggression against
Ukraine.

The international community should be alarmed
by the fact that this hybrid propaganda machine
based on Soviet and czarist experience and other
totalitarian concepts continues to work very well and
in an effective manner, affecting, first and foremost,
young people. There are reported cases of teenagers'
participation in the activities of Russian-backed
terrorist organizations - the so-called Donetsk People's
Republic and Luhansk People's Republic - that have
on several occasions attacked civilians in certain
areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine,
using arms and munitions supplied by the Russian
Federation. Some of the perpetrators are lS-years-old
or even younger.

There is also credible information that the Russian
proxies and their Kremlin masters are forcing pupils
and students into their ranks using different means of
influence, including religious organizations. Moreover,
there is plentiful evidence that such means as promising
to annul criminal records or repay loans are used in
the Russian campaign to recruit mercenaries into the
terrorist gangs operating in the Donbas. Young people
are common victims of such recruitment campaigns.
Therefore, apart from comprehensive efforts to
eliminate the social, economic, cultural, religious and
other grounds for the spread of violent extremism and
terrorism, there is a need to address such phenomena as
State propaganda imbued with intolerance and hatred
and information wars, which often serve as part of
hybrid warfare.

We proceed from the understanding that victims
of terrorism should also play an important role in the
aforementioned comprehensive preventive campaign to
combat extremist and terrorist ideologies and counter
their narratives. The messages brought by the victims
of terrorism and their family members can help us
revive people's natural understanding of good and evil
and disrupt terrorist information campaigns aimed
at pulling the wool over people's eyes. We strongly
believe that by establishing an international day of
commemoration of the victims of terrorist acts we
would send a strong signal about the dire consequences
of terrorist activities, which are to be remembered as
the lessons from the tragic past, with the ultimate goal
of preventing such acts from ever recurring.

