Mr. Kononuchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to welcome you, Madam
President, to today's meeting of the Security Council.
We thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. David Beasley,
Executive Director of the World Food Programme,
for their briefings assessing the issue of food security
in countries in situations of conflict. We have also
taken note of the reports published by the World Food
Programme (WFP) and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAQ) on this
topic following presidential statement S/PRST/2017/14,
issued by the Security Council in August last year.

As those reports rightly note, armed conflicts
are by no means the only reason for the increasing
numbers of hungry people in the world, although they
undoubtedly have a negative impact on the ability to
ensure food security for needy populations. However,
we see a clear desire on the part of some countries
to entrench and promote the link between conflict
and hunger both in the work of the Security Council
and more generally. We feel that is problematic
chiefly because in practice it effectively pushes the
key drivers of food insecurity - volatile world food
prices, global economic stagnation, unequal access to
agricultural and agro-industrial technology, lack of
investment, weak progress in the areas of sustainable
consumption and production, unfavourable weather
conditions and others - into the background. There
is no justification for ignoring such factors, especially
their underlying causes.

In response to that, it is argued that a focus on
conflict favours strict compliance with the Security
Council's mandate. If our colleagues are indeed guided
by that objective, we can only welcome such efforts,
since we ourselves consistently object to overburdening
the Security Council's agenda with issues beyond its
purview. However, we have participated in a series
of discussions on the links between hunger and
conflict, and having studied the arguments for possible
response measures on the part of the Council, we have
concluded that considering this issue generally cannot
be productive. Each conflict has its own specific
characteristics, participants, reality and plans for
a resolution. It is hardly likely that we in the Security
Council will be able to come up with some universal
formula - a panacea, if you like - for solving the
problem of food security in such circumstances.
We have not heard any groundbreaking ideas in that
regard so far. Basically, all the proposals boil down to
affirming and reaffirming the principles ofinternational
humanitarian law, but that work is already being done
in the framework of country-specific topics. Where is
the added value in this case?

In that connection, we firmly maintain the position
that the Security Council should consider problems of
food security only in the context of specific country
situations that pose a threat to international peace and
security. There are qualified experts working on all of
these situations who can make objective assessments of
the causes underlying local threats in the area of food
security support andpropose various solutions, assuming
any are possible. The same applies to the international
legal aspects of hunger in the context of conflicts. The
Security Council's responses should be planned and
implemented in conjunction with the country dossiers
that the Council addresses. Incidentally, all four issues
that the President outlined today are being attended to
within the framework of country-specific areas that are
on the Council's agenda. We are ready for more active
collaboration with experts from the United Nations
specialized agencies within the framework of existing
formats and negotiation platforms.

With regard to the humanitarian response to threats
related to food security, we would like to express
our gratitude to the humanitarian organizations that
have been taking steps to prevent hunger in Nigeria,
Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen. Unfortunately, the
situation in those countries remains tense, which does
not exclude the possibility that the alarming situation
that arose last year will recur. We will continue to
provide donor support to the efforts of the WFP, the
FAO and their partner organizations. We hope that
their activities will always be conducted in accordance
with the humanitarian principles defined in General
Assembly resolution 46/182.

We believe that as a rule, freely interpreting those
principles and exploiting the humanitarian agenda for
short-term military and political purposes in practice
lead only to increasingly confrontational rhetoric,
politicization and thereby to aggravating the suffering
of the millions of people who have become victims
of protracted military conflicts - and the famous
"fighters for justice and democracy" have played a
not insignificant role in fuelling those conflicts. It is
worth adding something about the consequences of the
unilateral sanctions and economic blockade policies of
certain countries, including self-styled humanitarian
rights champions. All of us, including humanitarian
agency personnel, are familiar with the negative effects
that such irresponsible measures can have for entirely
innocent populations, to the discredit of the initiators
of such steps. We hope that these factors that are
aggravating the humanitarian situation will receive as
much attention as all the others in our public work.

