Mr. Jinga (Romania): I would like to commend the
Polish presidency for convening this open debate on the
protection of civilians, a topic that lies at the heart of
the Security Council's mandate.

Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union. I will now make a few
remarks in my national capacity.

Next year will mark the twentieth anniversary of the
Security Council's adoption of resolution 1265 (1999),
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Since
then, the Council has adopted multiple resolutions on
that topic, enacted a legal framework for strengthening
that protection and mandated peacekeepers to integrate
the protection of civilians into their missions.

However, the recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/462) on the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts describes an accurate but sombre reality.
We witness, on a regular basis, attacks on schools and
hospitals, widespread and persistent humanitarian
access constraints and appalling behaviour, such as
sexual violence, which continues to be employed
as a tactic of war. Major gaps remain with regard to
prevention, protection and impunity. At the same time,
we are confronted with new challenges, such as the
urbanization of conflict, asymmetrical threats that
include unpredictable attacks targeting peacekeepers,
and the blurring of differences between combatants and
innocent civilians. As the nature and characteristics of
conflict are evolving, so must our reaction. Bearing
all those realities in mind, allow me to highlight
three points.

First, preventing armed conflict should continue
to be at the heart of international cooperation. In
strengthening the protection of civilians, it is necessary
to start by addressing the root causes of conflict.
Advancing political dialogue, pursuing reconciliation
processes and strengthening security sectors, economic
recovery and social development are therefore
comprehensive means for creating an environment of
sustainable peace.

Secondly, when prevention fails and we confront
the reality of armed conflict, ensuring respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights law is
of paramount importance. In fact, it is our sole guarantor
in ensuring that, even in the face of war, human dignity

is still upheld and parties may still find ways to coexist
once hostilities have ended. There is already a consistent
legal architecture in place; we should continue to build
on it. Romania is among the States that endorsed the Safe
School Declaration, the Kigali Principles and resolution
2286 (2016), concerning the protection of the wounded
and sick and of medical and humanitarian personnel
engaged in medical duties. In doing so, we reasserted
our engagement in support of the United Nations
efforts for peace and security in countries affected by
conflict and recognized the essential importance of the
human dimension of protection. We also reaffirm that
the main responsibility in the protection of civilians
lies with the host countries. We consequently invite all
States that have not yet done so to become parties to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, and
we call upon all Member States to fully cooperate with
the Court.

Thirdly, we strongly support the Secretary-
General's proposal on developing national policy
frameworks on the protection of civilians. In 2007,
the Romanian Government adopted a national strategy
for the implementation of international humanitarian
law, which has a dedicated section on the protection of
civilians. The strategy is designed to be implemented
both at the domestic level and during participation in
international missions. It aims to promote and raise
awareness about the rules of international humanitarian
law among armed forces personnel and other entities
with responsibilities in that field.

Romania has been contributing with troops to
peacekeeping operations since 1991. Currently, we are
participating in two thirds ofall United Nations missions
on the ground. So far, we have provided more than
12,500 military, police and close-protection personnel
to United Nations missions, and we will continue
to do so. Romanian contingents attend a rigorous
three-month predeployment training programme, in
which the protection of civilians and respect for human
rights are cornerstone themes.

Finally, the Romanian experience proved to be
beneficial in that it incorporated a gender dimension,
where female members of peacekeeping operations
interacted with women and vulnerable individuals from
local communities. With a long-term commitment to
peace, justice and development, Romania will continue
to advocate and act for the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts, in close collaboration with all
relevant actors.

