Ms. King (Australia): Iwish to thank the Secretary-
General and the High Commissioner for Human Rights
for their briefings. We would like to acknowledge High
Commissioner Navi Pillay's achievements over the past
six years and to thank her for her dedicated pursuit of
her vital mandate.

Conflict prevention was the reason the United
Nations was created. It is enshrined in the first
line of the Charter and it is central to the Council's
responsibility. The prevention of conflict is always
better than cure. As the Secretary-General said this
morning, when actions come late, the consequences are
measured in human lives. But, also, the cost of civil war
is around 30 years of gross domestic product. Recovery
averages 14 years. Those are staggering, generational
consequences. It is natural to be crisis-focused, but it is
short-sighted. Prevention is cost-effective.

The United Nations Office for West Africa, which
has demonstrated concrete prevention results in places
like Guinea, costs under $10 million per year. The
smallest peacekeeping operation costs almost five
times that much; the largest over 150 times that much.

Early warning signs of conflict vary from political
signals, such as social unrest, to humanitarian crises.
The role of the media and civil society in shining a
spotlight on them is invaluable. Different parts of the
United Nations are best placed to monitor early warning
signs from missions to envoys to development actors.
The United Nations needs an effective, system-wide
approach to ensure that this is done effectively.

Information, of course, is not sufficient. Effective
prevention strategies must be underpinned by strong
analysis. The Department of Political Affairs has played
a proactive role in bringing analysis of potential flash
points to the Council's attention. We also welcome
the pattern of increased briefings from the High
Commissioner for Human Rights. We would welcome
an informal monthly briefing by her successor, as she
has proposed. We have consistently argued that human
rights abuses can be one of the most important early-
warning indicators - the canary in the coal mine.

The Rights Up Front initiative is a direct reflection
of that link. Among its six action points is the provision
of candid information about serious human rights
violations. A culture of such reporting to the Council
must be encouraged.

For the same reason, we support more Council
briefings from special representatives and advisers
on the prevention of genocide, on the responsibility to
protect, on sexual violence and on children and armed
conflict. We also support briefings from the Head of
UN-Women, because that agency's role in supporting
women's political participation is vitally important to
reducing the risk of conflict. We should also increase
use of Arria Formula meetings with civil society and
non-governmental organizations, which often bring a
sophisticated understanding of events on the ground.

All the early warning signs in the world will be of
no use unless the Council acts on them. In that regard,
we must be self-critical; our record is not strong. In
Syria, for example, we failed to take early action as
the Al-Assad Government's repression led to today's
incredibly destructive and destabilizing conflict. Why
do we have such a questionable record on prevention?
The Council has struggled to agree on the balance
between responses that are sufficiently early while
respecting the primary responsibility of national actors.
We have yet to get that balance right, but we must.

Faced with early warning, we need to take action in
a strategic manner, focused on the most effective points
of leverage. We should use the tools at our disposal
proactively and gradually ratchet up of our response
as necessary. And we should work with regional
organizations. In all cases early action is vital. There
are a number of areas where we can do more.

First, we need to support the Secretary-General - his
good offices, advocacy and mediation efforts - and his
representatives. Our vocal backing for the initiatives of
the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes is a good example.
We should also be more proactive in mandating fact-
finding missions, which can have a strong deterrent
effect, and commissions of inquiry, such as that on
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We agree
with the High Commissioner for Human Rights that the
Council needs to seriously consider and take action on
the recommendations of those commissions and that
the commissions should have an official channel of
communication to the Council.

Secondly, we need to get behind the Rights Up Front
initiative, lending our political and practical support to
see it realize its full preventive potential.

Thirdly, we can do better to integrate sanctions
into our responses. The mere threat of sanctions can
bring parties to a negotiating table. Arms embargoes
reduce the viability of force as an option. Targeted
individual sanctions can constrain and disrupt the
actions of destabilizing actors, slow conflict financing
and change the political calculations of spoilers.

Fourthly, the Council must do more to implement its
commitment to accountability, including by deepening
its relationship with the International Criminal Court.
Failure to address past crimes is often a powerful driver
of future conflict, and accountability can have a strong
deterrent effect.

In cases of possible mass atrocities, we have a
responsibility to protect. It is important that we are not
impeded from taking practical action in such scenarios
by use of the veto.

Finally, we would endorse more preventive Council
visits. Those need not involve all 15 members. The
five-member Council mission to Indonesia and East
Timor in 1999 helped end the violence and paved the
way for the International Force for East Timor.

In conclusion, we need to build a culture of
prevention which fully reflects the cost of failing to
act. Only then will the aspirations of the Organization,
which emerged out of the ashes of conflict, be fully
realized. The Council has a responsibility to be vigilant,
strategic and proactive.

