Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me first of all
join previous speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing, as well as, of course, the Permanent
Representative of Brazil Ambassador Viotti, as the
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for her statement.

As stated in the report (S/2008/628) of the
Secretary-General, and having been identified as one of
the peacebuilding challenges, the upcoming legislative
elections scheduled for 16 November 2008 are indeed
an important landmark in the effort to achieve
sustainable peace in the country.

At this important juncture, it is important that the
international community continue its sustained
assistance to Guinea-Bissau. Continued support in the
areas of development and security could contribute
greatly to the efforts of Guinea-Bissau to consolidate
peace and stability in the country and the subregion.
With regard to the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Indonesia welcomes and supports the
adoption of the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding
in Guinea-Bissau on 1 October 2008, which was the
result of an extensive consultative process involving all
the relevant stakeholders. Most important of all, the
Framework observes a nationally owned process.

We share a common concern with the Secretary-
General regarding drug trafficking. Guinea-Bissau is
increasingly not merely a transit hub but rather a major
marketplace for the drug trade. In order to address that
grave problem, we are of the view that the country
should build on the December 2007 Lisbon
International Conference on Drug Trafficking in
Guinea-Bissau. It should bring to bear the efforts of all
stakeholders, which came together successfully in
"Operation Bissalanca" this past July. My delegation
also welcomes the convening of a regional conference
by the Economic Community of West African States on
combating drug trafficking, which is to be held later
this month in Cape Verde. Close cooperation among
neighbouring countries of the subregion has the
potential to deal with the menace posed by drug
trafficking, which is a borderless and transnational
form of organized crime.

Drug trafficking and organized crime should be
recognized as unintended products of the continuing
challenges in institutional and economic development
and of the lack of governing capacity, which needs to
be addressed. Like in similar cases in many other parts
of the world, we believe that what is needed for
Guinea-Bissau is also a concerted effort to build the
national capacities needed to overcome drug trafficking
and organized crime. In that regard, we need to
respond positively to the appeal of national authorities
for international support to combat drug trafficking.
The international community is therefore called on to
lend its full support to the efforts of the Government of
Guinea-Bissau in strengthening its legal, law
enforcement and judicial institutions to deal with those
criminal acts.

Strengthened law enforcement and judicial
institutions will accordingly be in a sound position to
identify those who are involved in those activities and
to bring them to justice in accordance with the
country's national laws and regulations. It is through
that emphasis on the building of national capacity that
we view the efficacy of punitive sanctions and the
possible establishment of a panel of experts by the
Security Council.

We are of the View that the Security Council
could continue to play its role by encouraging a more
coherent and holistic approach by international
stakeholders, and in particular by the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS), in order to contribute to the
establishment of peace, stability and prosperity in
Guinea-Bissau. The placement of Guinea-Bissau on the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission makes it
clear that the country has graduated from conflict to
the post-conflict phase, in which internal consolidation
and national capacity building are key.

Lastly, let me reiterate Indonesia's continued
support for UNOGBIS in helping to consolidate peace,
democracy and the rule of law in Guinea-Bissau. My
delegation would also like to commend the crucial role
being played by the Peacebuilding Commission, in
particular by its Guinea-Bissau configuration.

