Mr. Grauls (spoke in French): I should like at the
outset, Sir, to thank you for giving me the opportunity
once again to address the Security Council in my
capacity as Chairman of the Peacebuilding
Commission country-specific configuration on the
Central African Republic. I should also like to warmly
welcome the appointment of Ms. Sable-Work Zewde as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Central African Republic and to assure her of the
Commission's support.

Since I last addressed the Council in March, the
Peacebuilding Commission adopted its strategic
framework for peacebuilding on 6 May. The
framework is a kind of road map for achieving the
goals that the Commission has set itself. From 21 to
23 May, I led a mission to Bangui to officially present
the framework to all actors of Central African society.
09-37565

As Mr. Pascoe noted, the Commission has
decided to focus on three urgent priorities: security
sector reform (SSR) and the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme
for ex-combatants; good governance and the rule of
law; and the identification of development poles, to be
considered as embryonic structures created to relaunch
socio-economic development throughout the Central
African Republic. Those three priorities correspond
perfectly to the conclusions reached by the inclusive
political dialogue that brought the Government, the
unarmed opposition, rebel groups and civil society
together in December.

The Commission is currently focusing its
attention on two files that are critical to stability and
peace in the Central African Republic. I refer to the
drafting and implementation of a DDR programme
thoroughly integrated into the SSR programme, and the
preparation for elections in 2010. Without successful
DDR, the electoral process may be compromised, and
without a successful electoral process the entire
country runs the risk of being destabilized.

The drafting of the DDR programme is
progressing. Considerable technical work has been
completed, and political conditions are being
established so that the programme can be launched in
optimal circumstances. In that regard, I note the return
of recalcitrant rebel groups to the peace process, which
is an encouraging sign. The financing of the early DDR
phases seems to be assured thanks, among other things,
to contributions from the Peacebuilding Fund and the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), and
to the agreement of President Bozize' to allocate to
DDR all the funds pledged by the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community, pursuant to the
communique issued by the heads of State in Libreville
on 30 January. We encourage the Government of the
Central African Republic to pay those funds into the
UNDP Trust Fund in order to ensure their transparency
and effective management.

If the DDR process is to begin expeditiously, the
Steering Committee must rapidly proceed to validate
the submitted lists of recognized combatants belonging
to political-military groups. The Commission also
encourages the strengthening of the subregional
Mission de consolidation de la paix en Republique
Centrafricaine, which will be called on to supervise the
DDR programme.
5

I wish to say a word on the electoral process. If it
is to unfold in acceptable conditions, the process must
enjoy the assistance of the international community. In
that regard, the authorities of the Central African
Republic must urgently establish the Mixed and
Independent Electoral Commission, the only national
body authorized under the Constitution to undertake
preparations for elections and to adopt changes to the
electoral code. The activation of the Commission is
necessary to ensure the firm commitment of the United
Nations and other actors of the international
community.

In agreement with the Government of the Central
African Republic, it has been decided that an initial
assessment of the implementation of the strategic
framework will be carried out in six months. The
biannual assessments should allow us to maintain the
momentum of the peacebuilding process in the Central
African Republic.

In order to strengthen peace and stability in their
country, the people of the Central African Republic
need the support of the international community. The
encouraging signs to which I have referred are an
appeal to which we must respond positively. That is
why, since the strategic framework was adopted, I have
visited various Governments and organizations in order
to make international partners aware of the needs of the
Central African Republic and to invite them to join in
the Commission's efforts. I have noted an upsurge in
interest in the Central African Republic, a country that,
perhaps with reason, was long considered an orphan of
international assistance.

It is important to involve non-governmental
organizations in those awareness-raising efforts. At the
most recent meeting of our configuration, two important
international non-governmental organizations confirmed
that they would increase their presence on the ground in
the country. Some countries have also conveyed to me
their willingness to consider specific proposals for a new
or increased involvement in the Central African Republic,
pursuant to the priorities of the strategic framework. I feel
that, while it may yet appear to be low-key, this renewed
interest of the international community in the Republic
must still be underscored.

The Peacebuilding Commission advocated the
transformation of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in the Central African Republic into the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office, and in

that regard welcomed the presidential statement of
7April (S/PRST/2009/5), whereby the decision was
taken in principle to establish the new Office as soon
as possible. The Commission is pleased to note that the
new structure for the Integrated Office, as proposed in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2009/309), will allow
us better to assist its work. The Commission especially
welcomes the establishment of a Human Rights and
Justice Section, to include prison experts, among
others, and of a Security Institutions Section. The
creation of the posts of Gender Adviser and Child
Protection Adviser are also very welcome proposals. I
express the hope that the new integrated structure will
be established as soon as possible in order to facilitate
the implementation of the Peacebuilding Commission's
strategic framework. It would indeed be regrettable to
waste time.

With the death of the President of Gabon, the late
El Hadj Omar Bongo Ondimba, the Central African
Republic has lost a founding father of its peace
process. I salute the vision and untiring support that the
late President gave to the Central African Republic in
recent years in order to help it turn towards a more
hopeful future. The peacebuilding process will
continue to require the full attention of the Government
of the Central African Republic and its international
partners in the coming months and years.

