Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, allow me to commend the
Republic of Poland for its skilful leadership since
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of May, and express our gratitude for the
holding of this fundamentally important open debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I would
also like to take this opportunity to convey our thanks
for the informative briefings by Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres; Mr. Yves Daccord, Director-General
of the International Committee of the Red Cross; and
Ms. Hanaa Edwar, Secretary-General of the Iraqi
Al-Amal Association.

The following statement on behalf of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea is aligned with the statements to
be delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and by Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations.

As previous speakers explained, armed conflicts
are increasingly complex, asymmetrical and posing
new challenges as they expand to urban areas. The
expansion and mobility of terrorist groups, extremists
and organized crime further augment that complexity.
Those new scenarios entail the increased vulnerability
of civilians, which undermine their dignity, humanity
and resilience, and also limit the capacity and work
of Member States, humanitarian personnel and
peacekeepers during armed conflicts. Equatorial Guinea
firmly condemns violent attacks and threats directed
against civilians in armed conflicts, and expresses its
deep concern about the direct and indirect effects of
those attacks on people and their communities. We call
for those responsible for such acts to be brought before
the relevant international judicial institutions to answer
for their crimes.

During 2017, in many armed conflicts, thousands
of civilians lost their lives from the use of high-powered
explosive and chemical weapons. Many survivors
not only suffered serious injuries, but also witnessed
the destruction of their homes, vital infrastructure
and social spaces, which are essential to maintain a
dignified, humane and productive life. Many others fell
victim to the strategic use of sexual violence and hunger
as weapons of war, terrorism, torture and repression.
Children have suffered grave human rights violations,
and it is estimated that more than 65 million people have
been forced to leave their homes and become displaced.
Tragically, many civilians have disappeared without
a trace.

In accordance with the common position of the
African Union, Equatorial Guinea believes that, in
order for Member States to be able to protect civilians
during armed conflicts, it is imperative to support them
in their efforts to prevent or avoid the escalation or
recurrence of conflicts through initiatives that facilitate
their sustainable development and peacebuilding.
That would strengthen their capacity to invest in the
resilience of their peoples and in prevention to better
cope with humanitarian emergencies that result not
only from armed conflicts, but also from, inter alia,
unexpected climatic phenomena and the impact of
global financial crises. In that regard, Equatorial
Guinea reaffirms that the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is the primary responsibility of Member
States, and recognizes the vital work of United Nations
peacekeeping operations in supporting Member States
and humanitarian organizations to that end.

With respect to what I previously mentioned, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that respect for,
and compliance with, the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations must be an essential
condition for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, especially respect for the national sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of the countries where
conflict is taking place. The protection of civilians
must never be politicized. The protection of civilians
is an undeniable responsibility of all parties to conflict;
however, Governments bear the primary responsibility
in that regard.

For that reason, we call on the parties to existing
armed conflicts to comply with their obligations under
international law, as appropriate, and international
humanitarian law, under the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and the relevant obligations under the Additional
Protocols of 1977 and 1999. We therefore also call for
the implementation of resolution 2286 (2016), on the
protection of the wounded and sick and medical and
humanitarian personnel in conflict situations.

Furthermore, we call upon humanitarian
organizations and their personnel to also respect
international humanitarian law and the laws of the
Member States in which they operate, including
respecting the principles of humanity, neutrality and
impartiality, as well as the sovereignty of Member
States, set out in the annex of General Assembly
resolution 46/182. We also call for recognition of the
contribution of the African Union and African countries
to the continental and global humanitarian architecture,
in particular to displaced persons and refugees as a
result of armed conflict and other humanitarian crises,
and call for the catalysing of partnerships between the
United Nations and the African Union to that end.

We welcome the recommendations contained in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/462) to promote
respect for international law among the parties, as
well as good practices. We completely agree with him
that the best way to protect civilians is to prevent and
end conflicts. We call for exploring how to strengthen
the capacity of peacekeeping operations to support
Member States, at their request, in implementing those
recommendations, within the framework of the reform
of the United Nations peace and security pillar.

Finally, Equatorial Guinea expresses its deepest
solidarity with the victims of armed conflicts and pays
well-deserved tribute to the efforts of Member States
to protect civilians during armed conflict, especially
in developing countries and those most in need. We
furthermore commend the firm commitment, courage
and solidarity demonstrated by the humanitarian and
health personnel of the United Nations, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the other humanitarian
organizations present here with whom they carry out
that important work. We believe it is of the utmost
importance that this issue remain on the agenda of the
Security Council.

