Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the briefing of Special Representative of the
Secretary General for Haiti Sandra Honore.

Chile associates itself with the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Peru, Ambassador
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.

As other delegations have noted, we too are
concerned about the political situation in Haiti. It is
essential to maintain and strengthen the space for
dialogue that led to the agreement on 5 February,
which all actors should undertake with responsibility.
The provisions of the agreement must be implemented
with the aim of concluding without delay the electoral
process begun in 2015. Given the transitional nature of
the current Government, we must bear in mind the need
to return to the appropriate institutional channels. The
political context must improve, given the repercussions
in areas that affect the entire Haitian society, such as
economic and social development, the security situation
and the humanitarian spehere.

The security environment continued to be
influenced by the electoral process. We are especially
concerend about the escalation in violence in the days
leading up to the signing of the political agreement of
5 February. That made it necessary to deploy the full
potential of the Haitian National Police and the important
support of the United Nations Stabailization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH). We hope that the Haitian National
Police witll meet its strategic development plan for the
period 2012-2016.

The political crisis diverted the attention
required by humanitarian crisis and had an impact on
development spending, which is more complex in a
context of declining international funding. We reiterate
our particular concern about the situation of food
insecurity. We hope that the efforts to eliminate cholera
will continue and, in that regard, there is a need for
a long-term perspective, especially in connection with
providing clean water and sanitation.

With regard to the reconfiguration of MINUSTAH,
we note the recommendation of the Secretary-General
to carry out the strategic assessment called for in
resolution 2243 (2015), once the electoral process is
completed. We reiterate that, as a matter of principle, that
process should properly take into the views of the troop-
contributing countries. It is positive that the Mission and
the country team advance in the consolidation of tasks
that will be undertaken by the Haitian Government
under the principle of national ownership.

Notwithstanding the current difficulties, we must
not lose our perspective. Haiti has made tremendous
progress in various areas and has overcome tragedies
such as the 2010 earthquake, during which the Haitian
people displayed commendable resilience. In that,
the international community, particularly the United
Nations, through its agencies, funds and programmes,
and MINUSTAH, has played a fundamental role. The
challenge now is to maintain the progress achieved.

In conclusion, we reiterate the commitment of
the Government of Chile to the strengthening of
the institutions and development of Haiti and its
people, which has been reflected in our close bilateral
cooperation and participation in MINUSTAH since its
beginning, as well as in other forums for South-South,
regional and international cooperation.

