Mr. Chambas: Ithank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Council on Boko Haram.

As Council members are aware, over the past few
years the violence and brutality of Boko Haram attacks
in north-eastern Nigeria, as well as in neighbouring
countries, have intensified. Today as we meet, though
weakened, the group continues to commit horrendous
acts against civilians, including women and children.
We have received reports that children in particular
have been abducted, abused, recruited, maimed and
killed. Schools in north-eastern Nigeria are no longer
safe places of learning, as many of them continue to
be attacked, looted and destroyed. Several schools in
the areas targeted by Boko Haram in Cameroon and
the Niger also remain closed. In 2014, the group also
commenced using young girls as suicide bombers in
attacks in populated urban areas. We have also observed
an alarming trend of children being used by the group
as human shields. Boko Haram's recent declaration of
allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), whether for publicity reasons or to tap into ISIL's
support, is also of concern as it is sends a clear signal
that Boko Haram's agenda goes well beyond Nigeria.

The impact of Boko Haram attacks has been
manifold. Overlapping with the regional impact of other
crises, notably that in the Central African Republic,
countries such as Cameroon, Chad and the Niger are now
facing humanitarian and human rights consequences as
a result of the group's activities. Significant numbers
of refugees and internally displaced persons are
adding pressure on host communities that are already
food insecure and fragile. I will defer to the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, who will
delve further into the impact of Boko Haram activities
on the humanitarian situation across the Lake Chad
Basin region and the challenges therein. However,
allow me to raise a number of human rights concerns.

A recent evaluation mission of the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights to the far
north of Cameroon confirmed that Boko Haram has
committed numerous human rights abuses, including
indiscriminate and targeted killings, abductions
of women and girls, the use of children in military
operations, the widespread destruction of property and
systematic shooting or slaughtering of captured men
who refuse to join their ranks.

In the Niger, a similar human rights evaluation was
conducted to assess the situation in the Diffa region,
following a Boko Haram attack in February. The
mission reported that Boko Haram had indiscriminately
targeted the civilian population, either killing or forcibly
turning captured civilians into combatants. Children
had also been recruited either for combat roles or as
suicide bombers. Since the attack in February, schools
in the Diffa region have remained closed, depriving
children of the right to be educated. The local economy
in the Diffa region is also being negatively affected by
a continuing state of emergency. In response to these
and other concerns, the United Nations is in the process
of scaling up its presence and operations in Nigeria,
the Niger and Cameroon. In this regard, we appeal to
the international community to support humanitarian
efforts in the Lake Chad Basin region.

The response of the Lake Chad Basin Commission
(LCBC) countries to the threat of Boko Haram has been
commendable. The joint regional offensive involving
Nigerian, Chadian, Cameroonian and Nigerien troops
has led to the recapture of several key towns in north-
east Nigeria. At the beginning of the year, Boko Haram
controlled some 20 local governmental districts in
the three north-eastern states of Nigeria. Today, Boko
Haram holds only a few areas in Borno state. Moreover,

according to reports from the Nigerian army, on
27 March Boko Haram's headquarters in Gwoza was
captured.

The United Nations is supportive of national and
regional efforts to prevent and combat terrorism and
to ensure that the perpetrators of terrorism are brought
to justice. However, in view alleged human rights
violations related to the ongoing counter-insurgency
operations against Boko Haram, we would like to stress
that counter-terrorism operations that are perceived
by the affected populations to be disproportionate and
brutal violate the very norms that we seek to defend. It
is therefore essential that the Multinational Joint Task
Force and other counter-insurgency operations uphold
the rule of law and abide by international human rights
standards. This is not only an absolutely vital principle,
but also an effective strategy, as communities that
believe that their Government seeks to protect them are
far more likely to cooperate with the authorities and far
less likely to support insurgent groups. In this regard, we
welcome the commitment made by the LCBC countries
that their operations will be in full compliance with
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law. We also urge that adequate procedures be put in
place to ensure that children being used by Boko Haram
are treated as victims and dealt with in accordance with
international standards for juvenile justice.

We welcome the decision ofleaders ofthe Economic
Community of Central African States to better
coordinate efforts in the fight against Boko Haram and
to hold a joint summit with the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) to adopt a common
strategy. We also salute the sacrifices that the countries
of the region have made and the solidarity they have
shown by uniting to stop the advance of Boko Haram.
We equally welcome the efforts of the LCBC and the
African Union towards the operationalization of the
Multinational Joint Task Force. While we acknowledge
that the Force is already engaging Boko Haram, we are
ready to support regional efforts as necessary, in line
with the United Nations human rights due diligence
policy.

I would like to reiterate the Secretary-General's
message that a military approach alone will not suffice
to contain the Boko Haram threat. The international
community can and should play an important role in
helping the countries of the region to address the social,
economic and political Challenges associated with Boko
Haram. In doing so, we have a responsibility to look
at the problem and its consequences in a way that puts
respect for human life and dignity first. It will therefore
be critical to follow up the current military operations
carried out by the LCBC countries with stabilization
measures and restoration of State authority. During
this phase, attention would be focused on creating
conditions conducive to the provision of needs-based
and principled humanitarian assistance to the displaced
populations and returnees.
As the Lake Chad Basin countries come together
to address the menace of Boko Haram, the international
community must also support them in eliminating not
only the threat, but also the conditions that allow Boko
Haram to thrive. In this regard, it will be important
for the United Nations to reiterate its commitment to
working with regional countries to bring an end to
the ongoing violence and to alleviate the suffering of
civilians. The Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General for West and Central Africa are both already
fully engaged in this regard. We are also working on
deploying more resources to the subregions to help
provide a hands-on approach to assisting the affected
Governments.

I cannot conclude without referring to an important
development in West Africa, namely, the recent general
elections in Nigeria that took place over the weekend.
In the preliminary statement of its election observation
mission, ECOWAS noted that, despite pockets of
incidents and logistical challenges, the general
elections of 28 March "met the criteria of being free
and transparent".

The mission commended the enthusiasm, maturity,
patience and sense of civic responsibility demonstrated
by the electorate, and expressed hope that the same
spirit of respect for order and discipline would
characterize the rest of the electoral process, especially
after the election results are announced. On 29 March,
the second day of the elections, voting took place in
330 polling stations. There were reports of Boko Haram
activity outside Bauchi but, as on the day before, it had
no impact on the voting process. In other words, Boko
Haram was unable to disrupt the electoral process.

The legitimacy of the next Government will be an
important requisite for garnering global support for
an effective response to the insurgency and ensuring
Nigeria's long-term stability and prosperity. It is our
sincere hope that the next Government will remain
committed to the subregional fight against Boko Haram.
