Mr. Williamson (United States of America): Let
me begin, Madam President, by thanking you and the
United Kingdom presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this Council workshop today. The
importance of our discussions is evidenced by the
presence with us this morning of the Secretary-
General. We are honoured to have Foreign Minister
Koroma of Sierra Leone here as well, and it is a
particular pleasure to have our former colleague and
good friend, Foreign Minister Francois Fall of Guinea,
back in New York this morning to join us once again
around this table.

The United States delegation looks forward to a
useful discussion of the lessons to be learned from
Sierra Leone and of the way forward in the Mano River
Union. The wars and civil unrest in the Mano River
Union region have taken a terrible toll in lost life,
human suffering and lost opportunities. There have
been unconscionable abuses of women and children.
There have been mutilations, murders and terror, as
well as the systematic trampling of basic human rights.
Tragically, civilians indeed were the deliberate targets
of a great many of these horrible acts of violence and
abuse.

The remarks of our opening speakers have gotten
us off to a good start, and I thank both Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno and Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator McAskie for their insights this
morning.

Let me start by asking whether there are, in fact,
any overarching lessons to be learned from Sierra
Leone and how the United Nations and the Security
Council can resolve the other conflicts on our agenda.
As we begin our discussion, we need to keep in mind
the fact that each conflict situation on the Security
Council's agenda has its own causes, its own unique
personality and its own geopolitical variables. The
successful resolution of any conflict is a matter of these
variables aligning in such a way that, if the Security
Council is focused and united but realistic about its
abilities, the Security Council and the United Nations
can help the parties themselves see a hinge of history
and push open the door towards lasting peace.

But let me be clear: the United Nations and the
Council rarely have the ability themselves to ensure a
successful peace process. Seldom can the United
Nations on its own impose a successful solution. In
most cases, the parties themselves must create facts on
the ground that will allow the United Nations to
contribute to a lasting peace.

We neither strengthen the United Nations and the
Security Council nor help bring peace to any conflict
by overpromising, raising unrealistic expectations or
overextending the capacity of the United Nations to
deliver on the ground. What the Security Council and
the United Nations can do is to stand ready, so that,
when the external factors fall into place, we can
support the parties' own efforts to make peace. The
United Nations and the Security Council also can help
to foster an environment that permits peace to take root
if the parties want it.

In Sierra Leone the crucial factors behind our
current success range from the commitment of the
United Kingdom to provide military training to the
Sierra Leone army to the military weakness of the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) following its
miscalculation in invading Guinean territory.

Other factors were the Security Council sanctions
on President Taylor as well as, and most important and
decisively, the courage and dedication of the people of
Sierra Leone to end violence and to restore democracy.

All of these external factors came together in a
way that created an opportunity for a stable peace and
for the United Nations and the United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) to play an important but
supporting role.

As we look at our experience in Sierra Leone, we
can review what those external factors were for
guidance and historical understanding, but we are
making a mistake if we too readily embrace the view
that the events in Sierra Leone provide universal
lessons for the United Nations that automatically can
be imposed on other situations. To a large degree, each
must be tailor-made and adapted to the unique
situations of each conflict.

Nonetheless, it is important to learn from
experience, and therefore let me thank the United
Kingdom once again for its leadership in presiding
over this workshop. In my delegation's view, what we
can learn from our experience in Sierra Leone are
lessons in how the Security Council and the United
Nations can better manage and organize our efforts, be
they peacekeeping, diplomatic or humanitarian, to
support peace processes in conflict situations in which
there is an existing commitment by the parties to
resolve the conflict. These lessons are valuable to our
work going forth.

My delegation takes away several such
management lessons from the United Nations
experience in Sierra Leone: first, the need for careful
matching of the resources and mandate of
peacekeeping missions with the risks involved in the
operation; secondly, the importance of frequent
consultations with troop-contributing countries on the
rules of engagement for any peacekeeping mission;
thirdly, the need to find a mechanism for donor group
coordination and follow-up, and the need for the
reintegration element of any disarmament,
demobilization and resettlement programme to be
undertaken as part of a peace process; fourthly, the
requirement for better coordination of humanitarian
assistance between peacekeeping operations,
international aid agencies and humanitarian groups;
and finally, a strong special representative of the
Secretary-General is critical to the success of a
peaceful operation to ensure good coordination among
the peacekeeping, humanitarian and, if necessary,
judicial elements of a mission.

Finally, I will make a brief comment on these
lessons. Regarding peacekeeping missions, a key
lesson is that we must give missions the appropriate
rules of engagement, force size and mandate for the
situation on the ground.

