Ms. Sison (United States of America): The
international community continues to make significant
progress in degrading terrorist groups worldwide, with
significant recent gains against Da'esh in Syria and
Iraq, as well as Boko Haram and other Al-Qaida groups
around the world. But much more needs to be done. We
know that those threats persist, and have even begun to
spread to other locations around the world. We continue
to see Da'esh, Boko Haram and Al-Qaida affiliates
radicalizing and recruiting our citizens to carry out
their deeds even as they recruit new affiliate groups
and establish branches around the world. Da'esh, in
particular, seeks to stage more mass casualty attacks in
public spaces around the world, in conflict zones and in
our very own communities.

As we look at terrorist trends, we are now seeing a
growing number of returning foreign terrorist fighters
from Iraq and Syria posing serious threats to their
countries of origin. From Brussels to Istanbul to Paris,
returnees are sparking new threats, inspiring new
violence and recruiting new sympathizers. The threat of
Da'esh-inspired, homegrown violent extremists is also
growing, as we saw in San Bernadino and elsewhere.
What is clear from all that we have been seeing over
the past years is that no country is immune to the
terrorist threat today. That is why we must not only
counter and respond to terrorist attacks, but we must
also take appropriate steps to prevent radicalization to
violence while ensuring that it is done in compliance
with obligations under international law, including
international human rights law. That requires just the
sort of all-of-United-Nations and whole-of-society
approach offered in the Secretary-General's Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. We applaud the
Secretary-General's leadership on that issue and hope
that all Member States can endorse his plan during this
summer's United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy Review.

In addition to longer-term prevention efforts, we
must continue to do more to fully implement Security
Council resolutions 1373 (2001), 2178 (2014) and
2253 (2015), which are central to the world's counter-
terrorism efforts and drive the work of two of the
Council's three counter-terrorism committees. As
we stressed in resolution 2253 (2015), the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida,
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities is vital to countering the threats posed by these
groups, in particular their financing and recruiting
activities. We appreciate Ambassador Van Bohemen's
active stewardship of that Committee and thank the
1267 Committee's Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team for its great work in developing helpful
threat analyses. Thanks to their work, the Council has
been kept updated on the changing terrorist threat
picture, the challenges in implementing resolution 2253
(2015), and new areas on which the Committee and the
Council should focus to better counter the financing
activities of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL).

While implementing sanctions remains key, there is
alsoacriticalrole forthe Committee establishedpursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee's work is helping
the Council to identify Member States' weaknesses in
implementing the core international counter-terrorism
obligations, and is driving international attention and
resources towards key vulnerabilities and gaps that
need to be addressed in order to stop terrorists. We
appreciate Ambassador Aboulatta's active stewardship
of that important committee, as well as the efforts of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) to address the full array of terrorist threats
and State capability requirements, in particular against
foreign terrorist fighters.

That is why the joint work between the Monitoring
Team and CTED in countering foreign terrorist fighters
is exemplary. That is the kind of solid and actionable
analysis to better counter foreign terrorist fighter flows
to Da'esh in Syria and Iraq that the Council needs
to see more of. In fact, these analyses need to drive
the United Nations' capacity-building efforts. We
commend the development by the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) of its capacity-
building implementation plan for countering the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters. We call on the Council
and all Member States to increase their support for the
efforts of these three counter-terrorism bodies in order
to better counter Da'csh and foreign terrorist fighters,
including by mobilizing resources to CTITF, as it helps
to build needed capacity for those States most affected
and in need of assistance.

Turning to the important work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to
counter weapons of mass destruction terrorism, I
would like to note that we see resolution 1540 (2004)
as a foundational instrument in our efforts to combat
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery. We also strongly support the
resolution and the work of the 1540 Committee. In
light of the allegations of use of chemical weapons
by ISIL, we consider that resolution to be timely and
vital. We should all redouble our efforts to implement
it. Initial information from the Committee's Group
of Experts indicates that States have taken measures
for only 48 per cent of items on which the Committee
gathers data, representing a meagre 7 per cent increase
in implementation of security measures since 2010. The
data clearly shows that three United Nations regional
groups - Africa, Asia and the Pacific, and Latin
America and the Caribbean - have much lower levels
of overall implementation. That is especially troubling
considering the numbers of violent non-State actors in
Africa and the Middle East.

The data also indicate low levels ofimplementation
in several policy areas, such as obligations related to
securing biological and chemical items. The second
comprehensive review provides an opportunity to
improve implementation of the resolution. We hope
all States and relevant organizations, civil society and
industry will make meaningful contributions to the
review, including in the United Nations open meeting
on 20 to 22 June, and that we will all seriously consider
ways to improve our overall implementation efforts.

I would welcome the sending by all Security
Council members and all United Nations Member States
of a message back to their capital - if they have not
already done so - requesting the start of reflection on
three main actions with regard to how we all approach
resolution 1540 (2004). We think of it as the "3 S's":
start, strengthen and stop. First, what new thing should
we start doing? Secondly, what important thing should
we continue to do or strengthen? Thirdly, what should
we stop doing because it does not work or is irrelevant?

As part of our support for the work of the 1540
Committee, in March the United States submitted
an updated report on recent nuclear-security-related
measures we have taken to implement our obligations
under the resolution. The report can be found on the
1540 Committee's website. Such reporting also supports
the overall objectives of the Nuclear Security Summit,
including elements of the recently adopted United
Nations action plan, to which we remain committed.
We are also preparing to submit a similar updated
report on biological security measures. Through this
year's comprehensive review, we need to ensure that
resolution 1540 (2004) and the Committee can evolve
and retain their critical importance and relevance in
addressing the risks that the world faces today.

We look forward to working with the other
members of the Security Council, as well as the broader
international community, to achieving that goal.

