The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Angola.

I wish to thank the Secretariat for its very
comprehensive report following the assessment
mission to the region, which gives us a clear picture of
the problems and an indication of possible solutions to
them.

I should like in particular to commend Mr.
Kalomoh and the members of the mission for their
efforts and for the quality of the data they have
produced on the region.

I should like also to avail myself of this
opportunity to congratulate Cameroon and Ambassador
Belinga-Eboutou, under whose presidency the Security
Council adopted the presidential statement on 31
October 2002 calling for a mission to that region.

I would like to thank in advance the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of the Congo for the
statement he will deliver on behalf of all members of
the Economic Community of Central African States.
My delegation fully subscribes to and supports that
statement.

Moreover, my delegation would like to comment
on the third paragraph of the summary of the report,
which states:

"The mission concluded the visit to the
subregion with a strong sense of a striking
paradox, namely, that Central Africa is potentially
one of the richest subregions in Africa but also
contains the largest number of States that fall
among the lowest in almost all human
development indices." (5/2003/1077, 17.3)
The report refers also to a complex of problems
affecting the region, such as the proliferation of small
arms, the lack of infrastructure, and others. It is true
that, to overcome that paradox, a comprehensive,
integrated and resolute approach to the complex of
problems of the region is needed, as rightly indicated in
the conclusion of the Secretariat's report. Meanwhile,
this can be achieved if the problems are addressed in a
solidly grounded and integrated framework. The
dispersion that currently characterizes the institutions
which serve the Central African region must be
addressed so as to make them more effective and
results-oriented.

Central Africa, potentially one of the richest
regions of the continent, has the means to overcome its
problems if the new trend towards peace and security
in the region is sustained and an integrated and holistic
approach is followed in addressing the problems
currently plaguing the region. A more concerted effort
by the Central African countries is needed in which
ownership by States will have to be complemented by
better-coordinated support by the international
community.

It is my delegation's hope that today's meeting of
the Security Council can be viewed as a contribution
by Angola towards this common endeavour of
promoting peace, security and development in Central
Africa as well as throughout the world.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

In order to optimize the use of our time, I will not
individually invite speakers to take seats at the Council
table. When a speaker is taking the floor, the
Conference Officer will seat the next speaker on the
list at the table.

I give the floor to the representative of Italy.

