Mr. Haysom: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the situation in South
Sudan. My remarks will build upon the briefing
provided by Assistant Secretary-General Wane and
will cover the developments relating to a resumption of
the political process in South Sudan.

Since my previous briefing (see S/PV.7982), two
months ago, the five internal and regional initiatives
to address the crisis in one form or another indicate
continuing concern about the trajectory and depth of
the conflict, without any of them thus far presenting
a definite breakthrough in the political impasse.
However, I remain hopeful that some, or a combination
of them, may have the potential to positively impact
the situation.

As we just heard from Assistant Secretary-General
Wane, there is sporadic fighting and widespread
insecurity across the country. Our engagements
with South Sudanese interlocutors, including the
opposition, suggest that battlefield fortunes continue
to inform the calculus of both the Government and
its opponents. Alongside its military pacification
efforts, the Government has created an appearance of
reconciliation efforts, including through the limited
release of political prisoners. The Government has
further linked those efforts to the national dialogue
initiative and to laying the groundwork for calls on
political actors to prepare for elections in 2018. For our
part, we have made clear to all external and internal
stakeholders our view that the prevailing insecurity,
internal and external population displacement and
lack of appropriate institutions, or a reasonably level
political playing field, in an increasingly divided ethnic
environment, militate against organizing credible
elections within the year. Indeed, it may well contribute
to deepening and extending the conflict.

Assistant Secretary-General Wane dealt with some
of the challenges facing the national dialogue and its
potential contribution to long-term sustainable peace. I
would simply draw attention, in the context of current
regional initiatives, to the possibility of the national
dialogue initiative being played off against other
initiatives directly related to securing an immediate
cessation of hostilities.
Among the regional efforts, the Ugandan initiative
has focused on the reunification of certain factions
of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM).
In late July, that initiative led to President Kiir,
Ms. Rebecca Garang, of the former detainees group,
and First Vice-President Taban Deng committing to
expediting the implementation of the Agreement on
the Reunification of the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement, known as the Arusha Agreement, of January
2015. The Agreement concerned a resolution of SPLM
intra-party problems. With the continued absence of
the SPLM. in Opposition, led by Riek Machar, and
some among the former detainees group reluctant to
reconcile with President Kiir in such a manner, the
Ugandan initiative continues to falls short of achieving
its goal. It may even be divisive both among and
between opposition groups. President Museveni has
also begun to engage groups outside the SPLM. core,
by, inter alia, encouraging preparations for elections.

Another regional initiative - the meeting of
opposition parties, which was to be hosted in Kenya
by President Kenyatta - has not gained much traction.
With the Kenyan Government focused on the outcome
of recent elections and the former detainees, who were
a driving force behind the initiative, preoccupied with
their Kampala discussions, the initiative appears to be
stalled. The apparent advantage to any peace process of
dealing with a coherent opposition and the increaising
competition and conflicts between opposition
groupings have led stakeholders to explore alternatives.
A meeting between opposition parties, possibly outside
Kenya, could be reinstated as part of preparations for
the Revitalization Forum of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD).

The decision of the IGAD Summit of Heads of
State and Government of 12 June to convene a high-
level Revitalization Forum in respect to the 2015
IGAD-sponsored peace Agreement has begun to gain
some momentum. It aims to include Government
and opposition groups in a dialogue to consider how
to implement the peace Agreement, and IGAD has
appointed Ambassador Ismail Wais as its Special Envoy
to follow through on its decisions. Recognizing the
importance of securing President Kiir's buy-in, IGAD's
Council of Foreign Ministers met on 24 and 25 July in
Juba. Following that, IGAD, with help from the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (JMEC), the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and my Office, carried out a mapping exercise on
the relevant opposition actors to be included in the
Revitalization Forum.
In mid-August, I attended an IGAD-hosted
meeting in Ethiopia of independent South Sudanese
experts. The discussions were frank and generated a
number of recommendations for IGAD, including on
which opposition parties to engage and on how the
peace Agreement could be adjusted to reflect the new
realities in South Sudan. While the IGAD initiative
continues to have potential, a main concern, which I
have conveyed to IGAD, is its cautious preparation for
engagement with opposition actors. Although those
engagements are delicate, the danger is that the more
the initiative consults with IGAD capitals, including
Juba, the more suspicious the opposition will become
that its agenda is partisan.

Crucially and irrespective of his declared
commitment made to the IGAD Council of Ministers
during their Juba visit to implement the IGAD summit
decisions, President Kiir continues to prioritize the
national dialogue and the reunification of the SPLM,
which he recently stressed would bring about peace, with
the revitalization process playing only a supplementary
role. As IGAD grapples with those challenges, it has
already warned that the indicative timeline for holding
the Revitalization Forum at the end of September will
necessarily slip.

Meanwhile, with regard to the African Union's
(AU) engagement, the AU Chairperson, President Alpha
Oumar Konare, is awaiting the internal adoption of a
broad AU engagement strategy on South Sudan before
taking further measures. Previously, President Konare'
emphasized speaking with one voice, the primacy of
internal support for any solutions to the conflict and
a full and robust presence of the Regional Protection
Force. President Konare will visit Addis Ababa this
week, thereby providing my Office an opportunity
to engage and take stock of the current tracks of
engagement and the respective steps to be taken by
the AU, IGAD and the United Nations. We will be
concerned about establishing mutual complementarity
between IGAD and AU initiatives. That will be
crucial as we enter a period of more intensive public
engagement by the Security Council, the AU Peace
and Security Council and forums on the margins of the
General Assembly, respectively.

Given the motives and underlying logic that drive
the national dialogue, the SPLM. reunification process,
IGAD's peace Agreement Revitalization Forum and
even the AU plan of action, it would, at first instance,
appear to suggest that those initiatives might clash
or undermine one another. On the other hand, they
could harness potential complementarity, and such
an outcome would require a clear commitment to an
inclusive and credible peace process.

We have underlined to the IGAD secretariat the
importance of distinguishing the particular goals of
each initiative and encouraged it to focus on how they
can work to the greater good. The Revitalization Forum,
the national dialogue and the other initiatives should
neither adopt the agenda of the others, nor overload the
agendas of competing initiatives with their own goals.
Therefore, in the quest for a more coherent approach,
my Office will continue to work closely with IGAD,
the JMEC, the AU and UNMISS to support initiatives
towards sustainable peace. I will also continue to
engage South Sudanese stakeholders to open lines to
all sides of the conflict.

