We thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Ms. Deborah Lyons, for her observations and assessments of the situation in Afghanistan. UNAMA plays an important role in coordinating international assistance to this country. The Russian Federation supports its mandate and activities. We welcome the first briefing by Ms. Lyons in the Security Council and wish her every success. We have also listened attentively to the assessments of the Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly. We thank the Chairperson of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission, Ms. Shaharzad Akbar, for her respective briefing. We have studied carefully the recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/549) about the activities and efforts of the United Nations in Afghanistan. The key issue that is on the radar today is the peace process. The Russian Federation consistently supports the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process in Afghanistan. As the Special Representative of the Secretary-General has rightly mentioned, one of the crucial factors in starting intra-Afghan negotiations - and definitely not the easiest one - is the prisoner releases. We emphasize that this issue remains one of the key preconditions vital for future peace talks. We note several positive steps taken by the Government and the Taliban in that regard and call for the rapid release of the remaining prisoners in the coming days. We affirm our principled position that the upcoming Afghan peace process should be inclusive. All efforts should be focused on promoting national reconciliation, which will lead to the end of the long-standing war in the country and the revival ofa peaceful, united and independent State, free of terrorism and drug crime. We have no illusions that direct intra-Afghan talks might be complicated and protracted, especially given the different understanding of the future political architecture of Afghanistan by both sides. Russia has always stood and still stands ready to facilitate negotiations. Enabling the Afghan parties to find an agreement that is acceptable to all and establishing a sustainable peace in the country are at the heart of our efforts within the troika plus Pakistan, which remains a very important driving force for the peace process in Afghanistan. For that reason, we also actively participated in the four-party virtual conference of the Special Representatives of the Russian Federation, China, Iran and Pakistan on Afghanistan on 18 May 2020 and in the trilateral virtual meeting of the Russian Federation, the United States and Afghanistan on 15 June 2020. We truly believe that the regional actors can and should play their substantive role in promoting the peace process. The regional players and neighbours will undoubtedly be the first beneficiaries of the resolution of this protracted conflict in Afghanistan. Their cooperation and assistance are crucial to Afghanistan's peace, stability and development. In that regard, we emphasize that the Moscow format, which has under its umbrella all key participants, including Afghanistan itself, can play a crucial role. Against that backdrop, the security situation in Afghanistan remains volatile. It is worsened by the activities of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in the country. We fully condemn the recent barbaric and cowardly terrorist attacks in Kabul and Nangarhar, which resulted in a high number of victims and for which ISIL-Khorasan claimed responsibility. The continued presence of ISIL in Afghanistan is still of serious concern to us. This represents a real threat to the security of both Afghanistan and its neighbours, the countries of Central Asia and Russia's southern regions. We strongly believe that underestimating this problem is unacceptable. We urge all sides in Afghanistan to take decisive action against Al-Qaida, ISIL, the Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement, Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan and other international terrorist organizations operating against regional countries. We are also intensively monitoring developments regarding the fight against drug trafficking in Afghanistan. In that regard, we support your intention, Madam President, to focus today's meeting on the counter-narcotics issue. This threat remains a serious concern for the country, as well as for the region and the whole world. Drug production and drug trafficking are sources of significant financial support for terrorism. We call for all sides to completely eradicate this problem in the country. We are ready to fulfil our obligations by assisting the collective efforts against this threat, including through our active participation in UNODC, as well as the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. Needless to say, Afghanistan is at a crucial juncture and needs the full support and attention of the international community, especially against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease pandemic situation. Appropriate regional cooperation and international assistance, as well as the joint efforts of the regional and international players, will remain imperative in order to achieve lasting peace and stability in the country.
