Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I wish first of all, on behalf of my
Government and on my own account, to convey our
deep condolences to the Government and the people of
the Republic of Zimbabwe on the untimely death of
His Excellency Mr. Moven Mahachi, Minister of
Defence, who died last Saturday in a traffic accident.
Mr. Mahachi played a key role in defending my
country's national sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence. His sudden death is a great loss
to the Congolese people. At this sad time, our thoughts
go first to Mr. Mahachi's widow and children, and we
convey our condolences to the family of the deceased.

On 3 May, the Council heard my Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, His
Excellency Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, say how
pleased he was to see you, Sir, presiding over the work
of the Security Council for the month of May, which
has indeed been crucial and decisive for a final solution
to the war of aggression of which my country has been
the victim since August 1998. This is reflected also in
the important message of peace and reconciliation just
conveyed by the Security Council mission to all the
countries of the Great Lakes region.

My delegation welcomes the presence here today
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan; we take this
opportunity to pay tribute to him for having retained
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
as one of his top priorities. Our thanks go also to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kamel Morjane, and to all the United Nations
personnel working in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for the excellent work they are doing in my
country.

My delegation conveys its sincere thanks to
Ambassador Jean-David Levitte of France and to the
other members of the Security Council mission for the
clarity of the report now before the Council, despite its
late publication. We thank them for having come and
for having successfully carried out a Council mission
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the
remainder of the region that bore a message of hope
and peace: a source of reassurance to the peoples of
Congo and of the rest of the region.

In my delegation's view, the mission sent a strong
signal and conveyed the Security Council's genuine,
unanimous determination to move ahead in the peace
process, to put an end to the plundering of the wealth
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to take
up the question of the massive violations of human
rights and of international humanitarian law that have
been taking place on the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo since the aggression began.

My Government also welcomes the partnership
established two years ago between the Security Council
and the Political Committee for the implementation of
the Ceasefire Agreement for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is our hope that this cooperation will
continue until real peace is restored to my country.

It is time for the Security Council to declare that
the war of aggression has exceeded the bounds of what
is tolerable and acceptable, and that the occupying
forces must immediately return home without further
ado. The death of 3 million Congolese civilians, as
reported by the non-governmental International Rescue
Committee, is not a mere regrettable occurrence; it is a
genuine tragedy. The massacres in my country resulted
from a painstakingly planned policy of "cleansing",
especially on the part of Rwanda, in reprisal for what
had taken place seven years earlier and in line with a
policy of settling people from that country in Kivu and
Maniema provinces. Those responsible for the
genocide of Congolese people must be prosecuted and
punished.

Responsibility is borne also by the Ugandan
authorities who instigated ethnic discord between the
Hema and Lendu communities and who have played a
decisive role in the three wars in Kisangani, where
more than 1,000 Congolese lost their lives. The
Burundian, Ugandan and Rwandan authorities
responsible for the flight of thousands of Congolese -
who are now either refugees or internally displaced
persons - must also be brought to justice. The leaders
of those countries must understand that the little regard
they still enjoy within the international community is
no guarantee of impunity. There is no amnesty for
them; they must realize that sooner or later they will be
brought to justice.

My Government reminds the aggressors of their
obligations with respect to the safety and security of
civilians under the Fourth Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949. We stress that the occupying forces
must be held responsible for human rights violations in
territory under their control. In that connection, my
Government regrets the deplorable events that led to
the April murder of members of the staff of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and
the recent abduction of members of a forestry company
that was illegally exploiting timber in the eastern part
of my country, which is under occupation.
It is important, indeed crucial, that the process of
disengagement and withdrawal be accelerated in order
to put an end to the wretched situation of the
Congolese people.

The Security Council can no longer be satisfied
with repetitive, thundering declarations about possible
movement towards disengagement or withdrawal of
troops. The Council should abide by its own
resolutions and force the parties to implement them as
well. In Lusaka, the mission and the Political
Committee welcomed a statement by one of the
signatories, relating to the Ugandan occupation zone,
that disengagement would occur in agreed areas as
from 1 June 2001. Security pretexts cannot be a
precondition for disengagement by that party.

That is a challenge that the Security Council must
take up. What will happen if that party makes no move
towards withdrawal in the next two days? Will the
Council await another statement of good intentions,
thus risking the loss of its credibility? Or will the
Council finally use its powers to impose enforcement
measures on that party in conformity with the
provisions of resolution 1341 (2001) of 22 February
2001? Those questions deserve an appropriate answer.

The approach to the withdrawal of foreign troops
includes a timetable that began on 22 February 2001;
this derives from resolution 1341 (2001). Our
understanding of this is that by 15 June 2001 the
parties should provide information about the
deployment of their troops and should issue the order
to withdraw.

A parallel process of the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement of armed groups should be implemented in
conformity with the Lusaka Agreement, which, I would
recall, recognizes the need to address the security
concerns of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
of neighbouring countries.

In order to make a real contribution to the
preparation and implementation of the plans for
withdrawal and for disarmament, demobilization,
resettlement and reintegration in the context of the
third phase of MONUC deployment, my Government
intends to provide all the appropriate information in
due course.

The extent of the withdrawal, the geographical
area it covers, the rejection of a Congo divided in
perpetuity and the need to tackle the many tasks of
peacemaking after the withdrawal of all foreign troops
will require a significant and appreciable increase in
the civilian, military and associated personnel of
MONUC, as well as a broadening of its mandate to
allow it to carry out the accompanying policies aimed
at ensuring peace, security and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. My Government
therefore invites the Council to begin considering a
possible increase in MONUC personnel once phase III
of deployment is initiated.

My Government has noted the proposal of
President Masire, the facilitator of the inter-Congolese
dialogue, to convene the preparatory meeting for the
dialogue on 16 July 2001. In this connection, I wish
once again to confirm that my Government will spare
no effort in helping the facilitator so that the meeting
can be held on the scheduled date.

Similarly, it is our hope that, together, we will be
able to convene the inter-Congolese dialogue as soon
as possible, bringing together all the socio-political
stratums and movements in our country without any
outside interference or military pressure so that they
can consider and reflect on the future of the Congolese
nation and have their say on the new institutions of the
next Republic. The promulgation on 17 May 2001 of
law 001/2001, on the organization and functioning of
political parties and groupings, may be appreciated in
that light.

The dates and venue for the inter-Congolese
dialogue will be decided by its participants. As of now,
my Government can affirm its readiness for the
preparatory meeting and the dialogue to be held in the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

My Government will do its utmost to ensure
security for all participants in the preparatory meeting
and in the dialogue itself. Likewise, my Government
assures the Council that it will take all possible
measures to provide for the security of the members of
the Joint Military Commission (JMC), which is to
share the headquarters of MONUC in Kinshasa. In so
doing, my Government will undoubtedly enjoy the
support of the Tunisian troops of MONUC deployed in
the capital. This co-location must take place so that the
JMC can discharge its mandate in the best possible
conditions.

Last year, the city of Kisangani was ground-zero
in the war of aggression. Kisangani was the theatre of
exceptionally violent clashes between the regular
armed forces of Uganda and Rwanda, in flagrant
violation of the Ceasefire Agreement. The fighting, the
most recent outbreak of which took place under the
eyes of MONUC, caused enormous loss of human life
and the destruction of the economic, social and cultural
infrastructures of the city. The reasons for the fighting
were well known and have since been confirmed. It
was a struggle to control the natural resources of the
third economic hub of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The mission was able to see for itself that the
martyred city of Kisangani has yet to be demilitarized,
in violation of the relevant provisions of resolution
1304 (2000) of 16 June 2000. My Government would
ask the Security Council to take the appropriate
measures to ensure the effective demilitarization of
Kisangani and to require the notoriously recidivist
Uganda and Rwanda to provide reparations for the loss
of human life and the material damage in the city.

The Rwandan troops must totally evacuate
Kisangani. The Ugandan troops mired and blocked in
the outskirts of the city must be authorized to return
home. The welcome given by the people of Kisangani
to the Moroccan troops is an indication in itself of the
entire Congolese people's weariness and rejection of
the presence of these uninvited and unwanted troops.
The Moroccan troops of MONUC are perfectly able to
provide the necessary security for the city of
Kisangani. Their presence must be reinforced. The
ability of the United Nations to meet the challenge of
demilitarizing Kisangani will bear witness to the
authority of the Security Council.

With respect to the situation in Burundi, my
delegation is pleased that, for the first time, a
delegation led by the Minister of Defence of Burundi
was invited to participate in the joint meeting of the
Political Committee for the Implementation of the
Ceasefire Agreement in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Security Council of the United Nations
in order to discuss the process of disarming,
demobilizing, resettling and reintegrating all the armed
groups. We are also pleased that, during its visit, the
Council was able to meet with the leaders of the
Burundian Front pour la defense de la democratie.

As members of the Council know, although
Burundi is not a signatory to the Ceasefire Agreement
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, that country,
despite ever less credible denials and refutations,
continues to maintain a significant number of troops in
the territory of my country.

The Lusaka meetings are thus very important in
that they may encourage Burundi to continue the
withdrawal of its troops that was observed last March,
as we emphasized in a note addressed to the Security
Council last April and which the Secretary-General
noted in paragraph 28 of his seventh report on
MONUC. These meetings are also a warning to that
country that it must immediately halt the redeployment
of its troops observed last week in the Kalemie region
and withdraw from that city and from the regions of
Fizi and Uvira, which are currently under the complete
control of the regular army of Burundi.

Last April in Libreville, Gabon, the question of
the withdrawal of Burundi's troops was addressed in
talks at the highest level between my country and
Burundi. We had intended to continue our discussions
in Bujumbura in conjunction with the work of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa. We would have
made significant progress had it not been for an
attempted coup d'e'tat by young officers of the
Burundian army.

The Lusaka meetings are therefore very important
to us because, on the one hand, they have cleared my
Government of any involvement and borne witness to
its impartiality in that country's domestic crisis and, on
the other, they have created a new dimension in the
inter-Burundian negotiations.

We are convinced that a settlement of the crisis in
Burundi will have a positive impact on the settlement
of the war of aggression. We therefore ardently hope
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo will no
longer have to suffer the negative impact of the
situation in Burundi. We hope that the brotherly people
of Burundi will be able to re-establish national concord
as soon as possible. We urge President Nelson Mandela
to spare no effort to refloat the good ship Burundi and
to pilot it safely to port, in particular through the
process begun at Arusha.

The Congolese people has suffered and continues
to suffer with exemplary courage the consequences of a
lengthy political transition that has had devastating
consequences for its economic infrastructure, as well as
of two armed conflicts, one of which is ongoing.
Indeed, the Democratic Republic of the Congo today is
a poor and heavily indebted country, whose
consecutive conflicts have exacerbated the rapid
destruction of its economic fabric and social
infrastructure, which had already been heavily
damaged by years of mismanagement.

Throughout the provinces of our country, access
to the villages has become extremely precarious as a
result of the destruction of roads and of the lack of
security. The entire health-care system has crumbled,
bringing malnutrition, recurring epidemics and a
shortage of medicine. According to figures of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
approximately 16 million people - 33 per cent of the
Congolese population - are directly affected by the
war. Likewise, the chronic devaluation of our national
currency, in particular the most recent such
recommended by the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund, has had a devastating impact on daily
life in the Congo.

The Congolese people were therefore greatly
relieved to learn of the opening of the River Congo
between Kinshasa and Mbandaka. We have great hope
that the imminent arrival of Uruguayan troops of
MONUC at Mbandaka will provide security along the
river, allow goods and people to resume travel and
contribute through such trade to relaunching economic
activity in the affected areas.

The international community is therefore invited
to help my country to emerge from the crisis in which
it finds itself by, among other things, participating in
initiatives aimed at restoring lasting peace and
resuming partnerships and bilateral and multilateral
cooperation in accordance with our national
development plans that will be formulated for the
economic and social well-being of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. As peace is a prerequisite for
development, the Security Council and the
international community are also invited to address the
issue of the Congolese situation from the perspective of
an appropriate post-conflict response.

In its tireless quest to live in peace and harmony
with all of its neighbours, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo fully endorses the idea of an international
conference on peace and security in the Great Lakes
region. My country is convinced that the holding of
such a conference will be one of the peaceful ways of
bringing peace and understanding to our entire region,
which has suffered so much for almost 10 years now.
All countries in the region face the same task of
strengthening domestic peace and achieving economic
reconstruction. Resuming good-neighbourly relations
will be essential for all of our countries. It is up to us to
restore peace to the Great Lakes region and to create
the appropriate conditions for economic and social
development. If it is well nurtured, recovery in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo can only be positive
for the whole Great Lakes region, of which Rwanda
and Burundi are part. Although of course in a different
way, we will together be able to rebuild the regulatory
mechanism that existed not so long ago between our
three countries to help ensure peaceful coexistence.
That mechanism also played an important role in
conflict prevention and was aimed at stabilization
throughout the Great Lakes region.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to say
that my Government and the people of the Congo were
greatly impressed by the visit of the Security Council
mission, by the members themselves and by their
commitment to the cause of peace in my country. We
believe that the Democratic Republic of the Congo will
regain peace, dignity and its territorial integrity. That
will be a victory for the Security Council and for the
entire international community. We extend an
invitation in advance to the members of the Security
Council to visit us again in the Great Lakes region once
peace is restored in order to see the great achievement
to which they will have contributed.

