Mr. Mauer: We thank Indonesia for its stewardship
of this debate and we note with appreciation its continued
support in hosting an important regional conference for
armed forces in Jakarta in a few weeks from today. We
trust the conference will follow the debate here and
lead to further efforts to strengthen the protection of
civilians through better peacekeeping.

Madam President, we appreciate your country's
and your personal commitment to this issue, in
particular your focus on a strengthened role for women
in peacekeeping. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his strong leadership in highlighting the critical
protection gaps with which we are confronted today.

Twenty years ago, the Security Council invited the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to
briefit on the protection of civilians (see S/PV.3977) and
adopted a presidential statement that further welcomed
its contribution to this issue (see S/PRST/l999/6). The
past two decades have shown us how the political and
military decisions made in this Chamber impact the
human conditions on battlefields around the world.
These decisions can save lives or end them; they can
create hope or misery; and they can bolster or break
the norms that protect universal humanitarian laws
and principles - whether a city is bombed to rubble
or whether civilians and hospitals are spared; whether
children are sent to school or recruited into armed
groups; whether prisoners are tortured or treated with
decency; whether families ever hear from their loved
ones again.

Not only are the decisions of all United Nations
Member States and especially those of the Security
Council important; the absence of decisions by the
Council also takes its toll on civilians. On battlefields,
where the ICRC is present today, too many actors take
the absence of political convergence among Council
members as a free ride for military operations without
any limitations and without accountability. Seventy
years after the universal ratification of the Geneva
Conventions; more than 40 years after the adoption of
the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions;
and 20 years after the Security Council held its first
protection of civilians debate, we are still seeing
outrageous violations on a daily basis.

While we understand that political consensus is
difficult, we ask the Council to be clearer in its support
for respect for international humanitarian law and in
stating and following through on the simple truth that
no one is above the law and no civilian can be excluded
from protection. Today, in the face of changing
conflict dynamics, international humanitarian law
and international human rights law continue to be
the bedrock.

Humanitarian action is adapting to people's
changing needs, and we call on States to adapt, too,
by prioritizing the protection of civilians; by upholding
international humanitarian law and influencing their
partners to do so; by setting clearer frameworks for
their troops and for those supported; by setting clearer
ground rules; by vetting, training and instructing
partners; by applying the highest standards of
precaution in weapons transfers; and by setting up clear
oversight and accountability frameworks. Through
these measures, the Council can influence behaviour
and protect populations exposed to war and violence.

This debate must be anchored in the experiences
and needs of people and communities who suffer the
daily brutalities of war and violence. Measures must
be taken that protect civilians not only from physical
harm but also from invisible, psychological harm; from
abuses like sexual violence or torture in detention; or
from not knowing the fate of missing loved ones.

We must also move beyond a victim mind-set to
understanding people and communities as agents of
their own protection and experts of their own situations.
They have individual needs, but they also have
individual skills, capacities and enormous resilience.
They do not wait for external interventions to address
the problems and threats they face. They decide how
best to travel in groups and to ensure that children, older
people and people with disabilities are not left behind
during flight, choosing in advance which road to take,
discussing locations to avoid and negotiating directly
with weapons-bearers. Connectivity has strengthened
the possibilities for self-protection measures and we all
need to adapt to these new developments.

While we ask more of the members of the security
Council and the international community at large, we
ask at the very least that they do not hinder people in
need in their effort to protect themselves. Too often,
we see that in addition to being exposed to war and
violence, populations are stopped from reaching safer
spaces, constrained by bureaucratic obstacles and
limited in their free movement.

In putting people at the centre, we can see
that protective layers must be built across three
interconnected spheres in which proactive policies
and practices of protection are needed; these are the
individual, community and contextual levels. When an
individual faces immediate threats to safety and dignity,
harm can be greatly reduced through strict adherence
to the rules regulating the use of force, through more
stringent arms controls and through humane treatment
in transfers of detainees and in detention.

We cannot gloss over the issue of missing people.
Hundreds ofthousands ofpeople - ifnot millions - are
missing worldwide. Their family members suffer deep
losses and unanswered questions, their pain only
deepening with time. Such festering wounds can harm
the fabric of whole societies, undermining relations
between groups and nations, sometimes decades after
the original events.
For the sake of individuals, and whole communities,
the humanitarian imperative is clear. Families have a
right to know the fate of their loved ones and States
must take steps to prevent people from going missing
in the first place, for instance by registering detainees
and notifying their families. The ICRC and the Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement overall stand ready
to support States in these efforts.

The ICRC has made specific efforts to ensure
that community-based protection approaches are
integrated more systematically into its response. This
is part of our commitment to being accountable to
affected populations. Importantly, these activities can
never be considered a substitute for the protection
responsibilities of authorities, and States must put
measures in place to protect their population, in line
with their obligations under the law. Communities need
space to protect themselves and States must be more
proactive in granting it.

The ICRC is looking to build on our role of neutral
intermediary to support these activities, for example in
supporting communities to self-advocate to authorities
or weapon bearers in order to ensure their safety as
they go about their daily lives, collecting food and
water, seeking medical help, attending schools and
more. The ICRC also organizes information sessions
for families on their legal rights so they can themselves
approach authorities.

Additionally, the ICRC is broadening its
assistance to create stronger communities through
micro-economic projects aimed at reducing exposure
to risk, distributing seeds that can be grown in towns to
avoid women being assaulted while going to the field,
or providing income-generating activities to reduce
harmful behaviour such as sending children out to work.
Protections in fragile settings will also require broader
investments that go beyond the work of humanitarian
actors, such as the restoration of markets and enabling
sustainable economic activities.

In the wider context of protection, with increasingly
urbanized warfare, it has become starkly evident that
the effects of bombing and shelling in cities are almost
never limited to military targets. In densely populated
areas, the wide-area impact of heavy explosive weapons
is now well known and their use against targets that are
smaller than their area effects is all too often ethically
and maybe even often legally indefensible. The price is
too high to be justified; beyond the deaths and injuries
of civilians, we see damaged infrastructure leading
to the collapse of essential health and water systems
and more.

It is not only civilian infrastructure that is harmed;
the environmental consequences of conflict are often
overlooked. International humanitarian law protects the
natural environment as a civilian object. This includes
vital natural resources that, if damaged, can have
implications not only for the survival of the civilian
populations, but also for environmental risks.

The ICRC this year will release updated guidelines
on international humanitarian law and the natural
environment. We will be engaging with militaries
about these guidelines, and with parties to the conflict
to ensure practical measures are taken that protect the
natural environment.

We are also seeing gaping protection risks and
vulnerabilities in the digital environment. People
may face hate crimes, violence, discrimination,
digital surveillance and profiling because of their
online presence and/or use of digital technologies,
including by Governments, the private sector and other
non-State actors. In conflict zones, this can be lethal.
Data collected on affected people, including through
humanitarian operations, must not become a source
of additional risk for populations or humanitarian
organizations. States should promote a do-no-harm
approach, backed by accountability mechanisms, for
the responsible use of technologies and data.

Twenty years after the International Committee of
the Red Cross first addressed the protection of civilians
in the Council (see S/PV.3977), violations and abuses
continue. Let us work together to respond on these three
levels: individual, community and the wider context.
As we mark the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions this year, we urge States to recall their
spirit, which is to uphold human dignity in the midst of
armed conflict.

