Mr. Baali (Algeria): I would like first of all to
associate myself with those who have expressed their
appreciation and admiration to Ambassador Munir
Akram and his able team for the remarkable manner in
which Pakistan conducted our work last month. I
would like also to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council and to
assure you of the full support and cooperation of the
Algerian delegation.

It is a great honour for the Council to receive
today Chairman Bryant, Chairman of the National
Transitional Government of Liberia, and to hear his
views and expectations regarding the role of the
Security Council and of the international community at
large in support of the remarkable efforts of the
Liberian people and Government aimed at rebuilding a
peaceful, safe and prosperous Liberia.

I would like also to express our thanks to Mr.
Klein for his comprehensive briefing and to commend
him, as well the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), on the encouraging developments achieved
so far in the peace process in Liberia.

Chairman Bryant has clearly outlined the
challenges that the Liberian people are still confronted
with. For Liberia, the process of healing from the
wounds inflicted by the war will certainly be a long
and arduous one. The problems are numerous and
difficult to solve, and the transition from emergency
recovery to reconstruction and rehabilitation will
require tremendous efforts and huge resources. The
impatience of the Liberians, especially ex-combatants,
will rise as peace and stability are restored throughout
the country.

Yet the news is encouraging, and success is well
within reach. We are in that regard very impressed by
the improvement of the security situation, by the fact
that the transitional institutions are functioning
smoothly, and by the significant progress achieved in
the peace process, in particular regarding disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and the progressive
restoration of State authority throughout the country.

Furthermore, the international community has
been quite supportive, as demonstrated during the
international conference that took place last February
here in New York. The international community is
indeed fully aware that there is no alternative but to
succeed in Liberia. As a matter of fact, failure would
have dramatic consequences, not only for the Liberian
people, but also for the security and stability of the
entire West African region.

In that regard, there is a broad consensus, which
we welcome, within the international community and
within the Council, on the necessity of adopting a
global and regional approach when dealing with the
issue of instability in West Africa and when addressing
the factors that have been fuelling insecurity in that
subregion for more than a decade.

In that context, I would like to commend the
personal commitment of Chairman Bryant and his
tireless efforts to promote good relations with Liberia's
neighbours, at both the bilateral and multilateral levels.
The holding of the summit of the Mano River Union,
which took place on 20 May, is a very welcome step
towards the activation of dialogue and cooperation
among the States of the region. In that connection, I
would respectfully ask Chairman Bryant if he could
offer us some comments with regard to the outcome of
that very important event.

Finally, we are fully aware of the importance that
Liberia attaches to the lifting of sanctions, and we
entirely agree with its argument on the moral, social,
economic and humanitarian impact of sanctions. The
sanctions were imposed for the sake of peace in
Liberia. Last December, the Security Council revised
the legal basis of the sanctions regime in order to bring
sanctions into line with the new political realities in
Liberia. The Government is a partner for peace of the
Security Council. It is therefore our View that the issue
of sanctions should no longer be a source of
controversy between Liberia and the Council.

In conclusion, I once again thank Chairman
Bryant and wish him every success in his very
demanding duties.

