Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his second
valuable and comprehensive report in the past month on
this issue. We are very grateful to him and to you, Mr.
President, for your efforts and for your leadership, Sir, in
calling for this meeting today.

Before I comment on East Timor, with your
permission, Sir, I should like to report to the Council on
a conversation I had about 30 minutes ago with President
Chiluba concerning the mission of the Security Council to
Africa that you have asked me to head.

I want to report to you and to your colleagues,
including those here who will be on that mission, that
President Chiluba reaffirmed his high degree of
enthusiasm for the trip. He asked me to report to you that
he considered it a benchmark, important event. He said
that the Joint Military Commission would receive the
Security Council mission in Lusaka; that there have to be
some slight adjustments in logistics and timing on the
internal part of the trip, but no change in the arrival time
in Kinshasa; and that there may be - in fact, I think, will
be - a need for us to visit capitals other than Kinshasa
and Lusaka.

 

We are now in touch with the United Nations
Secretariat to arrange logistics. The United Nations
Secretariat will be providing an airplane and I will be
consulting each member of the mission on the details. This
should not extend the length of the trip, but change some
of the interior details. I will keep the Council informed.
President Chiluba asked me to express to you, Mr.
President, his appreciation for your leadership in getting
this project under way.

In regard to East Timor, I want to state again that my
Government remains deeply disturbed by Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi's reports concerning the
relationship between elements of the Indonesian military
and the militia operating in the refugee camps in West
Timor. We welcome the news that the border is more
peaceful than it was when Mr. Annabi reported to us a
month ago, and we acknowledge specifically President
Wahid's repeated commitments to solving this problem. My
Government strongly supports President Wahid in this
effort.

Even recognizing that progress has been made,
including four weeks without a cross-border incident, I
think we must point out to the world and to the
Government of Indonesia that the international community
is not satisfied yet and that it expects the Government of
Indonesia to take additional actions on its own to ensure
that this border remains peaceful and to deal with the
underlying problems that still threaten stability in both
halves of the island of Timor.

Let me be specific. First, while the border agreement
signed with the United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET) was a positive step, the
Indonesian military must take the crucial next step and stop
all militia activity in areas under their control. This includes
closing down militia training camps. When I was there in
November I heard first-hand eyewitness accounts of these
camps, training in full view in the market places of towns
near the border. It also includes disarming the militias,
arresting those responsible for infiltrations and discipline in
rotating Indonesian armed forces (TNI) troops who are
tolerating and promoting these infiltrations.

The United States and other members of this Council
again urge the Indonesian Government to fulfil its
responsibility to disarm and disband the hardcore militia
and to prevent those who would persist in breaking the law,
especially the leaders, from doing so by simply moving
them elsewhere. The Government must also end, once and
for all, any TNI collaboration that still exists with the
militia.

I visited some of these refugee camps in West
Timor, and I can say, as I have many times before in this
Council, that these are really miserable and depressing
places. They threaten the health of every man, woman
and child in them and the well-being of any person
unfortunate enough to be in one of them. I have spoken
before about the great need to avoid creating another
situation such as that which exists in the Gaza, where
refugees have become a permanent feature of the
landscape.

Recent reports of returnees are encouraging, but I
am pretty puzzled - indeed, very unhappy - when the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) reports, and the United Nations
reports, and the Government of Indonesia reports that
80,000 to 100,000 refugees still remain in these camps.
Many of them are still not going home because of
disinformation, lies and fear; and those who do not want
to go home should be encouraged to resettle outside of
West Timor.

When I visited the area in November, I said publicly
that if these camps still existed in large numbers within
three or four months, it would be an international
disgrace. It is now five months since that trip, and the
numbers are still very high, although somewhat
diminished. Therefore, I can only conclude that it is a
disgrace and needs to be dealt with.

In saying this, I want to stress that I have the highest
regard for President Wahid and for Special Representative
Sergio Vieira de Mello and his team, one of whom, my
old friend and colleague from the Balkans, Peter
Galbraith, is sitting in the Chamber today as part of the
United Nations team. I know that they are working
vigorously and against all odds, and they are making
progress. But progress is still slow six months into
UNTAET's mandate. For example, UNTAET signed a
Memorandum of Understanding with the Indonesians
concerning judicial cooperation, but the East Timorese
prisons are in such disrepair and wardens so few that, as
Mr. Annabi has alluded to, implementing the
Memorandum of Understanding will be difficult.

The Council, therefore, must stay involved to
monitor and guide UNTAET and to remind the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) that
funds must be disbursed in a timely manner, expert staff

 

must be deployed to the field and priorities must be agreed
with the East Timorese and implemented quickly. The
problems encountered during UNTAET' s stand-up illustrate
perfectly the need for DPKO flexibility and reform.

In conclusion, and speaking on behalf of my
Government, I congratulate President Wahid on travelling
to East Timor to extend the hand of friendship, on ordering
his generals to resolve the militia problem and facilitate
the repatriation or resettlement of refugees and on
promoting cooperation with UNTAET on accountability and
border management. But let us not forget that good
intentions are not sufficient.

We must continue to ask the Government of Indonesia
to do everything in its power to break any remaining
Indonesian military ties to the hardcore militia and resolve
the militia problem. This will help achieve UNHCR's goal
of phasing out the current refugee camps in West Timor by
30 June in favour of return and resettlement elsewhere of
those who elect not to return.

I want to address, in conclusion, two aspects of the
issue: first, benchmarks towards independence referred to
by Mr. Annabi and, secondly, the relationship of the East
Timor problem to the other peacekeeping efforts of the
United Nations at this time.

In regard to the first issue, I know of no more difficult
issue for the United Nations and the people of East Timor
than deciding when they will take full sovereignty and
independence. There is a tide in the affairs of men, as
Shakespeare said, which must be taken at the right moment.
If we push independence too rapidly, we might have an
unfortunate outcome, and if we delay it too long we might
have an unfortunate outcome, so this decision is of the
utmost importance. We need to discuss it continually and
encourage it to take place as rapidly as possible, consistent
with the overall situation.

We are launching here what may well be the first new
country of the twenty-first century, and the launch should
be an excellent one.

In regard to the relationship of East Timor to the other
efforts, I would draw the Council's attention to an obvious
but central fact, which is that in the last 12 months, the
Security Council has authorized the undertaking of, or the
substantial expansion of, five major peacekeeping
operations on three continents: in East Timor, Kosovo,
Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
now, the impending and virtually inevitable increase in
Lebanon. This is a very costly operation for the United
Nations and for those countries that pay the bulk of the
costs associated with this burden. It stretches the
bureaucratic, administrative, managerial and political
resources of the United Nations system, and particularly
DPKO, to the limits. It stretches the Security Council in
a way that is probably without precedent. As we look
around the table today, we see clearly that half of our
colleagues are not here because they are on the Kosovo
mission. The other half of us, with the exception of
President Fowler, who is going to stay here and man the
fort and Ambassador Wang, who is going to stay here
and get ready for his presidency - everyone else in the
chamber is on a trip, either to Kosovo or the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I doubt that has ever happened
before in a two-week period, and it costs a great deal of
money. That is why in the Fifth Committee we have
urgently requested that the discussion of how to revise the
peacekeeping scale of assessments be undertaken so that
we can pay for these operations and we can make them
succeed.
Of the big five - and we must not forget that there
are over a dozen smaller operations, such as the
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, which plays an
indispensable role in preventing Cyprus from returning to
this Chamber as another huge problem - in undertaking
these operations we must be mindful that the very future
of the United Nations is at stake in one of its core
functions - indeed, the very function that President
Roosevelt, Winston Churchill and other great leaders in
1945 put at the centre of the United Nations
responsibilities.

Despite my earlier comments about the refugees in
West Timor, I consider the situation in East Timor one of
the encouraging parts of the United Nations system. It is
for that reason that I think we should look at it as a
model and not allow it to become an indefinite and
prolonged mission, but one which we can look to the
phasing out of so that we can address our resources and
efforts to the other problems as soon as it is practical.

So, Mr. Annabi, I wish you would convey to Mr.
Vieira de Mello our Government's very high respect and
admiration for what he is doing. I wish that you and your
colleagues would make absolutely clear to the
Government of Indonesia how critically important it is to
resolve the problem on which I have focused my remarks
on today.

 

