The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation for the kind words he
addressed to my delegation.
 

I call on the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Nigeria,
His Excellency Chief Tom Ikimi.

Chief Tom Ikimi (Nigeria): On this occasion when
the whole world is joined together as one family in
commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations, allow me to express to you, Madam President, the
appreciation of the Government of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria for convening this meeting of the Security Council
at the level of Foreign Ministers. We commend your
country's initiative in bringing us together today, and we
feel sure that under your guidance this commemorative
meeting will be a success.

Fifty years ago the world emerged from the
devastations of the Second World War with the
determination to save mankind from the scourge of another
war. To this end, the Charter of the United Nations charged
the Security Council with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Security Council has, to a large extent, discharged this
difficult responsibility with commendable courage.

However, the world, particularly the developing world,
has witnessed over 150 civil wars and conflicts which have
caused nearly as much destruction as in the two World
Wars. The wave of refugees and internally displaced
persons, mainly women and children, and the human and
material wastage have reached unacceptable proportions.

The recent dramatic changes in the international
situation, particularly the end of the cold war, encouraged
the hope for a safer and more peaceful world. Regrettably,
such expectations have not been fulfilled. However, there
are encouraging signs that the capacity of the Security
Council to take positive initiatives for the maintenance of
international peace and security has discernibly improved as
a result of the increasing cooperation between all of its
members.

Our collective endeavours for peace could be
undermined by the growing tendency on the part of the
Security Council to be less willing to stay the course in
certain conflict situations, particularly in Africa. In addition,
a noticeable fatigue has developed among troop-contributing
countries and the major contributors to peace-keeping
finances as a result of the multiplicity of United Nations
peace-keeping operations.

It is therefore incumbent on all Member States of the
United Nations to reaffirm their commitment to contribute
to peace-keeping operations. The Security Council must
take the lead if it is truly to discharge its responsibility
with credibility and strive to give equal attention to all
crises that have the potential to threaten international
peace and security. In this regard, the United Nations
needs to respond positively and effectively to the calls
made by West African leaders for financial and logistic
support to be given to the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) in order to implement the recent peace
Agreement in Liberia.

Nigeria believes that the Security Council is in
urgent need of revitalization and structural reform in order
to enable it to respond adequately to existing realities and
the daunting challenges which it faces. It is therefore
necessary that its membership should be increased to
provide more equitable representation. Furthermore, the
Council's working methods and procedures need to be
improved upon so as to enhance its effectiveness,
efficiency, legitimacy and transparency. Africa deserves
to be adequately represented in the permanent
membership of the Council.

As we observe this solemn occasion of the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations, let me reaffirm the
commitment of the Government of Nigeria to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and
to all efforts aimed at enhancing the effectiveness of the
Organization in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts. Nigeria, as a major troop-
contributing country and an international peace-keeping
nation, is prepared to continue to contribute to the
collective efforts of the United Nations in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Nigeria for the kind words he addressed to my
country.

I now call on the First Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Czech Republic, His Excellency
Mr. Alexandr Vondra.


