Mr. Larrain (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): I
wish at the outset to welcome the representative of
Tajikistan to the Security Council Chamber.

Six months ago, by resolution 1030 (1995), the
Security Council agreed to extend the mandate of the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan
(UNMOT) and requested the Secretary-General to report to
it every three months on the progress towards a
comprehensive political settlement of the conflict. We are
grateful to the Secretary-General for his three-monthly
reports pursuant to that resolution, the latest of which
(S/1996/412) has been carefully considered by the Security
Council, and has formed the basis of the draft resolution
before us today.

My delegation cannot conceal its frustration at the
information not merely that there has been no progress
during this period but that the situation in Tajikistan
continues to be very tense and has actually deteriorated
seriously in some regions. Moreover, hostile acts have
impeded the pursuit of political negotiations and have led
to the virtual stagnation of the peace process.

We wish also to state our special concern at and
firm rejection of the continued Violation of the 1994
cease-fire agreement and the failure to put in place the
conditions necessary to sustain the mandate of the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan, such as
progress in the process of national reconciliation and the
promotion of democracy, as the Security Council has
repeatedly requested.

My delegation has often stated its firm condemnation
of harassment and restrictions on the freedom of
movement of United Nations peace missions. We wish
therefore to indicate our particular concern at the facts in
this case and to remind the parties that the security of the
civilian and military personnel of the Mission in
Tajikistan must be rigorously guaranteed.

My delegation is also concerned at the critical
humanitarian situation resulting from the conflict; we
therefore support and express our special gratitude for the
economic and social activities carried out by the United
Nations in the field, which are directly helping those most
harshly affected. Hence, we affirm that the international
community must continue to devote its attention to the
continuing emergency situation, which is accompanied by
massive unemployment, poverty and starvation, as
indicated by the Secretary-General in his most recent
report.

Furthermore, in the context of our concern for the
humanitarian situation, my delegation emphasizes the
importance it attaches to the appeal made in the draft
resolution to the Tajik parties to cooperate fully with the
International Committee of the Red Cross in order to
facilitate the exchange of prisoners and detainees between
the opposition and the Government.

Despite the sombre picture in Tajikistan, we see as
a positive sign the conviction expressed by the parties that
the only way to resolve the Tajik conflict is through
political dialogue. We therefore firmly appeal to the
authorities of the Government and of the opposition to
translate their constructive position into deeds, and we
therefore urge them both to resume political negotiations

 

without delay, to undertake to implement the cease-fire
agreement and to renew it indefinitely.

We believe that the Council should receive without
further delay tangible signals from the parties of their
intention to move forward in the peace process. Such an
attitude would be consistent with the desire that has often
been expressed, and is now being ratified, by the Security
Council, to continue to lend its cooperation and support in
order to resolve this conflict.

Accordingly, my delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution, which extends for a new period of six
months the Mission in Tajikistan.

In conclusion, we wish to express our firm support
and appreciation to the Special Representative, Mr. Gerd
Merrem, as well as to all the military and civilian personnel
of the United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan,
who are carrying out their tasks in such difficult
circumstances.

