Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to congratulate the delegation of the
Russian Federation on having assumed the presidency
of the Security Council and wish it every success in
its work.

Secondly, I would like to thank the Ambassador of
Poland for the excellent manner in which she steered
the work of the Council in May.

We deplore the fact that, despite the efforts of
the facilitator and other members of the Council, we
were unable to reach a substantive agreement. We
would like to underscore that Peru agrees with some
of the proposals the United States included in its draft
resolution (S/2018/520). We believe in particular that
all terrorist acts committed against the Israeli civilian
population and perpetrated by organizations such as
Hamas and the Islamic Jihad, in particular the recent
firing of rockets, must be firmly condemned.

We would have liked to have been able to consider
and discuss such proposals during our consultations so
that they could be reflected in a text to which everyone
was wholly committed. To that end, we also believed that
it was important to reaffirm our continued recognition
ofIsrael's right to guarantee its security and legitimate
defence. Nonetheless, we abstained in the voting on the
draft resolution submitted the United States because
serious developments on the ground must be assessed
holistically and impartially.

Peru has made a constructive and positive
contribution to the negotiations facilitated by the
delegation of Kuwait, as it attempted to reach a
consensus-based and balanced final document that
reflected the legitimate concerns of Council members,
with regard to the current deteriorating situation. In
that regard, in addition to highlighting the role of its
delegation, we would like to thank Kuwait for its draft
text (S/2018/516)becauseitreflects manyofthe concerns
conveyed by our delegation during negotiations, which
is why we voted in favour of it.

Our action on that and other items on the Security
Council agenda is primarily geared towards building
consensus that would enable the protection of civilians,
in line with international humanitarian law, and
addressing the root causes of conflicts, in particular
in the case of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, which
has serious implications for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Lastly, we believe that it is urgent that the parties
resume negotiations towards a two-State solution with
safe and internationally recognized borders.

