Mr. Lukwiya (Uganda): We thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate on
the protection of civilians in situations of armed
conflict. We also thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon; the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. John Holmes; and the Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Kyung-wha
Kang, for their succinct and very informative briefings
this morning.

The year 2009, apart from being the sixtieth
anniversary of the 1949 Geneva Conventions, together
with their Additional Protocols, also marks 10 years
since the Security Council's adoption of its resolution
1265 (1999) on the protection of civilians.

Uganda remains concerned that civilians still
account for the vast majority of casualties during
situations of armed conflict. Civilians continue to be
targeted by parties to conflicts and subjected to
indiscriminate attacks and other forms of violations,
such as forced displacement, sexual violence, forced
conscription, indiscriminate killings, mutilation,
maiming, hunger, disease and loss of livelihood. The
impact of those violations lingers on long after active
combat has ended. Sixty years of attempts at
understanding the concept of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict is a long period of time, especially
for the innocent civilians who wake up every day
confronted by those threats.

The proliferation and fragmentation of non-State
armed groups contribute to the complex nature of most
conflicts. Such groups do not subscribe to or even
realize their obligations under international law to
protect civilians, but instead view them as human
shields to fortify their numbers and gratify their social
needs. Of even greater concern is that most civilians
caught between warring parties for the most part
remain ignorant of their rights under international law,
being more concerned with simply trying to stay out of
the crossfire and to distinguish between friend and foe.

Resolution 1894 (2009) reaffirms those
obligations and calls upon States emerging from armed
conflict to prioritize security sector reform and
independent national judicial systems, and to take all
feasible steps to empower their populations through the
dissemination of information, education and training
on the rights and responsibilities of civilians in
situations of armed conflict. However, experience has
shown that such States cannot rebuild national
institutions on their own, and therefore require support
from the international community. The new resolution
(1894 (2009)) covers important areas that are often
taken for granted. It recognizes the need for safeguards
for vulnerable people, especially women, the elderly,
the disabled, and children, the civilians envisaged in
such terminology. In addition, the resolution addresses
the important component of refugees and internally
displaced persons.

Uganda is encouraged by the attention this
resolution gives to the proliferation and destabilizing
effects of small arms and light weapons, as well as to
the devastating impact of landmines and explosives left
after war. Even more significant for us is the
recognition of the needs of persons with disabilities as
a vulnerable group arising out of the indiscriminate use
of these weapons. Uganda calls upon all subregional
and regional organizations, civil society organizations
and Member States to come to the aid of these people
and to take initiatives aimed at the clearance and
removal of unexploded ordnance and at educating
civilian populations about the dangers it poses.

Of the 26 million documented internally
displaced persons worldwide, 11.6 million are in
Africa. Today's resolution notes the recent adoption of
the African Union Convention for the Protection and
Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa at
a summit held in Kampala on 23 October. Now known
as the Kampala Convention, it is an important
milestone in addressing the root causes of conflict in
Africa. The Convention provides a legal framework for
promoting and strengthening regional and national
measures to prevent, mitigate, prohibit and eliminate
the root causes of internal displacement.

My delegation also welcomes the Council's
recognition of the need to address the issue of HIV and
AIDS as an important component of national
predeployment training information for peacekeeping
troops, as well as for personnel involved in
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities. It is imperative to point out that HIV and
AIDS present a constant risk for populations, not just
during times of peace but even more so during times of
conflict. Soldiers are a high-risk group for HIV
infection during their deployments and can
unknowingly spread it as they are transferred from one
location to another.

Long after the guns have gone silent, affected
populations, many of whom end up losing everything,
are left to pick up the pieces with no assistance, even
from friendly forces. International law does not
provide for making amends to individuals who lose
property or livelihood as a result of armed conflict.
Today's resolution calls for national reparation
programmes for victims as well as institutional
reforms. However, my delegation would like to go a
step further and also recognize the need for all parties
to armed conflict to emphasize the dignity of civilians
by recognizing losses that result from lawful combat
operations, as well as providing meaningful amends to
affected individuals and communities, such as financial
assistance or funding for humanitarian aid
programmes. My delegation encourages all Member
States to embrace the concept of making amends, not
because there is any legal obligation to do so, but
simply in the interests of mitigating suffering and
promoting humanity. That has been the policy of the
Uganda People's Defence Forces (UPDF) and
continues to be implemented by UPDF troops serving
in the African Union Mission in Somalia.

In conclusion, we thank the delegation of Austria
for spearheading the drafting of the resolution that we
have just adopted.

