Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the Minister
Siala for his presence. I want to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salame for
his important briefing today and for all his efforts
to restore peace in Libya. My special appreciation
also goes to Ambassador Skoog for his effective
Chairmanship of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. We look
forward to the important statement to be delivered by
Mr. Siala, Minister ofForeign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Libya.

I would like to highlight the following points.

First, Ukraine continues to believe that the
conflict in Libya has no military solution. It can be
resolved only through a genuine dialogue, in which all
stakeholders must participate in good faith and without
preconditions. In that regard, we welcome the recent
engagement of Special Representative Salame' with the
parties to advance the implementation of the United
Nations action plan for the resumption of an inclusive
Libyan-owned political process, which was endorsed by
the Council in presidential statement S/PRST/2017/l9,
on 10 October. In particular, I would like to refer to
several meetings ofajoint drafting committee in Tunis
and to other meetings in the region that sought to
discuss amendments to the Libyan Political Agreement,
which, in our view, remains the only viable framework
for ending the current crisis. In that regard, we call
on all parties involved to continue those consultations
until all outstanding issues are resolved. Any attempt
to undermine the objectives of the transition period in
Libya are unacceptable and should be rejected.

Secondly, my delegation is extremely concerned by
the ongoing insecurity in Libya. The warring parties
must refrain from any actions that may further aggravate
the security situation and disrupt the unification of
the Libyan army and national security forces under a
unified and civilian Government. Ukraine also takes
very seriously the threat of terrorism in Libya. It has
not only an internal dimension, but a broader regional
impact. In that regard, Ukraine supports the efforts of
the Government of National Accord to counter terrorist
threats and to defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and other extremist groups in Libya.

The ISIL attack in Misrata on 4 October against a
courthouse and the establishment by that organization
of additional checkpoints near Sirte are a clear signal
that the continuing fragmentation of Libyan society,
coupled with internal strife and armed confrontations,
is the single biggest obstacle to conducting a targeted,
consistent and persistent anti-ISIL campaign in that
country. Thus, it is now more necessary than ever that
the international community continue its support to the
Government of National Accord in its efforts to unite
the country and restore law and order.

Thirdly, we are no less concerned over the
deteriorating human rights situation in Libya.
Numerous reports alert us to ongoing human rights
abuses and violations, such as unlawful killings,
kidnappings, forced disappearances and torture.
Recent discoveries of bodies bearing signs of having
been shot and tortured are extremely troubling. The
other development that Ukraine is worried about is
abuses against migrants and refugees in official and
unofficial detention centres in Libya, which include
arbitrary detentions, cases of torture, rape and other
ill-treatment. In our View, the international community
must develop a comprehensive strategy on how to better
protect those vulnerable groups. I am sure that our
discussion tomorrow will contribute to that endeavour.

Finally, Iwould like to reiterate once again Ukraine's
support for the efforts of Special Representative
Salame and to commend all the men and women of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, who
continue to carry out their duties in extremely difficult
and dangerous conditions.
