Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassadors Wittig, Puri and Sangqu for their
briefings.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) has recently made notable progress in the
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1904
(2009). In June, the Council shall adopt a draft
resolution renewing sanctions against Al-Qaida and the
Taliban. China hopes that the new resolution will help
the Committee to improve its work and safeguard the
authority and effectiveness of the sanctions regime.

China appreciates the efforts of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) in implementing the
Security Council's counter-terrorism resolutions. China
supports the CTC's activities, such as the organization
of workshops, improving national preliminary
assessment of implementation reports, facilitating
technical assistance, pursuing dialogue with Member
States and helping them to intensify their counter-
terrorism capacity-building.

The Security Council's unanimous adoption of
resolution 1977 (2011) reflects the resolve of Member
States to promote international counter-proliferation
efforts and represents a new phase in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). China hopes
that the Committee will pursue its work in a practical
and prudent manner, assist Member States in fulfilling
their obligations under the resolution, and promote
progress towards all goals set forth in resolution 1540
(2004) in a balanced, comprehensive and effective
manner. China will continue alongside other Member
States to support and participate in the work of the
Committee and to promote further progress in the
international non-proliferation process.
Terrorism is the arch-enemy of the international
community, and China, too, has been its victim. China
opposes all forms of terrorism and hopes that the
international community will continue to intensify
cooperation and take joint steps to crack down on it.
China supports the ongoing efforts of the United
Nations and the Security Council in playing a key role
in the international struggle against terrorism.

