Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing on his vision of
the future of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
a vision that we fully share. France fully shares the
conceptual framework proposed by the Secretary-
General in his report on the future of United Nations
peace operations (S/2015/682), based on the report
(see S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations, led by Mr. Ramos-Horta. Those
excellent reports call for a dynamic, engaged and
sometimes, when necessary, robust peacekeeping that
supports national political processes. The fine line that
has been drawn in that regard is, in our view, good.
In the context of this debate, I would like to highlight
three aspects.

First of all, within his prerogatives, the Secretary-
General has the right and the duty to ensure that the United
Nations is more effective, responsive and exemplary
on the ground. Those needs can be addressed through
simple and inexpensive measures for reorganizing and
reforming procedures and can be carried out on his own
initiative. With regard to effectiveness, we believe that
the parties on the ground must be given responsibility
and be empowered. The remits and capacities must be
decentralized from Headquarters to the field. We are
counting on the Secretariat to follow through with
that. Along the same lines, we feel that the internal
procedures of the Secretariat should be the focus of an
in-depth analysis. Some rules for recruiting civilian
personnel appear to us to be too cumbersome and
slow. Finally, in terms of setting an example, France
supports the proposals to strengthen the zero-tolerance
policy for sexual abuse committed by Blue Helmets,
and all efforts must come together towards its concrete
implementation. Beginning in 2016, in line with the
comprehensive training organized by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, we want to launch a
training of trainers initiative for the specific purposes
of peacekeeping operations, which will be conducted in
French and open, of course, to a multinational audience.

Secondly, France wants certain issues to be given
fuller consideration. That can also be carried out by
the Secretary-General with our full support. For our
part, we are mobilized to provide the Council with
our military expertise in the following priority areas.
The first area is that of protecting Blue Helmets, who
are called on to intervene in increasingly complex
situations in which they often become targets
themselves. Strengthening their security is a cross-
cutting objective that is related to force generation
and the smooth implementation of security measures,
including the deployment of measures for protection
against improvised explosive devices. Another area is
the use of new technologies to improve reconnaissance,
surveillance and information capacities, which should
make it possible to better anticipate threats, bolster the
activities of peacekeeping operations, ensure the safety
of the staff and protect civilians. Similarly, some rules
governing operational logistics could be improved in
order to be even more responsive and better adapted
to the needs in the theatres of the operations. Finally,
there must be an improvement in medical care in
peacekeeping operations, where, in the absence of
any standards, the basic principles of transparency,
accountability and performance evaluation have not,
in our opinion, been sufficiently implemented, which
exposes United Nations staff to risks that should be
unacceptable.

As a member of the Security Council and a
penholder on a number of resolutions, we plan to do
all we can in those efforts. That is why we intend to
implement or to support the implementation of several
initiatives in particular. They include strengthening
consultations with regional players and neighbouring
countries. That objective is in the Secretary-General's
report and we fully endorse it. Therefore, before we
start negotiations on establishing or renewing the
mandate for peacekeeping operation, we will bring
regional players together to hear their views.

We want there to be more dialogue with troop- and
staff-contributing countries. Without those countries,
and without triangular cooperation among them, the
Security Council and the Secretariat, there can be no
effective peacekeeping. As the Secretary-General has
said, mandates must be well understood and accepted
in order to be implemented. France therefore intends to
bring together the main troop- and staff-contributing
countries on a regular basis to hear their views on
the implementation of mandates. Those consultations
should be conducted over and beyond the work that
precedes the renewal of mandates, thereby enabling
mandates to be better targeted and prioritized. That
is another area in which we plan to focus our efforts,
in line with the recommendations of the Secretary-
General.

Finally, the negotiation of compacts with host
States is something we feel should be encouraged, over
and beyond the mandates conferred by the Security
Council. We believe that reciprocal commitment leads
to a common vision of what should be done. France will
continue its wholehearted participation in, and support
for, United Nations peacekeeping operations and will
do all it can to help make them more effective and more
relevant.

