The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Canada, Chile, Guatemala, Haiti,
Luxembourg, Norway, Peru, Spain, and Trinidad and
Tobago, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Merores
(Haiti) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 12 May
2005 from the Permanent Representative of Benin to
the United Nations, which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Security Council, that Ambassador Ridha
Bouabid, Permanent Observer for the
International Organization of la Francophonie, be
authorized to participate, without the right to
vote, in the public meeting of the Council on
Haiti that will be held tomorrow, Friday, 13 May
2005'"

That letter will be issued as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol 5/2005/311.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Ridha Bouabid, Permanent Observer for the
International Organization of la Francophonie to the
United Nations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Bouabid to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now resume its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2005/302, which contains the report of the
Security Council mission to Haiti, which took place
from 13 to 16 April 2005.

I shall now give the floor to the representative of
Brazil, Mr. Ronaldo Mota Sardenberg, in his capacity
as head of the Security Council mission to Haiti.


