Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): Terrorism is a
concern shared by the entire membership of the United
Nations and the international community at large. My
delegation supported your decision, Mr. President, to
organize this open debate, as a result of our
understanding that broad participation by United
Nations Member States in this debate would contribute
not only to the promotion of our common efforts in the
fight against terrorism, but also to the effectiveness of
those efforts. I thank Mr. Mike Smith, Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), for his briefing. We
appreciate his efforts to improve the organization and
the working methods of CTED, as reflected in the
proposed changes set out in the organizational plan
presented to the Council in document S/2008/80.

International terrorism continues to be one of the
most serious threats to international peace and security.
It constitutes a flagrant violation of international law,
endangers the territorial integrity and stability of States
and causes severe damage to the infrastructure of many
countries and horrifying losses and injuries to innocent
people. Viet Nam has been consistent in its
condemnation of terrorist attacks in whatever form, for
whatever motive and by whomsoever committed,
including those committed under the pretext of
defending democracy and human rights. At the same
time, we are against linking terrorism to any religion.

We support the view that the international fight
against terrorism must be strengthened in a
comprehensive and balanced manner in compliance
with international law, particularly the principles of
respect for national sovereignty and territorial integrity
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
Phenomena such as political, economic and social
inequalities, double standards and selectivity, as well
as the use of force in international relations - all of
which create conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism - need to be addressed, together with the
root causes of international terrorism, such as absolute
poverty and political and social injustices. In the fight
against international terrorism, the United Nations
must continue to play a leading role, especially in
promoting international cooperation and complementing
the efforts of Member States.

Acting under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter, the Security Council adopted resolution 1373
(2001), stipulating as concrete obligations that Member
States shall undertake to prevent and suppress terrorist
attacks. By the same resolution, the Council decided to
establish the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) to
monitor the implementation of those obligations.

The CTED, established by the Council in March
2004 and tasked to support CTC in performing its
mandate of monitoring the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and continuing the capacity-
building work that CTC had undertaken, has completed
in its first three-year mandate.

My delegation aligns itself with the conclusions
by the Council as reflected in the statements by the
President of the Council contained in documents
S/PRST/2005/64 of 21 December 2005 and
S/PRST/2006/56 of 20 December 2006. Viet Nam has
been supportive of CTED in its dialogues with Member
States to identify ways of improving their
counterterrorism capacity as well as its efforts to
provide them with technical assistance.

In August last year, CTED undertook a visit to
Viet Nam where it had fruitful discussions with
Vietnamese counter-terrorism agencies. We are
committed to continued cooperation with CTED,
especially in the follow-up to the visits and in
contributing to the work of CTC. We concur with the
CTED assessment that there have been further
developments in both the threat that terrorism poses to
us and how we face these challenges.

Much progress has been made in raising the
awareness of Member States of their obligations under
Security Council resolutions on counter-terrorism, as
well as of the need to promote international
cooperation in this connection. Member States now
look to the United Nations agencies for assistance to
strengthen their capacity and expertise for effective
implementation of their counter-terrorism obligations.

Acknowledging the crucial role of CTED in
supporting CTC in its efforts to fulfil its overarching
goal of ensuring the full implementation of Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001), Viet Nam will support
the renewal of the mandate of CTED for three years, as
specified in paragraph 2 of resolution 1535 (2004). We
call for further emphasis by CTED on the guiding
principles of cooperation, transparency and even-
handedness.

We welcome the decision of CTC to direct CTED
in developing a more flexible approach to visits to
countries, which would allow more focused visits,
tailored to the needs and situation of the country
concerned. We encourage CTED to work out a more
comprehensive strategy for engagement with donors to
match their capabilities and programs with the
capacity-building requirements of Member States.

We welcome the readiness of CTED to participate
in and support all relevant activities under the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, including
its more active involvement in the work of the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.

