Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): At the outset, Djibouti
wishes to express its profound gratitude to the members
of the Council for this opportunity to offer Djibouti's
perspective on the status of the mediation between
Djibouti and Eritrea and to share some recent negative
developments that constitute a violation of the Security
Council's repeated demand that Eritrea cease arming,
training and equipping armed grounds, including
Al-Shabaab.

Djibouti feels compelled to make this contribution
today because Eritrea has often offered a misleading
and deceptive account of the progress made on the
implementation of the 2010 mediation agreement signed
by Djibouti and Qatar, in an unconvincing attempt
to justify a call for the rescinding of the sanctions
imposed on Eritrea by resolutions 1907 (2009), 2023
(2011), 2044 (2012) and 2317 (2016), just adopted today.

In various forums, Eritrea has often cynically
characterized the border dispute with Djibouti as one of
the pretexts under which the sanctions were justified and
invoked the 10 June mediation agreement facilitated by
His Highness the Emir of Qatar as a purported basis for
rescinding sanctions. But it would be no exaggeration
to state that the assertion that Eritrea is fully committed
to Qatari mediation process is dishonest and not proved
by the facts.

With respect to prisoners of war, the mediation
agreement includes a single provision that each State
promptly provide a list of names and identification
numbers of all prisoners of war and other missing
persons held in its custody. Djibouti did just that.
Nearly six years have passed and Eritrea still refuses to
provide the list or otherwise account for the remaining
Djiboutians it has in its custody, incommunicado, and
in the most inhuman and degrading conditions for the
past eight years. Djibouti was hopeful that the release
of four prisoners of war earlier this year would signal
a radical departure from past practices and induce a
change in the behaviour of the State of Eritrea. Denial,
obfuscation and procrastination belong to the past.
The Secretary-General, and indeed the international
community as a whole, welcomed that development
as positive and expressed hope that tangible progress
would be made - but that hope quickly vanished.

Instead of honouring its international obligations
and commitments, Eritrea has continued to conduct
activities aimed at destabilizing the region and inciting
violent strife in Djibouti, as documented in the report
(see S/2016/920) of the Somalia/Eritrea Monitoring
Group, but has also provided weapons and ammunition
to Al-Shabaab in Somalia. We have provided evidence
of that to the Monitoring Group and the members of
the Security Council and we stand ready to provide
additional information. It is in violation of Security
Council resolutions and runs counter to our collective
efforts. That justifies the strengthening of sanctions,
not rescinding them.

In its most recent open debate (see S/PV.7802), the
Security Council carefully analysed the magnitude of
the threats posed by asymmetrical attacks by terrorists
and other armed groups targeting peacekeepers. Once
again, Djiboutijust recently lost soldiers to such attacks
in Somalia. But, of course, we will continue to support
our brothers and sisters in Somalia at this critical
juncture of the political process.

We all face competing priorities as developing
countries. One wonders why a developing country
with so many challenges would divert precious funds
destined for its development efforts to undertake
activities that aim at undermining peace in the region.

In conclusion, allow me to thank the members of
the Security Council for their continued vigilance and
support for the legitimate goals pursued by Djibouti,
in particular the settlement of the border dispute with
Eritrea and the release of all 13 prisoners of war.

The meeting rose at 10.50 am.
