We join other speakers in expressing appreciation to the Belgian Chair for the briefing on the work of the Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), concerning Somalia, over the past four months. Given that this is the last briefing of Belgium in that capacity, we would also like to thank our colleagues for chairing the subsidiary body and for the valuable input made. The Russian Federation considers the sanctions regime as an important instrument for assisting the Federal Government of Somalia to establish peace and stability in the country. Both arms and charcoal embargoes have made a substantial contribution on that track. We also believe in the untapped potential of the restrictions on the supply of the improvised explosive device components introduced last year. On the other hand, the sanctions regime should, under no circumstances, be an impediment to the Somali National Army in the fight against Al-Shabaab. The Security Council needs to keep the measures under constant review, taking into account the needs expressed by the Somalis in the field of capacity-building and results achieved in the weapons and ammunition management. On the relationship between the Panel of Experts on Somalia and the Federal Government of Somalia, we acknowledge the progress made on that track. In the current circumstances, it is particularly important that the Panel continue to accomplish its mandated tasks smoothly, while maintaining close coordination with the Somali authorities on all aspects of its investigations and enhancing trust and confidence with Mogadishu. Timely reporting of developments on the ground is essential. That said, we are seriously concerned over the leakage of the Panel's final report (see S/2020/949), and we hope that such incidents will never happen again. The Somalia sanctions renewal, scheduled for next month, provides a good opportunity to revisit all these issues. We see the resolution as a concise document focusing on the Somalia sanctions and devoid of provisions that fall outside the competence of the Security Council and the Committee.
