Ms. Flores (Honduras): My delegation congratulates
you, Mr. President, for convening this timely debate on
the situation concerning Venezuela to attend to the new

developments of a political and humanitarian crisis in
which more than 3 million refugees and migrants have
left the country since 2015. Those who remain are at
risk of enduring an escalating conflict, which today
members of the security Council are called upon to
prevent, while taking all the necessary to protect the
Venezuelan population.

The Inter-American Democratic Charter, with
respect to the principle of non-intervention, established
mechanisms for collective action in case of a sudden
or irregular interruption of the democratic political
institutional process in order to respond rapidly in
defence of democracy. For that purpose, the Permanent
Council of the Organization of American States
adopted a resolution to not recognize the legitimacy
of Nicolas Maduros' new term as of 10 January and
called for a new electoral process that would reflect the
will of the Venezuelan people. All member States of
the Organization of American States are called upon
to adopt, in accordance with international law and
national legislation, diplomatic, political, economic
and financial measures, as appropriate, to contribute
to the prompt restoration of the democratic order in
Venezuela and support other measures to allow access
to humanitarian aid.

As mandated by the Venezuelan Constitution, the
President ofthe Assembly, Juan Guaido, has assumed the
functions of interim caretaker President of Venezuela,
amid a monumental demonstration of support by
Venezuelan citizens, garnering the recognition of States
in the region, the Lima Group and the international
community, accompanying democracy, in trusting
that Venezuela can soon commence a process of
credible elections.

Upon those actions in the face of the restoration of
constitutional order, tensions have increased and serious
violations of human rights have been duly reported.
Notwithstanding Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, regarding regional arrangements and
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security, the Security Council has the responsibility to
respond to threats to international peace and security.
As all of our region and its peoples are impacted by
the protracted crisis in Venezuela and the deterioration
with regard to the rule of law, stability, security and
elemental guarantees and freedoms, we request the
security Council to urgently and diligently attend to
this matter.

In favour of our youth and of assuring prosperity
for generations to come, let us today shift the culture of
denial and dismissiveness of critical issues that require
the care and the attention of our United Nations, and
embrace a new conscientiousness with full respect for
human rights.

