Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the briefings by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Jan
Kubis, and the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury
Fedotov. We also welcome the detailed statement by
Ambassador Zahir Tanin.

We welcome the holding of the presidential and
provincial council elections on 5 April and the second
round of polling in the run-off between Abdullah
Abdullah and Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai on 14 June. We
note the Government's efforts to promote and strengthen
female participation, either as candidates, voters or
observers and applaud the 36 per cent participation rate
by women in the 5 April elections.

A legitimate political transition based on a result
that is accepted by candidates and voters is essential
for the stability of Afghanistan. We once again stress
the need for the process to be credible, transparent,
inclusive and in full compliance with the legal and
constitutional framework set out by the country's own
National Assembly. We also highlight the important
work of the Independent Election Commission and
UNAMA to verify that that is the case.

Progress on human rights, especially the rights of
women and girls, is a decisive factor in the country's
stability. It is important that resolution 1325 (2000)
continue to be implemented at all levels to ensure
women's participation in decision-making and that their
needs are adequately met. In that vein, including women
in the police and security forces is important and should
continue to be a priority task for the new authorities.
It is equally crucial that the new Government ensure
the full implementation of the law on the elimination
of violence against women in order to end impunity for
those who commit violence against Afghan women.

The increasing number of civilian deaths and
injuries in Afghanistan caused by the use ofimprovised
explosive devices shows there are still serious security
problems in the country. The number of events and
victims is at the worst levels since 2011. Given that,
we firmly support the new provisions on such explosive
devices contained in resolution 2160 (2014), adopted by
the Council on 17 June, which are aimed at reducing
their production, propagation and use.

In addition, together with Mr. Yury Fedotov, we
are alarmed by the increase in drug production and
trafficking in Afghanistan, where last year a new record
was set in the production of opium. We reiterate the
need for a comprehensive and international approach in
the fight against drug trafficking that includes actors
involved in security, development and humanitarian
issues.

We deplore the further deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the north as a result of
the heavy seasonal rains and extend our solidarity
to Ambassador Tanin with respect to the resulting
significant loss of life. In the context of a conflict that
has spanned decades, ongoing vulnerability to natural
disasters, the situation of internally displaced persons
and food insecurity are major humanitarian challenges
that need to be addressed in a coordinated manner
by the newly elected authorities and the international
community. That will not be possible without ensuring
the full, prompt and unhindered access of humanitarian
personnel.

We are concerned that terrorism in its various forms
and manifestations has increased with the elections,
and we condemn the attack on presidential candidate
Abdullah Abdullah on 7 June. With the withdrawal of
the International Security Assistance Force at the end
of 2014, my country believes it will be necessary to
continue building the capacities of the Afghan National
Security Forces in order to address the emerging
threats and challenges. That will require greater resolve
with regard to the current uncertainties that prevail in
Afghanistan.

A specific example in that regard is the bilateral
security agreement between Afghanistan and the United
States of America. Both presidential candidates have
committed to subscribing to that agreement, if elected.
It is also important that the new Government establish
stronger regional cooperation networks through
multilateral processes, such as the Istanbul process
and the Toyko Conference. Regional cooperation is
also essential for peace and reconciliation, as are the
contacts with the Taliban and other groups that continue
to fight the Government. It is essential that the next
Government has the necessary stability to carry out an
orderly transition.

In conclusion, I should like to express Chile's
support for the efforts of the Afghan people in building
a democratic State with the rule of law and full
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
That is vital both for the stability and development of
Afghanistan as for the stability of the entire region.

