Mr. M'Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Jan Kubis for his presentation of the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan (8/2012/703). My country is grateful for
his efforts and initiatives to help restore lasting peace
in that country. I would also like to acknowledge the
presence of Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign
Affairs ofAfghanistan, and thank him for his statement.

Today, as we hold the third debate on the situation
in Afghanistan this year, we must welcome the tangible
developments on the ground, although significant
challenges remain in the area of security, politics, the
fight against narcotic drugs and corruption, to mention
just a few.

In his report, the Secretary-General observes
that the transfer of responsibility for security to the
Afghan National Security Forces has gone smoothly.
It is my country's hope that the Government-mandated
Transition Coordination Commission will continue its
efforts to put the finishing touches on the preparations
for subsequent phases of the transition.

We note a slight decrease in the number of violent
incidents, especially suicide attacks, due, among
other things, to measures undertaken by the Afghan
authorities to increase both the police forces and the
army, including by recruiting more women within
the national police, creating specialized community
policing units in certain provinces, and establishing
local police programmes. However, we are concerned
that indiscriminate attacks have once again increased
in intensity in recent weeks. We condemn attacks
targeting neutral subjects such as United Nations staff,
in particular locally recruited staff and their partners.
Planned attacks continue to make innocent victims of
political and religious personalities and of peaceful
populations.
The suicide attack of 18 September killed
12 people, including eight South Africans working
for a private aviation company. This clearly illustrates
the atmosphere of insecurity and terror that prevails.
We take this opportunity to reiterate the Togolese
Government's firm condemnation of this heinous
attack and to present to the South African delegation
our sincere condolences. We encourage the Afghan
Government and the international community to
continue to invest freely in helping the Afghan people
to emerge from this unacceptable situation.

In that regard, we commend the initiatives
undertaken in the area of fighting drugs with the help
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. The
approval by the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board of the Counter-Narcotics Monitoring Mechanism
developed to that end bodes well in that regard, in our
view. All that remains is to implement these measures
in order to allay the serious concerns of partners and
friendly countries.

The commitments undertaken by the Afghan
authorities are also coming to fruition at the political
level, with President Hamid Karzai's announcement
that he will devote the last two years of his term to the
promotion of good governance by fighting impunity and
corruption, promoting accountability and improving
the effectiveness of aid. At the same time, the electoral
events of 2014 and 2015 will be major challenges for
the Government, which, in the terms of the Tokyo
Declaration and the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, must organize presidential and legislative
elections that are credible and inclusive. It is Togo's
firm desire to see the electoral law on the structure of
the Independent Electoral Commission adopted within
the allotted time frame. In that regard, we dare to hope
that the resignation of the head of electoral operations
will have no impact on the normal functioning of the
process already under way.

We appreciate the support of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) through the second
phase of the electoral support project Enhancing Legal
and Electoral Capacity for Tomorrow, and of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in providing analytical, consultative and logistical
support to the High Peace Council. We also welcome
the fact that the High Peace Council has undertaken
activities to promote political conditions to encourage
the peace process. In that regard, we encourage
continuing the dialogue with all political players.

Over and above assistance from the international
community, Afghanistan more than ever needs the
support of the countries of the region. The tangible
progress made in the areas of regional cooperation
and mutual confidence-building during the Ministerial
Conference held in Kabul in June is a positive sign
of a successful conclusion of the Istanbul Process on
Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and
Stable Afghanistan. Togo urges the countries concerned
to do everything in their power to remove obstacles to
cooperation with Afghanistan. Specifically, we would
invite the Governments of Pakistan and Afghanistan to
continue to work together in order to overcome their
border problems.

In the area of humanitarian assistance, the report
(S/2012/703) notes the commitment of the Ministry
of Public Health to supporting action to reduce infant
mortality. Significant progress was also achieved in the
indicators for women and children. My country is very
pleased with this and places a great deal of hope in the
programme for voluntary repatriation and reintegration
of refugees developed jointly between the Afghan
technical ministries and the United Nations.

The Afghanistan situation will need, as it has in
the past, the international community's help, especially
after the scheduled withdrawal of international forces in
late 2014. The hopes created by the Tokyo Conference
on Afghanistan in July should not be dashed. The
noteworthy progress that has been made should be
supported and sustained. I reiterate Togo's profound
thanks to the United Nations and all its specialized
agencies, including UNDP, as well as to UNAMA and
the International Security Assistance Force, for all their
sacrifices with a view to providing Afghanistan with a
promising future.

