Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
begin by congratulating you personally, Mr. President,
and your delegation for your efficient guidance of the
Council's work and for the productive month of March
under your presidency.

One of the highlights of the monthly programme
was the Security Council's mission to Africa - which
I was very proud to lead with you, Sir - including the
Central African Republic, Burundi and Addis Ababa
for the ninth joint session aimed at enhancing the
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations in matters relating to peace and security in
Africa.

In the Central African Republic, we witnessed a
very dire situation in absolute need of the assistance
of the international community in order to overcome
the tragic realities its population is facing. Our mission
conveyed to the transitional authorities and other
interlocutors the importance of moving ahead with the
transitional process, in particular the implementation
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes and the effective rebuilding of State
institutions. Based on the continuing instability and
sectarian tensions in the country, the Security Council
decided by resolution 2212 (2015) to authorize an
effective increase in the military, police and correction
personnel of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic.

The Security Council mission was able to observe
the significant progress achieved in Burundi since the
end of the civil war. However, it is obvious that peace
remains fragile. Therefore, taking into account the fact
that elections will soon be held, the main objective of
the mission was to encourage the holding ofa peaceful,
inclusive, fair and transparent electoral process in
accordance with the Arusha Accords, the Constitution
and the road map for the election signed by the political
parties. It is our hope that all political stakeholders will
avoid aggressive rhetoric and that they will focus on
constructive debate of the real problems facing their
country.

The meeting with the African Union Peace and
Security Council consisted of an exchange of views on
the situations in the Great Lakes region, the Central
African Republic, Mali and the Sahel, Libya, Somalia,
South Sudan and Darfur, a strategy for fighting the
terrorist group Boko Haram and, in more general terms,
the strategic partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union. The consultations on the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the renewal of
its mandate mobilized the attention of Security Council
members and of the international community.

From the briefing provided by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General (see S/PV.7410)
and the discussions that followed, it is obvious that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is at a crossroads.
Remarkable progress has been achieved in recent years;
however, a lot remains to be done in crucial aspects of
the peace consolidation process, in which the dialogue
with the United Nations on enhancing the effectiveness
of MONUSCO has a very crucial role to play.

Positive developments, of which the Security
Council took good note, arose with respect to the
situation in Liberia and the evolution concerning the
Ebola virus. The apparent end of the epidemic enabled
the return of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
to Liberia and the pursuit of the peacebuilding and
State-building process.

The issue of Boko Haram was also at the centre
of the Security Council's concerns. The discussions on
the draft resolution on the fight against the terrorists
was the subject of a number of discussions at different
levels. Finally, today the issue was discussed in
consultations of the Security Council, and it is our
hope that this marks the beginning of the consolidation

process leading to the stepping up of the international
efforts in the fight against Boko Haram terrorists. The
two open debates held in the course of the month (see S/PV.7414 and S/PV.7419) were the expression of the
Security Council's great concern over the plight of
civilians caught in the middle of conflicts, and reflect
the importance attached to their protection. I thank you,
Mr. President, for that useful way of dealing with the
situation of civilians, especially children and women.

Children in armed conflicts have become a
central issue in the Council's work and a new trend in
the Middle East, where communities that have lived
together in harmony for centuries have been shattered
by this new brand of terrorists who aim at building so-
called States based on intolerance and the elimination of
any religious, ethnic or racial differences. We welcome
the Secretary-General's announcement that the United
Nations is developing an action plan on preventing
violent extremism, to be launched in September, with
a view to strengthening efforts to protect diversity
in the Middle East, and of his intention to form an
advisory group of religious, civil, cultural, academic
and business leaders to offer insight on the sectarian
dynamics.
The Middle East, with the escalation of conflicts
there, has been the focus of the Council's deliberations.
The inability of the Council to agree on the elements
of a political solution in Syria is exacerbating the
catastrophic humanitarian situation there, with
unforeseeable consequences. Accordingly, countries
with the influence over the parties at war should adopt
a more pragmatic and realistic approach to the conflict
if they are to make any meaningful contribution to the
cessation of hostilities. Yemen, with the collapse of
the United Nations-mediated talks, the rapid offensive
of the Houthis, taking over the State and marching
towards Aden, and the dramatic changes in the strategic
situation have created a scenario of outright war and
all-out foreign intervention, with unforeseen outcomes.

The United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force, one of the last conventional United Nations
peacekeeping missions and interposition force to
maintain a truce between two symmetric forces, is in
danger from the Syrian conflict, which adds disturbing
elements to its mission. Equally, the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and Lebanon itself are
suffering heavily from the consequences of the Syrian
conflict.

The situation in Libya was also the object
of consideration, without much progress in the
normalization of political life and the mounting dangers
of terrorism for the whole region. It is our expectation
that the Security Council's adoption of pertinent
resolutions might encourage the Libyan stakeholders to
reach the necessary understanding in order to push the
political process forward.

Regarding the situation in Palestine and Israel, it
is increasingly evident that drastic changes must take
place in its approach if the international community is
to maintain the commitment to the two-State solution
for Israel and Palestine. We fully support the initiative
of France to hold an international conference in Paris
over this serious issue, since the actions of Israel seem
to be poised to undermine the two-State framework
definitively, and we took note of the candid briefing
on the Middle East (see S/PV.7417) by Mr. Robert
Serry, urging the Council to present a framework for
negotiations and show firm leadership on the matter.

Haiti remains at the centre of the concerns and the
object of the continuous commitments to its process of
peaceful State-building. Ukraine was for the first time
the object of a Security Council resolution (resolution 2202 (2015)) endorsing the framework for a ceasefire
and peace. Cooperation between the United Nations and
the European Union was discussed in depth, as were the
intermingled conflicts in the Sudan and South Sudan.

To conclude, we want to reiterate our willingness
to work with our international partners on devising
new strategies for dealing with the violent extremism
that is affecting the very roots of civilization, innocent
civilians, including women and children, and religious
and ethnic minorities around the world. These strategies
should include an energetic ideological response to
terrorism at all levels and the use of all means available
to isolate the terrorists and degrade their capacity to
mobilize young people for their sinister objectives.
The promotion of tolerance and the inclusion of youth
in all aspects of policy-making are another particular
important feature in preventing radical groups from
exploiting the idealism of youth for their purposes.

I would like to conclude by extending our best
wishes to our good friends from Jordan, and hope that
next month we will continue with the productive work
that was ushered in by France.

