Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to welcome you, Sir, and thank you for
presiding over today's Security Council meeting. Iwould
also like to thank Ms. Fang Liu, Secretary General of
the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO),
for her briefing.

As globalization continues to advance, the air
transport sector is playing an increasingly important
role in social and economic development and progress
at the national level. However, terror attacks targeting
the international civil aviation system are a scourge
that destroys lives and property. Maintaining the safety
and security of international civil aviation is vital
to the promotion of international travel, interaction
and cooperation, intraregional and interregional
connectivity and global economic recovery and
development. In that regard, I would like to share China's
perspective on the issues, focusing on three points.

First, we should focus our efforts on improving the
civil aviation safety and security system and reinforcing
security measures, establishing a multi-pronged
approach that covers airport security, ground security
screening, industry regulation and internal risk control,
and all aimed at strengthening civil aviation security
safeguards. Resolution 2309 (2016), which we have
just adopted, refers explicity to States' obligations
to do more in such areas as airport security checks,
sharing passenger information and security-screening-
technology sharing and cooperation. It is incumbent
on all States to implement the provisions of today's
resolution, launch more substantive initiatives in the
relevant areas and continue to improve civil aviation
security standards.

Secondly, we should strengthen international
cooperation on civil aviation security. States should
commit to the notion that humankind is a community
with a shared future, and should work to comprehensively
strengthen such cooperation. Countries with more
developed civil aviation sectors should take the real-life
difficulties that developing countries are dealing with
seriously, and help them develop their capacities in the
areas of building infrastructure, training and providing
logistical services. The Security Council, as the world's
primary body for the maintenance of international peace
and security, should provide political guidance and
secure the commitment of all parties to strengthened
international cooperation and civil aviation security.
ICAO, as the technical agency responsible for
formulating aviation safety and security standards,
should help States to comprehensively implement of
the relevant international standards. The Council and
ICAO should improve their synergy by strengthening
their division of labour and collaboration, both working
within the purview of their respective mandates.

Thirdly, we should work unremittingly to combat
terrorist acts that compromise the safety and security
of civil aviation. Every State should maintain uniform
standards and take a zero-tolerance approach to
terrorism, with no distinction between acts of terror,
all of which should be firmly countered, regardless
of the countries they target or the means they employ.
International action against terrorism should promote
the greatest possible scope for the leadership of the
United Nations and the Security Council, abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, strengthen effective coordination, create
an internationally united front against terrorism and
maintain an uncompromisingly combative posture
towards it. In the light of the characteristics of terrorist
activities relating to civil aviation, and the requirements
of resolution 2309 (2016), all parties should improve
their intelligence sharing at both international and
regional levels, enhance their cooperation on border
control and law enforcement and take effective action
against cross-border movements ofterrorists, especially
when they are returning to their countries of origin.

China is an important member of the international
counter-terrorism community. We will continue
to promote bilateral and multilateral anti-terror
cooperation in accordance with our laws on counter-
terrorism and civil aviation safety and security, and
with international conventions. We will continue to
raise our civil aviation safety and security standards
and work with the international community to fight
terrorism effectively and keep aviation safe and secure.

