The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Ghana.

My delegation wishes to thank Ambassador Yukio
Takasu, Chairman of the Organizational Committee of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for his introduction of
the first annual report (S/2007/458) of the
Peacebuilding Commission. I also wish to commend
Ambassador Gaspar Martins of Angola for his
pioneering role - supported by the Peacebuilding
Support Office, led by Assistant Secretary-General
Carolyn McAskie - as the first Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

The annual report highlights some of the progress
made by, and the challenges confronting, the
Peacebuilding Commission. Notable among the
Commission's achievements has been its ongoing task
of assisting the two countries currently on its agenda,
namely, Burundi and Sierra Leone, to develop and
implement peacebuilding strategies based on priorities
identified in the light of the principle of national
ownership. Some challenges have also been spelled out
in the annual report, as well as in statements we have
heard from various delegations this morning, which
should merit the Council's due consideration.

One year after it was established, a clear
consensus has yet to emerge about aspects of the
Peacebuilding Commission's conceptual design,
operational methods and relationship with other United
Nations bodies and non-United Nations entities, as
well as between the Commission's own configurations.
The recent request by Guinea-Bissau to be placed by
the Security Council on the agenda of the Commission,
which Ghana supports, has brought some of those
issues into sharp focus.

Questions have been asked as to how many
countries should be on the Commission's agenda at any
given time, and what eligibility criteria should be used;
whether, besides the Security Council, other organs,
such as the Economic and Social Council, that deal
with the socio-economic recovery and development of
post-conflict countries may refer countries to the
Peacebuilding Commission for inclusion in its agenda;
and whether the Commission, which was essentially
established as an intergovernmental advisory body,
may offer advice to all relevant countries on the
Council's agenda that are making the transition from
war to peace, in particular those at the risk of relapsing
into a cycle of violence.

Any meaningful attempt to answer those and
other questions exercising the minds of many must take
due cognizance of the circumstances leading to the
adoption, on 20 December 2005, of concurrent
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, namely, resolutions 60/180 and 1645 (2005).
Those resolutions led to the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission as a hybrid subsidiary body
of both organs. The Commission is unique, and the first
institutional mechanism of the United Nations of its
kind. The Commission, together with the
Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office, constitutes the peacebuilding architecture
constructed in our collective quest to reform the United
Nations.

Following the lessons learned from the
experience of many countries that relapsed into conflict
a few short years after peace agreements were signed,
the Peacebuilding Commission was designed to fill an
institutional gap within the United Nations by
addressing the deficit in international attention on
countries in post-conflict situations. It was also
intended to help bridge the financial and other resource
gaps by playing an advocacy and catalytic role in
mobilizing national and international resources to
sustain peace. To that end, the Commission must
become more proactive in mobilizing the support of
international financial institutions and other donors to
enable the Peacebuilding Fund to close the gap
between pledges and commitment. The Commission
must also be more proactive in engaging civil society
to enhance the prospects of peacebuilding initiatives at
the local and community levels.

The Peacebuilding Commission itself must be
adequately resourced to strengthen its capacity to
accept more countries on its agenda. In that regard,
further improvements in its working methods, taking
into account lessons learned in its first year of
operation, may be necessary. Who qualifies to be on
the agenda of the Commission should be determined by
need and reality. Ghana looks forward to working
together with other members of the Security Council to
achieve the necessary consensus on the request by
Guinea-Bissau to be placed on the Commission's
agenda sooner rather later. But the door should not be
closed to other deserving countries, whether they have
peacekeeping operations or not, because peacekeeping
and peacebuilding operations should not necessarily be
Viewed as mutually exclusive, but rather as mutually
reinforcing.

In conclusion, the ultimate purpose of the
Peacebuilding Commission is to help national and
transitional authorities to rebuild institutions of
democratic accountability and good governance that
will be capable of sustaining peace long after external
peacemakers and peacekeepers have left, in order to
avert a relapse into violence. National ownership
should remain the core principle of peacebuilding,
focusing on rebuilding national capacity to sustain
peace.

To be sustainable, peacebuilding efforts must deal
with the root causes of conflict by tackling poverty,
injustice and inequitable development, the promotion
of a culture of respect for the rule of law and human
rights, and adherence to the highest standards of good
governance and good citizenship. The African Union's
Post-Conflict Reconstruction Policy Framework, which
places emphasis on tackling root causes of conflict,
may be relevant in the Commission's effort to mobilize
regional support for its mandate.

Finally, Ghana remains committed to the
objectives of the Peacebuilding Commission, and calls
on the international community to approach the
challenges of peacebuilding in a coordinated,
integrated, flexible and efficient manner in order that
post-conflict countries will not relapse, while also
ensuring that the peacebuilding architecture of the
United Nations, erected through difficult negotiations
and compromises, does not collapse.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Netherlands.

