Mrs. Hrda (Czech Republic): The Czech Republic
fully shares the views expressed in the concept note
(S/2014/238, annex) for today's debate. We thank the
Nigerian presidency for having brought this critical
issue to the attention of the Security Council and hope
that the Security Council will continue to hold open
debates on security sector reform (SSR) on a regular
basis. We therefore welcome the draft resolution on
SSR and hope that it will be adopted today. The Czech
Republic would like to join others in announcing our
co-sponsorship of the draft.

We agree that it is the responsibility of the Security
Council as the body primarily responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security to
ensure that the necessary priority be afforded to this
critical role of the United Nations.

The Czech Republic fully aligns itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union,
and I would like to add the following remarks in our
national capacity.

We consider SSR to be a key step in the transition
from conflict to sustainable development. Successful
SSR is possible only by adhering to the principles of
national ownership and deepening cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations and civil
society. In this context, SSR emerged as a relevant
concept addressing the core deficiencies of the State
with the aim of improving not only State security but,
in a broader sense, human security - that is to say, the
security of every single human being within the society.

The Secretary-General's report of August 2013
(S/2013/480) clearly outlines the progress within the
United Nations system on SSR, but it also shows that
there is need for further improvement. In our view, SSR
requires a holistic approach and all activities should be
dealt with in a coherent and comprehensive manner. It is
crucial to involve all parts of the United Nations system
in this area. We therefore we welcome the creation of
the inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force,
which covers all important departments of the United
Nations Secretariat and its programmes. We also note
other ways of deepening this cooperation by involving
specialized United Nations agencies in the Task Force.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the active
participation of the Czech Republic and Czech experts
in several Common Security and Defence Policy
missions, whose mandate included SSR - in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Afghanistan, the Horn of Africa and
Mali. My country is also undertaking particular efforts
to implement resolution 1325 (2000), on women, peace
and security, as well as resolution 1612 (2005), on
children affected by armed conflict.

