The President: I should like to make a statement
in explanation of vote in my national capacity, as the
representative of South Africa.

South Africa will vote in favour of the resolution
before the Council today. Although far from ideal, it is
a consequence of concern about the need to build
international confidence in Iran's nuclear programme.

South Africa approached the resolution on its
merits and with the perspective of a country that is not
party to any dispute or conflict. The Council is well
aware that South Africa is fully committed to the
elimination of all weapons of mass destruction and is
therefore a strong advocate against both the horizontal
and vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons.
Inevitably, we are against the development of nuclear
weapons by Iran, or any other country, for that matter.
Our position is informed by our own national
experience as the only country, to have voluntarily
dismantled its nuclear weapons and related
programmes.

In that regard, South Africa acts on the basis of
principle and in full support of the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), where
we are an active member of the Board of Governors.
We work consistently to promote consensus within the
IAEA.

While South Africa recognizes that the Security
Council may be called upon to impose coercive
measures such as sanctions, we believe those measures
should be utilized with great caution and only to
support the resumption of political dialogue and
negotiations to achieve a peaceful solution. South
Africa's interventions in the Council have therefore
focused on trying to de-escalate tensions, promote
dialogue to establish confidence in the nuclear
programme of Iran and ensure that the IAEA inspectors
remain on the ground in Iran and that Iran remains part
of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.

South Africa has always been very clear, as a
matter of principle, that the Security Council must
remain within its mandate of addressing threats to
international peace and security. If the sponsors of the
resolution were convinced that the Iranian programme
was a threat to international peace, then the Security
Council should have been asked to take a decision on a
draft that would have concentrated on that, and not to
act as if the Iranian Government itself posed a threat to
international peace and security.

South Africa proposed a number of constructive
amendments to the draft resolution. Our purpose was to
assist the Security Council to find language for a new
resolution that matched the stated objectives of the
sponsors that the resolution would be "proportionate,
incremental and reversible".
We remain deeply disappointed that not all our
proposals were accommodated. The resolution does,
however, correctly acknowledge that there is a need to
respect the right of all countries, including Iran, to
exploit the peaceful uses of nuclear technology, subject
to appropriate safeguards. We are particularly pleased
with the fact that the resolution now reaffirms the need
of all States parties to the NPT to comply fully with all
their obligations, which corresponds to our view that
the twin obligations of nuclear disarmament and
nuclear non-proliferation require our equal attention.
After all, there is no basis for arguing that weapons of
mass destruction are safe in some hands and not in
others.

We note that the IAEA has been able to verify the
non-diversion of declared nuclear material in Iran.
However, we share the concern of the IAEA Director
General that the Agency continues to be unable "to
reconstruct fully the history of Iran's nuclear
programme and some of its components" because the
necessary level of transparency and cooperation have
not been provided by Iran.

Like other members of the Council, South Africa
sought to engage in the negotiation process in its
national capacity, mindful of the duty bestowed on all
Council members to contribute towards a peaceful and
negotiated solution to the Iranian nuclear stand-off,
which is an issue that affects the entire international
community - indeed, humanity as a whole.

The 15 members of the Security Council will take
a difficult decision, and after today's vote a great deal
of work still lies ahead if the international community
hopes to prevent heightened tensions from spiralling
out of control, to the detriment of all. A path needs to
be urgently found back to negotiations, restraint and
compromise on all sides. South Africa therefore hopes
that the latest offer by Iran to resume negotiations will
lead to concrete results.

South Africa urges Iran to provide the necessary
assistance and cooperation to the Agency in its efforts
to resolve the outstanding issues as soon as possible,
since that will make a substantial contribution to
building confidence in Iran's nuclear programme. It is
imperative that confidence be established in Iran's
nuclear programme for peaceful purposes.

Every effort must be made to resume dialogue
and enter into meaningful negotiations to find a
sustainable long-term solution to this matter, since no

one will win through a process of confrontation that
could lead to disastrous consequences in a highly
volatile region.

We hope, therefore, that support for this draft
resolution will not be perceived as an obstacle to future
negotiations. It is in that spirit that we will vote in
favour of the draft resolution.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Congo, France, Ghana,
Indonesia, Italy, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1747 (2007).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


