Mr. Rostow (United States of America): Let me
begin by joining those who have thanked the Chairmen
for their presentations. I also wish to thank them, the
staffs of the Committees and the Secretariat for their
hard work and their dedication to the struggle against
terrorism. Without them, the Security Council would
be hard pressed to shoulder with any degree of
effectiveness its responsibilities with regard to
terrorism.

We meet in the shadows of London, Madrid, Bali,
Bombay, Mombasa, Taba, Tel Aviv, Beslan, Baghdad,
Riyadh and Istanbul - not an exhaustive list since
11 September 2001, but one long enough to show the
persistence of terrorism and the worldwide reach of
terrorists. The list does not begin to scrape the surface
of the subject. Libraries are full of scholarly works on
what terrorism is and on what makes terrorists do what
they do. The important point is the one highlighted by
the Secretary-General in March of this year: "Groups
use terrorist tactics because they think those tactics are
effective" (press release SG/SM/9757). Indeed. What
we need to do as an international community is not to
give in - never to give in - to terrorism, full stop.

Some time ago, a former official of the United
Nations and noted expert on terrorism told the Counter-
Terrorism Committee that the United Nations could
contribute to the war on terrorism by monitoring State
compliance with Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) and by holding States accountable for
compliance. That is what we in this Chamber can do to
help those on the front line of protecting our respective
citizens and fighting terrorists.

In three and a half years, how has the Counter-
Terrorism Committee done? It has engaged in an
ongoing dialogue with Member States without
precedent in United Nations history. It has put counter-
terrorism on the agenda of more than 60 regional,
subregional and international organizations and has
encouraged them to help their members meet their
responsibilities to implement resolution 1373 (2001). It
has helped launch a coordinated effort to provide
technical assistance to States desiring to meet their
counter-terrorist responsibilities but lacking the
capacity to do so. Those are not trivial
accomplishments. Weakness in worldwide counter-
terrorism capacity gives terrorists the opportunity and
the space to plot and carry out terrorist activities.

What about the effort to sanction individuals and
entities affiliated with Al-Qaida or the Taliban? The
1267 Committee designations require Member States to
freeze the assets and ban the travel of those on the list
and to forbid arms sales to them. Under the travel ban,
for example, States now must have the 1267 watch list
at airports; experts in counter-terrorism believe that
that step deters terrorists from conventional air travel.
The 1267 Committee's work has led to the freezing or
seizing of more than $100 million that might have been
available to Al-Qaida or the Taliban.

The emergence of a more proactive and open
dialogue among Member States and the 1267
Committee - as evidenced by the increased number of
briefings provided to Committee members by
representatives of Member States - is a welcome
development that should be encouraged. The draft
resolution now under consideration by Council experts
supports increased dialogue between States and the
Committee to strengthen Member States'
implementation of the sanctions measures. The draft
resolution calls on States to implement the Financial
Action Task Force's 40 recommendations and nine
special recommendations on terrorist financing as part
of the effort to freeze the assets of those on the
Committee's consolidated list.

What of the efforts to make more difficult the
proliferation of nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons? The 1540 Committee has overcome its early
problems and is deeply engaged in a dialogue with
Member States about how they are implementing the
resolution and about what more can or should be done.
And, of course, the three committees are beginning to
work together in a more coordinated fashion.
While that record is one of accomplishment, we
all have to acknowledge that the United Nations can do
more to fight terrorism. Let me highlight three areas.

First, we must accept the fact that, by itself,
counter-terrorism activity has an important value.
Effective counter-terrorism imposes burdens on the
easy movement of people, goods and services, and
those burdens are the fault of terrorists, not of counter-
terrorism. If one could secure ports, boundaries, et
cetera, easily without having an impact on ordinary
life, if one could improve security without causing
inconvenience, then we would be able to fulfil Sun Zi's
aphorism about war: the greatest victory involves no
casualties. We must not undermine sound, lawful
counter-terrorism measures with specious arguments
about their collateral impact.

Secondly, we really must make counter-terrorism
the top priority; it is not enough to pay lip service to it.
Everyone in this Chamber knows that making counter-
terrorism the top priority is an unpleasant necessity, but
they know it is a necessity.

Thirdly, there remains resistance to outlawing
terrorism in all circumstances. States and would-be
States have to decide: are they going to take seriously
the call to put an end to terrorism? Are they going to
drain the swamp in which terrorists swim by arresting
and prosecuting anyone who commits a terrorist act or
supports it? Are they going to do so even if it seems to
impugn a cause with which they agree? Or are they
going to weaken the counter-terrorism front because of
some real or imagined potential to create a policy
inconsistency with regard to other national priorities?
The upcoming informal consultations on the long-
stalled comprehensive convention on international
terrorism provides all United Nations Members with an
opportunity to turn their collective back on terrorism
once and for all.

If we are not unanimous and united in that
fighting terrorism is a top priority and that bearing the
costs and overcoming practical and political obstacles are
our shared burden, then we all shall face a much longer
struggle to protect our citizens against terrorism.

Given its responsibility to maintain international
peace and security, the Security Council appropriately
should be at the center of the multilateral counter-
terrorism effort. To a great extent, the Council's
effectiveness depends on its committees being a
coherent and unified counter-terrorism instrument.
Over the past few years, the Council repeatedly has
called on its counter-terrorism related committees and
their respective staff bodies to coordinate, cooperate and
collaborate. These calls have yet to result in significant
action and change in operations. Much more needs to be
done. The Council will reiterate this call today with our
support. In the end, if the committees and expert
groups do not work more closely together than they do
at present, the Council may need to act by
consolidating the three expert groups into a single unit.

