Mr. Holmes: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on my visit to the
Sudan early this past month. That this was briefly
delayed until today is a good indication of the many
competing challenges we face around the world. The
aim of the visit was to review the humanitarian
situation in the areas most affected by the
Government's decision on 4 March to close three
national non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and
expel 13 international NGOs, and to promote an
improved operating environment between the
Government and the humanitarian community, based
on the development of genuine confidence and trust.

In addition to meetings in Khartoum, I visited
North Darfur, and in particular the newly displaced
populations in Zam Zam camp, just outside El Fasher. I
also visited South Sudan to assess the extent of recent
tribal violence, continuing humanitarian needs there
and progress towards sustainable recovery.

The overall background is continuing severe
humanitarian problems in Darfur, with 4.7 million
people still requiring assistance, and major
humanitarian needs in other areas too.
We continue to believe that the expulsions of
4March were wrong and unjustified, to deplore the
often brutal way in which they were carried out and to
regret the increased dangers created for hundreds of
thousands of people in need in Darfur and elsewhere.
The difficult weeks that followed the expulsions were
filled with reports of violence targeting NGOs - both
those expelled and those remaining in Darfur - and
negative rhetoric in the media that put agencies and
individuals at increased risk. However, I am pleased to
note that consistent efforts to explain the risks, to
reduce tension and to seek a constructive dialogue -
not least those led by United States Special Envoy
Major General Scott Gration and influential Member
States in the region - have begun to result in some
positive developments.

Following the joint assessment carried out in
March by the Government and the United Nations, the
humanitarian community has worked with Government
line ministries to fill the most critical life-saving gaps
left by the expulsions. While it has not been possible to
do this in a fully satisfactory or sustainable way, it
seems that these efforts have significantly narrowed the
gaps and prevented, for now at least, the feared extra
humanitarian crises and deaths. These joint efforts have
also begun to contribute to a more constructive
working environment between the Government and the
humanitarian community.

The Government has also taken some important
steps towards rebuilding the cooperation architecture
that was so badly fractured in March. It has reaffirmed
its acceptance of and support for the 2007 Joint
Communique on the facilitation of humanitarian
assistance in Darfur as the principal framework for
cooperation. In addition, ministerial decrees have
extended technical agreements for NGOs, ensured the
return to a previously agreed but ignored travel
notification system and guaranteed multiple entry visas
for all NGO workers. Government representatives have
made clear, including during my visit, that help from
international humanitarian agencies and NGOs is
welcome and valued, and have said publicly and
privately that not only remaining NGOs, but also new
NGOs, including NGOs with new names and new
logos, are welcome. Four of the expelled NGOs have
taken advantage of this latter flexibility and this week
completed initial registration processes in Khartoum.
The level of hostile comment in the media has also
been reduced.
09-36683

On 7 May in Khartoum, I co-chaired, with the
federal Minister for Humanitarian Affairs, the first
meeting of an expanded high-level committee that was
originally formed to oversee the implementation of the
Joint Communique in 2007. It now includes senior
Government representatives from all the concerned and
influential ministries and a wider spectrum of Member
States and regional organizations, as well as NGOs. It
was agreed that the committee would henceforth
monitor not only the implementation of bureaucratic
agreements detailed in the Joint Communique, but also
wider issues such as the protection of civilians,
voluntary and sustainable returns, independent and
joint assessments and ways to improve the safety and
security situation of humanitarian staff in Darfur. The
latter has become increasingly perilous over the past 18
months, as evidenced by, inter alia, two very disturbing
kidnappings in the wake of the 4 March expulsions and
a recent attack on a Humanitarian Air Service
helicopter flight, and has resulted in severely reduced
access. On this issue, I look forward to seeing
assurances from the Director-General of National
Security on steps to improve access and security
translated into a safer environment, particularly in state
capitals and along main supply routes.

It was also agreed that the new high-level
committee mechanism will be replicated at the state
level in the three Darfurs to help eliminate the
disconnect between federal theory and state practice
that we have so often seen in the past.

While in the Sudan, I welcomed these positive
steps and stressed that we, too, wished to work closely
with the Government to create a much more
predictable and facilitating environment for
humanitarian work. But I also stressed that the value of
these steps would be measured in improvements on the
ground in terms of ease and security of operations and
of the quality of assistance for the 4.7 million
beneficiaries in Darfur, not least the 2.7 million
displaced people included in that number. We need to
see consistent and sustained implementation of what
has been agreed. Meanwhile, I made clear that we
would work with the Government on the so-called
Sudanization of humanitarian work, in line with our
global policy of building national and local capacity.
The Government has helpfully made clear that
Sudanization does not and will not entail the
disappearance of international aid organizations. It is in
any case important, as I reminded the Government, that
09-3668}
local partners be credible, professional and able to
work with all sections of society in an impartial
manner.

However effective the efforts of the Government,
the United Nations and remaining NGOs have been in
preventing a further immediate crisis, they have not
replaced, and cannot easily or rapidly replace, the
capacity and skills lost. Current levels of assistance in
some areas remain well below the necessary standards
to which we subscribe. As we enter the "hunger gap"
and rainy season, the needs and gaps will only be
further exacerbated. In a number of camps around city
centres and state capitals, the availability of basic
services such as sanitation was significantly reduced,
while primary health facilities lost important capacity
in monitoring and surveillance. The World Health
Organization, for example, has recently reported that,
with the onset of the rainy season, the risk of a cholera
outbreak has increased in such camps as Gereida,
Kalma, Al Salam, Otash, Kass and Jebel Marra.
Meanwhile, we have less visibility of what is
happening in remote rural areas due to access
constraints and continued insecurity.

We have also not yet begun to fill gaps created in
less visible though no less vital areas, such as camp
coordination, education, secondary and reproductive
health, and livelihood assistance. In that context, I
urged and continue to urge the Government to accept
fully that work in the area of the protection of civilians
is a vital part of modern humanitarian operations, as
this Council knows and agrees. I hope that, in that
context, the Government will now allow agencies such
as the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration to carry out their planned
activities in areas such as camp coordination and
verification of internally displaced person (IDP)
registrations, in accordance with their global mandates.

As in past visits, the issue of IDP returns was
once again discussed. I emphasized that the safe and
voluntary return of civilians to their places of origin is
a shared goal. Given the security situation on the
ground today and the challenges facing the mediation
effort, I do not believe that the current conditions in
Darfur are yet conducive to large-scale return.
However, as I also noted throughout my visit, the
United Nations and partner agencies are keen to
support returns wherever they meet international
standards and are voluntary and sustainable.
3

While Darfur is the area of most immediate
concern, the expulsions also had a serious potential
impact on the three protocol areas and in eastern
Sudan, where the expelled NGOs played critical roles
in the provision of life-saving humanitarian, recovery
and development assistance, with few alternatives
available. It is helpful that the four international NGOs
that recently received new registrations should be able
to resume their work here.

Let me now turn to southern Sudan, where I
travelled to Jonglei state to assess the impact of
ongoing tribal violence. I was shocked not only by the
unprecedented destructive nature of the violence, but
also by the humanitarian toll. In the town of Akobo, I
heard of the destruction of entire villages in the
surrounding area, caused not least by the proliferation
of more powerful weapons, including rocket-propelled
grenades. With around 30,000 people displaced and
possibly more than 1,000 killed or taken prisoner,
including women and children, tribal reconciliation and
disarmament must be a high priority for the
Government of South Sudan, and indeed for the
international community.

Such tribal conflicts there and elsewhere, with
their political undercurrents, could even come to
threaten progress since the signing of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. While the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) has taken
measures to act as a buffer between the tribes by
establishing temporary operating bases and is
supporting reconciliation efforts, it is painfully clear
that this will be a long and difficult process. I urge the
Government of South Sudan to take the necessary
measures to protect its civilians, mainly women and
children, who have been targeted during those tribal
clashes.

If that was not challenge enough, the renewed
presence of the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) south of
Juba has also provoked large-scale killings and the
displacement of as many as 100,000 people. Almost
20,000 refugees have also fled into the Sudan from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to escape the LRA
savagery there. Military efforts to finish off the LRA
have so far had limited success and its ravages continue
unabated. I can only hope against hope that their leader,
Joseph Kony, will still somehow come to sign the peace
accord that he abandoned last summer. Meanwhile,
United Nations agencies and NGOs, in close
cooperation with the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
UNMIS and regional Governments, are doing what they
can to deal with the humanitarian consequences for
civilians of the LRA's continued existence.

With a myriad of critical challenges facing the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, including the Abyei
adjudication, the North-South border demarcation,
elections and, ultimately, the referendum, the
international community cannot afford to lose focus on
southern Sudan. Whatever the inadequacies of the
Government, the people there continue to need
significant humanitarian assistance as well as major
financial and development support, not least faced as
they are with the devastating financial consequences of
low oil prices and the global economic crisis. In that
regard, I am particularly concerned about cuts to social
services, primarily in health and education.

Let me conclude by summarizing where I believe
we are. First, it is important to acknowledge and to
welcome the recent efforts of the Government to
respond positively to the need to work much more
closely with the international humanitarian community,
and the new steps that it has taken to support the
requirements of its own people in Darfur through their
own efforts. The next meeting of the expanded high-
level committee, on 17 June, will be an important
chance to measure where we are on implementation of
agreements.

Secondly, we still need to see a return of
humanitarian capacity and full freedom of movement
to northern Sudan, further loosening of bureaucratic
impediments and considerable improvement in the
security environment to enable us to address the needs
of the population, which will only be exacerbated by
the rainy season.

Thirdly, the humanitarian situation in South
Sudan, with the current level of civilian casualties,
displacement and abduction of children, is of major
concern. The Government of South Sudan, UNMIS and
the international community must take active steps to
prevent further destabilization.

Fourthly, to meet the requirements of the new
situation, we will need to rework the financing needs
for humanitarian assistance not just in Darfur, but
throughout North and South Sudan. The results of a
review of the Work Plan for Sudan should be available
later this month. I look to both the donor community
and the Government for continued and accelerated help.
09-36683

Lastly, the Council will not be surprised to hear
me say that what is needed above all is political
progress towards a lasting settlement in Darfur,
towards a durable understanding between the Sudan
and Chad before current tensions and intermittent
violence on both sides of the border explode out of
control, and towards resolution of the many challenges
in the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement between the North and the South. Then the
resources currently devoted to humanitarian assistance
can be more productively used on the huge
development tasks ahead.
09-3668}

That is a serious agenda indeed not only for the
United Nations and humanitarian community, but also
for the Governments concerned, the international
community in general, and this Council in particular.

