Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me thank Special
Representative Carlos Ruiz Massieu and Ms. Rosa
Emilia Salamanca for their very valuable contributions
to today's discussion. Let me also extend a warm
welcome to Minister Carlos Holmes Trujillo for his
presence at the Security Council.
The signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace by
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) in 2016
markedthebeginningofaverysuccessfultransformation
period. It is hard to point to a brighter example of a
success story on the agenda of the Council. However, in
our View, further action is required to maintain lasting
peace. While many positive aspects remain undeniable
and seem irreversible, such as the unprecedented
drop in levels of violence and the successful elections
with the participation of the People's Alternative
Revolutionary Force political party, some challenges
still persist. We recognize President Duque Marquez's
right to fulfil his obligations made to those parts of
society that are not satisfied with the peace agreement,
but in doing so he must make sure that the actions taken
will not cast a shadow on the foundation of the fragile
political process.

Poland views Colombia's transitional justice
system, including the Special Jurisdiction for Peace,
as a cornerstone of the peace process and a model that
could be relevant in other parts of the world. We regret
that, two years after the signing of final agreement, the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace still lacks a statutory law.
We urge the Government, Congress and all entities to
take swift action to reach consensus in order to adopt the
statutory law as soon as possible, in line with the peace
agreement and Colombia's international obligations.
The Special Jurisdiction for Peace should be given
all the political and practical tools required for its
effective functioning under conditions of independence
and autonomy.

That brings us to highlight the need for the full
political, legal and socioeconomic reintegration
of former FARC-EP members to create trust and
confidence in the peace process. Despite the efforts
of the Government, there is still need for greater
guarantees of protection for human rights defenders
and social leaders. There is a clear role to play for
the National Commission on Security Guarantees to
safeguard the focus of its action plans.

Land ownership remains crucial in maintaining
the reintegration process moving forward. Regrettably,
despite initiating steps to purchase plots in some
regions, no land has been granted to former FARC-
EP members.

We look forward to the holding of peaceful local
elections in November, and we recognize the work that
needs to be done in order to ensure an undisturbed
process. Last year's elections were the most peaceful in
the country's modern history. We therefore believe that
the relevant authorities will use it as an example.

Pointing to the unstable security situation in the
region, caused by the man-made crisis in Venezuela
and migration crisis that it has triggered, we want once
again to extend our thanks to the Colombian authorities
and society for being so generous in keeping their
borders and houses open, despite having to deal with
their own difficulties. There is no clear solution to that
stalemate, but Colombia, with other regional actors, is
playing a very positive and constructive role.

In conclusion, Poland supports the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia and the United
Nations country team. We look forward to continue
working with such a dedicated team.

