Mr. Mahamat Zene (Chad) (spoke in French):
I, too, would like to begin my statement with a firm
condemnation of the terrorist attacks against innocent
civilians in Mali. On behalf of Chad, I would like to
express our deepest condolences to the families of the
victims and to the Government and the people of Mali.

I thank the United Kingdom presidency for
convening this meeting on the report of the Secretary-
General on the future of United Nations peace
operations. I also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing.

Seventy years after the founding of the United
Nations, the world seems still to be far from the goal
of a world without war, given the increasing number of
conflicts and the difficulties deterring their prevention
and resolution. Chad takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations and the priorities set out therein
(S/2015/682). I will make some brief observations in
this regard.

We agree that United Nations peace operations,
including special political missions and peacekeeping
operations, should give priority to finding political
solutions to conflicts. In this respect, my country
supports the call of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations for the Security Council to draw
upon its collective political influence to promote
these solutions. However, for a political solution to be
successful, it is important that the priorities and needs
of the host State be taken into account and that its
cooperation and that of other relevant actors be a given.
Pursuing political solutions should not exclude
the proportional use of force when it is necessary. In
some situations, non-State actors, such as armed or
terrorist groups, deliberately undermine peace efforts
and threaten the lives of civilians. In such cases, the
use of force cannot be ruled out. In this respect, we
welcome the experiences of the Intervention Brigade of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of the
African Union Mission in Somalia, which are successes
that many people recognize.

If the United Nations is not equipped to impose
peace, the regional and subregional organizations that
are willing to intervene for the sake of peace must be
able to receive the support needed from the Security
Council and the General Assembly. This is particularly
necessary, given that the current nature of conflicts
is such that that type of intervention is required
sometimes, and also because of the rigid approach of
traditional United Nations peacekeeping.

Chad is in favour of the better prioritization and
sequencing of tasks in peacekeeping operations. In this
regard, the Security Council should conduct meaningful
consultations with the host States and subregional and
regional partners and also with neighbouring countries.

Chad strongly supports the request formulated by
New Zealand and France that peacekeepers be better
protected. In this regard, we urge the Security Council
to address the issue of safety and security as a highly
strategic issue. Like other countries, Chad has lost
many of its soldiers deployed in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA).

Despite its experience and substantial resources,
the United Nations cannot meet alone the numerous
challenges it faces in terms of peace and security,
particularly in Africa. It is therefore essential that the
United Nations strengthen its strategic partnership
with the African Union (AU). There is no need to recall
that the overwhelming majority of United Nations
peace operations, including uniformed personnel, are
deployed in Africa. The African Union is a key strategic
partner that needs to be supported in its efforts. It must
be closely associated, in particular, with all United
Nations initiatives on peace operations on the African
continent.

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
makes provision for regional organizations to play
a role, and the African Union performs such a role
brilliantly. As an illustration, it should be noted that
the African Union is currently operating in the Sudan
as part of the African Union/United Nations Hybrid
operation in Darfur, in Somalia and elsewhere. Recently,
the AU first deployed in Mali and in the Central
African Republic, facilitating the later deployment of
MINUSMA and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic in those countries, respectively. Furthermore,
the comparative advantages of the African Union, such
as geographical proximity, legitimacy, knowledge of
the root causes of conflict and the ability to respond
quickly in crisis situations, are well established.

With respect to burden-sharing, the United Nations
should support the AU, particularly by financing its
peacekeeping operations authorized by the Security
Council, as recommended by the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations and the Secretary-General
in their respective reports.

In conclusion, we express our gratitude to the High-
level Independent Panel and the Secretary-General
for their reports replete with recommendations. Chad
supports all the relevant recommendations contained
therein, in particular those on the issue of financing
the peacekeeping operations of the African Union
authorized by the Security Council.

