Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) for presenting her tenth report on Libya
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). Since Prosecutor
Bensouda's last briefing to the Security Council, in May
earlier this year (see S/PV.7441), the political situation
in Libya has not shown much improvement while the
security conditions have worsened. According to the
Prosecutor's report, civilian deaths increased in the
period running from April to August 2015, abductions
and executions continue to be reported, and the number

of displaced persons has reached almost 450,000
people, which is close to double the figure reported just
over a year ago.

We are particularly concerned by the Prosecutor's
report that extremely grave crimes are being committed
not only by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and Islamic groups but also by all parties to
the conflict as well as their respective allies. The
indiscriminate attacks, assassinations, large-scale
abductions, acts of torture, and executions have all
led to civilian casualties. At the same time, heavy
military clashes between the conflicting parties have
also continued to cause civilian deaths, with no signs
of abating.

Malaysia is equally concerned that civilian
casualties attributed to ISIL are consistently growing.
The Prosecutor has reported that mass executions,
suicide bombing and terrorist attacks committed by ISIL
and affiliated groups have resulted in heavy civilian
casualties. We strongly deplore these indiscriminate
acts of violence committed by ISIL. Malaysia reaffirms
that the perpetrators responsible for committing these
grave atrocities must be held accountable. The culture
of impunity must not be allowed to prevail any further.

Malaysia is of the view that the continued efforts
of the Libyan authorities to comply with the relevant
Security Council resolutions would contribute positively
towards building trust and confidence, especially
with respect to their commitment to hold to account
individuals and parties responsible for grave violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. At the same time, we acknowledge
that the ability of the Libyan authorities to investigate
and prosecute the perpetrators of these atrocity crimes
and to continue its cooperation will depend largely on
the stability of Libya.

In this regard, Malaysia reiterates the importance
for all parties to the conflict to engage constructively in
the ongoing dialogue facilitated by the United Nations,
finalize the political agreement and immediately agree
on a Government of National Accord. We are of the
view that the formation of a Government of national
accord that enjoys the full backing of the international
community is a crucial first step in our collective
efforts to address a wide range of challenges currently
being faced by Libya, including combating impunity,
addressing the humanitarian conditions and promoting
the rule of law in the country.

I would like to conclude by taking this opportunity
to express our gratitude to Mr. Bernardino Leon for his
tireless efforts in facilitating the ongoing peace talks
under very difficult circumstances in Libya. I reiterate
our full support for the dialogue process facilitated by
the United Nations and look forward to working closing
with the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, Mr. Martin Kobler.

