Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Let me
acknowledge your presence here today, Mr. President,
as you chair our meeting. I wish to congratulate
Nigeria for taking the initiative to promote a debate on
such an important element of post-conflict
peacebuilding. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Herve' Ladsous for his presentation.

Allow me to make some comments on Portugal's
perspective concerning security sector reform (SSR),
based on our own experience in cooperating in
peacebuilding efforts in several countries.

First, we see the reform of security institutions as
part of a broader process of reconstruction, and in the
framework of national dialogue. That broader scope
must also involve social and economic development,
protection of human rights and consolidation of
Government structures, aimed in the end at promoting
human security in a broad perspective and through
effective citizenship. Ignoring the interlinkage among
those various aspects usually undermines the
reconstruction efforts of national and international
actors and increases the risk of relapse into conflict. In
that respect, the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) in linking the different elements of
peacebuilding, including SSR, is a good practice that
should be recognized and encouraged.

Secondly, the number of international actors
involved in SSR support initiatives has grown
considerably in recent years. The involvement of
African regional and subregional organizations, as well
as of individual African countries, in initiatives aimed
at supporting SSR - for instance, the training of
police in Somalia by the African Union Mission in
Somalia - is a very positive example of such a trend.
Likewise, I would underline the role of the European
Union in providing support to security sector reform in
several African countries, as well as initiatives of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries in
support of SSR in some of its member countries.

As the number of actors providing international
assistance to SSR increases, we should guarantee that
there is effective coordination among them, mainly to
avoid duplication. Also in that respect, the PBC has
contributed to ensuring a degree of articulation and
identifying and promoting synergies among various
initiatives. It is also important that the United Nations
maintain a leading role in the coordination of
international efforts.

A third aspect that I wish to underline is that
security sector reform is a long-term process based on
national strategies and on the political will of the
authorities to sustain the new institutions over the long
run. But implementation of reform cannot be achieved
without the necessary resources. We should be very
clear about that point. In many situations, SSR
strategies will stall if they are not properly matched by
the active engagement of the international community.
In those situations, it will prove very hard for countries
to individually undertake what is necessarily a difficult
process. We could mention here the case of Guinea-
Bissau, where the authorities have committed
themselves to an SSR strategy that requires the
commitment of international partners in the
implementation of key aspects of the strategy.

Fourthly, let me refer to the great importance of
the promotion of justice as a cornerstone of SSR.
While the military and the police are crucial for peace
consolidation, one should not overlook the decisive
importance of a functional and effective judicial
system as a central element for ensuring respect for
fundamental rights and freedoms, the fight against
impunity and the development of a functioning
economy.

Investment in SSR is also a fundamental measure
to tackle organized crime, in particular trafficking in
arms and drugs, which is a great challenge in some of
the countries emerging from conflict in Africa. As
Portugal has repeatedly stated, fighting organized
crime requires strong national security intuitions. But it
also requires enhanced regional cooperation, mainly to
ensure that success in one individual country does not
create additional risks for neighbouring States.

Finally, we should bear in mind that security
sector reform is usually part of a reconciliation process
in societies divided by recent conflict dynamics. Often
it involves searching for national consensus on the
foundations of the State, including on constitutional
reform. International support to SSR should, to the
extent possible, promote an inclusive approach to the
creation of new institutions by bringing to the fore
perspectives of the various groups and communities
that may contribute to the process, including women.
Such an effort will certainly enhance the legitimacy of
institutions as well as the resilience of post-conflict
societies.

