Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, first of all, I would like to
congratulate you and your delegation on the way in
which you have been leading the debates during your
presidency of the Security Council. Likewise, I thank
you for the timely holding of this open debate on an
issue of such importance.

The creation of the Peacebuilding Commission is
the result of our Organization's need for an
institutional mechanism that could assist countries
emerging from conflict situations or that are at risk of
relapsing into conflict, with a view to helping them
achieve peace as an indispensable step towards their
development.

From the beginning of negotiations leading to the
establishment of the Commission, the delegation of
Argentina has participated actively in the discussions
of the different structural aspects, which led to
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. Those resolutions defined the main
objectives of the Peacebuilding Commission, focusing
on reconstruction and on consolidation of the
institutions necessary for post-conflict recovery, and
laying the foundation for sustainable development. In
our view, the Peacebuilding Commission is a
fundamental instrument that will in future allow us
directly to address actions leading to reconstruction
and institutional recovery of States after suffering
conflicts.

Likewise, the subsequent establishment of the
Peacebuilding Fund must be considered as the ideal
way for the international community to obtain
foreseeable financing for initial recovery activities and
to extend the period for post-conflict recovery. Thanks
to the Fund, we will be able to set out emergency plans
on the basis of predictable funding.

Responding to the appeal of the Security Council,
the Peacebuilding Commission has already held its first
formal meetings to consider the situations of Burundi
and Sierra Leone, with the Governments of both
countries participating. In this regard, we would like to
underline the significance of the participation of those
countries in the assessment of their own situations.
Presentations by Governments or local representatives
to the Commission make detailed analysis possible and
allow for a more complete picture to be painted. Such
information will make it possible to identify priorities
with greater precision, taking into account
requirements and resources. In that connection, a
calendar of short-, medium- and long-term objectives
could be set out, on the basis of what we believe must
be clear and precise rules, established by the
Commission, which must be in keeping with the spirit
of the Organization and respond to the wishes of the
international community.

At the same time, we believe that the report to be
produced by the Commission, with recommendations,
should also include mechanisms for achieving goals
and implementing plans, as well as provisions for
supervision so as to prevent the funds from being
diverted.

To those two elements to which we have just
referred - clear and precise rules and supervision -
we would like to add another, which we believe is vital
for the orderly and predictable functioning of any
organization: the establishment of rules of procedure.
We know that such rules have been outlined by the
Commission, and we trust that their prompt definition
will help to improve its functioning, leading to a
fruitful outcome.

Before concluding, my country would like to
congratulate the two new States members of the
Peacebuilding Commission, elected by the Council:
Panama and South Africa. Argentina particularly
welcomes the inclusion of Panama in the Commission,
as that allows for the correction of the imbalance in
terms of regional representation, which is an
underlying principle of this Organization and one on
which my country, together with other Latin American
nations, has put great stress.

I would also like to note that my country
continues to be convinced of the wisdom of
establishing the Commission, which will allow for the
completion of the final phase of post-conflict situations
and the reconstruction and the strengthening of
institutions, so that conflict can be left behind for good.
We know from experience that it is not possible to
resolve conflicts by means of military operations alone.

Finally, I would like to say that while security is
the first pillar upon which peace can be achieved in
any conflict, the role of the United Nations must be
directed towards fostering development and ensuring
respect for and defending human rights. We therefore
believe that the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
must also be directed towards those goals.

