Mr. AlJarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
am honoured to speak on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). I would like to express
our sincere congratulations to you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Council this month. We
wish you every success.

This meeting is taking place against the backdrop
of a serious deterioration of the conditions of the
Palestinians because of Israel's hostile and destructive
practices and its systemic violations of international
law in its dealings with them and their territory. It also
coincides with the French initiative that we welcome
very much. We support the French efforts aimed at
establishing an international support group and holding
an international peace conference that would involve
all international parties, set a clear and credible path
towards negotiations aimed at ending the conflict and
arriving at a comprehensive, just and lasting peace.

With regard to the report ofthe Middle East Quartet
that was issued on 1 July, we find it unfair that the report
equates the responsibilities of an occupied people with
those of an occupying military Power. In addition, the
language of the report, which is unbalanced and unfair,
became a guise for the decision by Israel, two days later,
to build hundreds of settlement units in different parts of
the occupied territories, including East Jerusalem. That
is new proof that we need to follow a more resolute path
to end this conflict in the only way possible, namely,
to end the occupation. The Organization of Islamic
Cooperation reiterates in particular the obligations of
the Council, as per the Charter of the United Nations
and many of its resolutions requiring it to deal seriously
and urgently with this prolonged tragedy.

Israel, the occupying Power, continues to
systemically kill and extrajudicially execute unarmed
Palestinians in the occupied territories, as it has done
for almost five decades. The number killed by soldiers
of the occupying Power during the past few months
has reached 216 Palestinian civilians, including 50
children, some of whom were newborns. In addition
to State terrorism by the Israeli war machine, gangs of
terrorist settlers continue to attack Palestinian civilians,
including setting aflame Palestinians, their homes and
their crops. That is very similar to what Da'esh is doing,
with the difference that this is happening in front of
occupying Power and with its consent.

Those acts could all constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity that have no statute of limitations.
No generation will forget such acts. Everyone who
perpetrates such crimes must face international justice.
In that context, the OIC reiterates its call to the Security
Council to add the leaders of extremist Israeli factions,
including gangs known as the Hilltop Youth movement
and Make Them Pay, to the list of terrorists wanted by
States and the international community.

We express our deep concern at Israel's continuing
falsification of the historical record through its
illegitimate confiscation of Palestinian land and the
imposition of policies and measures that can be equated
to ethnic cleaning against Palestinians, in addition to
the continued attacks against praying congregations and
sanctuaries - Christian and Muslim - particularly the
Al-Aqsa mosque and a number of churches in Jerusalem.
That has led to a disastrous and tragic situation that
requires the Council to interfere to stop those attacks,
which only feed into extremism and racism and create
religious conflict in the Holy Land.

We reiterate that Israel must lift its siege of Gaza.
We commend the statement by the Secretary-General
during his visit to Palestinian land in June that the
Israeli siege of Gaza must be lifted immediately.

Once again, I take this opportunity to reiterate the
support of OIC for the Palestinian people in its pursuit
of its inalienable rights, including its right of return
and self-determination and to establish an independent
State on Palestinian land that has been occupied since
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

