Mr. Arbeiter (Canada) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank Equatorial Guinea for having organized
today's open debate on the African Union's Silencing
the Guns initiative.

(spoke in English)

Guns are the weapon of choice in most conflicts
around the world. For many communities across
Africa, they are the true weapons of mass destruction.
While firearms can be found almost everywhere, the
specific reasons they pose problems in a given place
are often tied to regional or national circumstances. It
could be terrorism, organized crime, armed conflict or
a combination of these or other factors.

In the past, we as an international community
typically approached the firearms problem the same
way we approached other weapons, such as nuclear
or biological weapons, through broad international
agreements. Canada continues to support this
multilateral approach, but we have also learned that we
need to look at the regional challenges of small arms
and light weapons. They need a tailored and context-
specific response.

The Silencing the Guns initiative is such a
response, offering African solutions to problems faced
by African countries. But we know that many of the
challenges facing Africa did not start in Africa and
have effects that go well beyond Africa. We therefore
support local ownership of this initiative and recognize
that all Member States have a stake in its success.
Indeed, it is essential that all of us - Member States,
the United Nations system as a whole, regional and
subregional organizations - work together to realize
this vision. In practice, this means strengthening our
cooperation in conflict prevention, management and
resolution, and joining forces to fully implement the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. As many
delegations have already attested to today, this is an
approach that enjoys full consensus. Moreover, we have
seen that this is the kind of approach that deliver results.
The recent signing of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic
very concretely demonstrated how close collaboration
between the United Nations, the African Union and
subregional organizations, working in partnership with
local actors, can advance peace.

(spoke in French)

In seeking to silence the guns, we need to
understand the disproportionate effect of conflict on
women and the important role that women can play in
the prevention and resolution of conflicts. In this regard,
as the Permanent Representatives of Ghana and Ireland
have also underlined, we welcome the establishment
of the FemWise-Africa network to strengthen the role
of women in conflict prevention and mediation. It is
also important to take the steps needed to address the
financing issues related to peace operations led by
African States. We should consider the use of United
Nations-assessed contributions to address these issues.
Canada is actively engaged at the regional and
national level in working towards the ultimate goal
of silencing the guns in Africa. For example, with
Sierra Leone, Canada is co-chairing the International
Dialogue on Peacebuilding and State-Building. This
is a partnership of the Governments of 20 countries
affected by conflict and fragility, international
development partners and civil society. In Mali,
Canada has supported the Centre for Humanitarian
Dialogue to broker a ceasefire agreement that has
helped to facilitate a disarmament process for local
militias, in coordination with the Government of
Mali. In South Sudan, Canada is supporting women's
participation in the implementation of the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict. With
Ethiopia, Canada recently co-hosted a Peacekeeping
Ministerial preparatory meeting on women, peace and
security to increase women's meaningful participation
in peacekeeping operations.

(spoke in English)

Canada was very pleased to co-sponsor resolution
2457 (2019), adopted earlier today. We will remain
committed to the long-term success of the Silencing the
Guns initiative. We share the principles underpinning
the African Union approach - working together,
including with multilateral organizations and regional
groups, to sustain peace and protect our rules-based
international order. This is an approach we hope to
bring to the Security Council if we are elected to a
non-permanent seat in 2021-2022. We are confident that,
by working together, we can create a more prosperous,
secure and inclusive world. We can silence the guns.

(spoke in Spanish)
Together, we can silence the guns.

