Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to thank His
Excellency Mr. Sebastian Kurz, Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Austria, for his briefing.
Yesterday's open debate (see S/PV.7886) was a good
opportunity for us to recall the major contribution made
by the OSCE to promoting security and preventing
conflicts in Europe. However, the debate was also a stark
reminder that OSCE confidence-building measures are
increasingly necessary in light of attempts to forcibly
alter the status quo by coercion in some parts of Europe.

As a regional arrangement under Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, the OSCE
is exemplary in supporting the Security Council
in maintaining peace and security at the regional
level. The OSCE has always held the conviction that
maintaining an international order based on the rule of
law that condemns the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity and political independence of any
State, as well as building confidence among member
States through efforts for dialogue and transparency,
will bring peace and stability in Europe and the
international community. Based on this belief, the
OSCE has been taking a comprehensive approach,
which encompasses not only politico-military security,
but also economic, environmental and human aspects.
Japan, as one of OSCE's Asian partners, firmly shares
its belief and comprehensive approach. We are pleased
to have expanded our cooperation with the OSCE over
the past quarter-century.

The situation in Ukraine, as Japan stressed at
yesterday's open debate, is of grave concern for the
entire international community. It poses a serious
challenge to the international order governed by the
rule of law. This is a matter of principle. We have
contributed to Ukraine by dispatching a Japanese
expert to the Special Monitoring Mission of the OSCE
in the light of its critical tasks. In addition, Japan is
supporting the country's reform efforts to become a
more resilient society.

The OSCE is playing an important role in
mediation, including in the situations in Abkhazia and
South Ossetia, Transnistria and Nagorno Karabakh. We
applaud the OSCE'S hands-on approach to enhancing
capacities and resilience in response to emerging issues,
such as violent extremism, as well as humanitarian crises
involving refugees and immigrants. We look forward
to further cooperation with the OSCE on a wide range
of issues, including security and counter-terrorism
through strengthened border management, election
observation missions and women's empowerment.

I would like to mention my first-hand experience
with the contribution of the OSCE. From 1999 to
2000, I was seconded to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), where
I worked with a young Austrian diplomat named
Mr. Jan Kickert, who is present in the Chamber as
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Austria.
The OSCE was at that time one of the four pillars of
our international efforts aimed at the reconstruction of
Kosovo. The OSCE and UNMIK cooperated closely
in conducting the first local election in October 2000,
and it was quite successful. Of course, the path to
democracy in Kosovo was not an easy task, but today
peace and democracy have taken root in Kosovo to a
certain extent. We are very proud of that and it is due,
in great part, to the efforts of the OSCE.

Asia and Europe have a certain interconnectivity
on peace and security-related issues. Just as tensions
in Europe have an impact on the entire international
community, including Asia, increased tensions in Asia
affect the stability of Europe. Japan is committed to
deepening its cooperation with the States members of
the OSCE as part of its joint efforts with the OSCE to
maintain and consolidate the international order based
on the rule of law.

