Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium associates itself with the statement of the
European Union, as well as with those of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security and the Group
of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect, of which it
is a member.

The figures are worrying. Peacekeepers are
increasingly being killed on mission. I would like to
begin by paying tribute to those who have contributed
to peace by sacrificing their lives, often far from
home. We owe them all a great deal. The facts are
well known - stalled political processes, differences
among the parties, a tendency to rely on the mission
to replace the role of the State, contradictory political
messages addressed by the authorities to the people.
The Blue Helmets are becoming targets for who they
are and what they represent, and that is unacceptable.

However, peacekeeping has also been a positive
experience: West Africa, Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia and
Sierra Leone are examples of successful missions. The
United Nations Mission in Liberia will close its doors in
two days. Those situations illustrate the importance of
having, at the outset of the mission, a clear view of the
elements that will enable the peacekeeping operation
to withdraw from the country once its mandate has
been fulfilled.

Peacekeeping is constantly evolving, and we thank
the Netherlands for giving further impetus to this debate
in the run-up to the high-level event in September and a
possible adoption of a resolution by the Council.

General Cruz's report made recommendations
aimed not only at improving the security of the men
and women who make up the contingents, but also at
making the operations more efficient. The Secretary-
General wasted no time in presenting a plan of action
to implement those recommendations. We welcome
those measures and would like to support their
implementation. The Cruz report is unambiguous: to
mitigate risks it is necessary to improve the performance
of the deployed troops and make the use of intelligence
more systematic and effective.

The protection of civilians has become one of the
priority tasks of peacekeeping operations. However,
that task will remain an illusion if the troops involved
do not have the necessary skills required for the
mission, if they are not properly trained and prepared,
and ifthey do not have the necessary equipment. Not all
troop-contributing countries have the same operational
experience. To match the level of performance with
the needs of the mission, the training and preparation
of contingents have become essential. Small gaps can
be corrected within the mission, but larger gaps need
to be identified and resolved before any contingents
are deployed.
Belgium welcomes the establishment of an agile
coordination mechanism to connect troop-contributing
countries that have expressed a need with those that
have the necessary experience. Mapping and keeping
track of trained personnel should also be improved, and
respect for the chain of command, from the moment
contingents are deployed in missions, is an essential
precondition if we want a mission to be effective,
credible and respected on the ground.

Belgium has decided to contribute to strengthening
the capacity-building of contingents from French-
speaking countries. We support the training of staff
officers in Entebbe, and we are also financing the
translation of manuals into French. In addition, thanks
to Belgian support, the first United Nations training
in French on the protection of civilians will be held
in June.

We also want to respond to the specific needs
identified in the Cruz report, and we will consider, in
close collaboration with the training services, additional
support to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, both in the
area of combat medicine and by providing a mobile
training team. In an asymmetric environment, such as
that of Mali, a more effective use of intelligence is an
essential requirement for ensuring security and mission
performance and, ultimately, protecting civilians.
Belgium, as a troop-contributing country, provides
a significant portion of the deployed personnel in the
Mission's intelligence structures and is preparing to do
even more in 2018.

Improving operations also means using the
strategic review instrument more effectively. They
are an opportunity to put the political process and the
protection of civilians back at the heart of mandates.
Strategic reviews are there to give us the keys to redirect
missions in a manner more in line with mandates or,
on the contrary, to modify mandates that have become
unrealistic or impracticable on the ground.

Strategic reviews should be an opportunity
for frank conversations about what is realistic and
achievable, and about the mission horizon, without of
course diminishing the deep ambition of the mission.
In some cases, it would be appropriate to sequence the
objectives more. In all cases, including the difficult
budgetary negotiations that we will have in the coming
years, Belgium is in favour of maintaining substantial
capacities in the areas of child protection and gender
policy. The fight against impunity must also be an
integral part of the longer-term mission strategy. In
terms of good practices, the experience of mixed
patrols involving mediation or human rights experts,
police and military should be applied in more missions.

The various exchanges that will take place this
year will aim to clarify roles and responsibilities in
the reform agenda that is on the table. I can assure
you, Sir, of Belgium's readiness to contribute actively
and concretely to this discussion throughout this year
but also even more closely with our Security Council
partners during the 2019-2020 term, for which we are
a candidate.

