I thank you very much, Sir, and I also thank the Special Envoy for his characteristically clear briefing. As we said the last time we discussed this matter (see S/2020/254), we remain deeply concerned about the devastating potential impact that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) could have in Syria, a country already devastated by a nearly decade- long conflict. It is clear from many of the statements today that that sentiment is shared across the Security Council. As my Chinese colleague has just said, we will discuss the humanitarian challenge this afternoon. But with 43 confirmed cases and undoubtedly many more, it is vital that all parties heed the Special Envoy's call for a nationwide ceasefire. The Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire is not just about rightly helping those in conflict zones, but also to allow for our full attention to be devoted to the fight against COVID-19. We can only defeat it if we defeat it everywhere. We are also appalled to receive news of yesterday's bomb attack in Afrin, which killed at least 40 civilians, many of them children. Yet more families are mourning, and our thoughts and prayers go out to them today. That such a senseless act should take place during the holy month of Ramadan makes it all the more egregious. Preventing a major outbreak of COVID-19 in any part of Syria must be a common task for us all. This virus knows no lines of control or geographical, political or cultural boundaries. It is therefore vital that all parties adhere to existing ceasefires in north-western and north-eastern Syria and abide by their responsibilities to facilitate humanitarian aid. The current crisis reinforces the need to work together to reach across the divide and resolve this conflict. The process of seeking a political solution in Syria must not cease. In this context, it was encouraging to hear at the last meeting that an agenda for the next round of Constitutional Committee talks had been agreed. It is important that this opportunity be seized before momentum is lost again, and we encourage the Special Envoy to look at ways for talks to go ahead and meetings to continue. As we and other Council members have made clear before, the political process under resolution 2254 (2015) extends beyond the Constitutional Committee. In addition to a nationwide ceasefire, the Syrian regime should also take other important confidence-building measures. These include releasing, wholesale, arbitrarily detained prisoners and ensuring humanitarian access to all parts of the country. Given the risk of COVID-19 taking hold in prisons, we would also strongly urge the Syrian regime to undertake the widespread release of political prisoners and vulnerable people and to ensure that medical care is available to those still in detention. The reported release of 40 detainees in Deir ez-Zor province is a small step in the right direction. We also note that the issue of sanctions has been raised by a number of members of the Council in relation to COVID-19. We want to confirm, as I think was well explained by our Estonian colleague, that goods and medical supplies used for humanitarian purposes are not subject to European Union sanctions, which the United Kingdom continues to apply, and additional exemptions from sanctions are available for humanitarian activity in Syria. I would also note that the United Kingdom and our European partners are among the leading donors of humanitarian aid to Syria, including in regime-held areas. In reality, the problems facing the Syrian health sector and economy are a result not of sanctions, but of the Syrian regime, through its cronyism, corruption and brutal conduct of the war. If the Syrian regime and its allies wish to see the removal of sanctions, then they know what they have to do - engage seriously with Special Envoy Pedersen and the United Nations-led political process to achieve a peaceful end to the Syrian conflict. Finally, we also wanted to say that, despite the looming prospect of a virus that could heap further suffering on the Syrian people, we cannot ignore the findings in the recent reports issued by the commission of inquiry, the Board of Inquiry set up by the Secretary-General and the Investigation and Identification Team of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. We welcome the release of the Secretary-General's summary report from the Board of Inquiry on 6 April. Even though the report does not explicitly identify Russia as the regime's ally that is responsible for some of the attacks on civilian infrastructure, it is clear which country it must mean when there is only one country flying military aircraft over Idlib alongside the regime. That conclusion is supported by the findings of the commission of inquiry, which identified Russia as responsible for attacks on civilian infrastructure. These are flagrant breaches of the international rules, which we all agreed cannot be tolerated, and those who have committed crimes must be held to account. That is our responsibility. We note with deep regret that the very hospitals that were bombed by the regime and by Russia are the same hospitals that could have been used now to fight against COVID-19. The time for action is now. We must ask ourselves how we can now come together to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people.
