Mr. Szijjarto (Hungary): First of all, I should like to commend our friends from Viet Nam for having made the wise decision to put this issue on the agenda at this time, although, dear Sir, when you decided to hold this open debate based on this topic, you might not have been aware of the importance of that decision. I congratulate you on having taken over the presidency, and I wish you the best of luck in this regard. As the Council is aware, I am representing a small - or, if I had more self-confidence, I would say midsize central European country - whose history is replete with instances of being occupied and oppressed by foreign Powers and dictatorships. We therefore always had to fight for our own freedom and sovereignty, which we gained only 30 years ago. So it is understandable that country with a history like Hungary's would highly value the existence of the United Nations and consider it as the most important international organization in ensuring peace and security. I want to express how warmly we welcome the membership of Estonia in the Security Council, whose candidature we supported given the fact that they are freedom fighters, as we are. We encourage it to represent the interests of the small, freedom-loving central European countries in an appropriate manner, but I am fairly sure it is going to do so. I think that this is the right place to express our deep concern at the recent developments in the Middle East. We have learned the lesson in recent years that the security situation in the Middle East and the security situation in Europe have a very, very strong correlation and that whatever happens in the Middle East has a direct security impact on the European continent. We are therefore strongly interested in seeing a de-escalation of the situation and consider dialogue and diplomatic efforts more important than ever before. We are fairly sure that without all these, the situation will definitely get worse and worse. We urge the United Nations, and the Security Council itself, to fulfil its mission and take all the measures necessary to maintain international peace and security. The United Nations Charter was signed 75 years ago, So it is time to take it seriously and apply it properly. I wish to highlight three specific aspects of importance to Hungary in this regard. First, Europeans have had bad experiences recently in the form of massive flows of illegal migration, which constitute a serious security threat, contrary to what is suggested by the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. We know full well that another crisis in the Middle East would immediately cause additional migratory pressure on Europe, aphenomenon that we definitely want to avert, because the migratory waves that have taken place so far have resulted in an increasing threat of terror for the European Union. I think, therefore, that this would be the right time for the United Nations to recognize the danger and the security threats that migration poses to countries of destination and transit. The second aspect we would stress is that the fight against terror must be continued. We consider the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) to be a global threat to peace and security. We commend the United States, which leads the international coalition against ISIS, and are a proud member of that coalition, with 200 troops on the ground. The third aspect of importance to us is that the number of countries possessing nuclear weapons must not increase. We consider proliferation as a global security challenge. There are international rules and regulations that set out the number and list of countries that have nuclear weapons, and we definitely do not want to see the number of such countries increase. We believe that in future greater emphasis should be placed on non-proliferation, arms control and disarmament in order to prevent a new nuclear arms race. In conclusion, we Hungarians are committed to strengthening the role of the United Nations given the fact that we are experiencing quick changes and the creation of a new world order, which could result in continual security challenges. Such challenges should be addressed according to the principles laid down in the Charter of the United Nations.
