The Secretary-General: The Council has before
it my latest report on the situation in Afghanistan.
Since its release, an important and very encouraging
development in the implementation of the Bonn peace
process has occurred: the adoption on 5 January by the
Constitutional Loya Jirga of Afghanistan's new
Constitution.

The Constitution, which has now entered into
force, provides a permanent foundation for re-
establishing the rule of law in Afghanistan. It defines a
political order through a strong presidential system of
government with a bicameral legislature. It establishes
a judicial system in compliance with Islam, and it
includes provisions aimed at ensuring full respect for
fundamental human rights, including equal rights for
women.

I would like to congratulate the people and the
Government of Afghanistan on this major
accomplishment. The delegates to the Loya Jirga
showed wisdom, flexibility and sensitivity to the needs
of all Afghans - a spirit which bodes well for the hard
work ahead.

Of course, the Constitution will not by itself
guarantee peace and stability. Afghans, with the
necessary support from the international community,
must now go on to address the impediments to the
peace process that existed before the Loya Jirga, and
that means tackling the deeply troubling security
situation, ensuring an inclusive and broadly
representative Government, and quickening the pace of
reconstruction. Indeed, if the next step in the Bonn
process - elections - is to be credibly achieved,
these challenges demand immediate action.

I would also like to thank the international
community for its sustained commitment to peace in
Afghanistan. At the same time, I think we can all
recognize that for all the gains made under the Bonn
process so far, there is a need to reinvigorate the
process. With that in mind, and as mentioned in my
report, I have suggested that the international
community, the Afghan Government and all Afghans
committed to peace in their country should come
together, assess the progress made and make the
necessary commitments to complete the transition.
Mr. Brahimi will have more to add on this when he
takes the floor.

Finally, I would like to pay tribute to my Special
Representative, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, for the superb
job he has done in Afghanistan these past two years.
Lakhdar, you have richly earned your honorary Afghan
citizenship. You are also, of course, one of our leading
global citizens, and the international community is that
much stronger for having your skills and judgement at
its disposal.
