Mr. Licharz (Germany) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by congratulating Cote d'Ivoire on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month and by thanking you for having convened this
debate on a subject of vital importance.

(spoke in English)

To begin, Germany would like to commend Cote
d'lvoire. As recently as last year, it was still the host
country of a United Nations peacekeeping mission.
Today, it is a member of the Security Council. We
can learn a great deal from this success story, and we
appreciate the lessons Cote d'Ivoire has shared with us.
Let me make two brief points.

First, Germany strongly supports cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations on prevention, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. Such cooperation, if
complementary and coordinated, enables more effective
implementation of mandates and thus better results on
the ground. The United Nations-European Union Action
Plan for Crisis Management and Peace Operations, the
United Nations-European Union Steering Committee
on Crisis Management and the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security are excellent examples of
successful cooperation. The international community
should invest more in such cooperation by building
capacities and networks to sustain peace. Let me give a
few examples.

For instance, Germany co-hosted a conference
on the Lake Chad region in September with Nigeria,
Norway and the United Nations. The event focused on
the humanitarian-development-peace-nexus and the
implementation of resolution 2349 (2017). The Lake
Chad Basin Governors' Forum is another successful
example of cross-border regional cooperation called for
under resolution 2349 (2017). Germany welcomes the
fact that the Lake Chad countries have demonstrated
ownership by adopting a stabilization strategy
developed by the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the
African Union.

Germany provides assistance to African partners
for early warning, prevention and mediation activities.
We are an active partner in mediation efforts conducted
under the umbrella of the African Union, for example
in the Sudan and South Sudan. We are proud to support
the African Union Mediation Support Unit, which will
increase the efficiency of African-led mediation efforts.

The European Union and the African Union have
also shown great leadership in putting the women and
peace and security agenda into action. Germany is
proud to support these efforts, especially the African
Women Leaders Network. We are convinced that
women's access to political leadership, in particular
their participation in peace processes, leads to a more
sustainable peace.

Secondly, we need to strive for international and
regional responses that are context specific, sequenced
and well-coordinated. In that regard, the Security
Council must take a more comprehensive approach
to crisis management in order to prevent relapse into
conflict. Too often, we have seen conflicts re-escalate
following the conclusion of peacekeeping missions.

When devising its strategy for a specific conflict,
the Security Council must develop realistic, politically
sound and sufficiently financed mandates, as well
as transition strategies that include prevention,
stabilization and peacebuilding measures for all phases
of the conflict. Regional organizations and troop-
contributing countries can offer their expertise to
help develop such mandates and ensure a coordinated
international response from the start. That will also
enable smooth transitions.

Regional and subregional organizations have unique
skill sets and play a paramount role in implementing
Security Council mandates. However, any contribution
should be subject to clear performance standards and
adhere to human rights and humanitarian law. The
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
should play a significant role in developing a human
rights framework for all peace operations.

Germany is committed to working with all Council
members and the broader United Nations community to
make transitions from peacekeeping to peacebuilding
work. This also reflects the strong shared commitment
to the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.

On the issue of peacebuilding, it is important to
make better use of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). Germany is currently Vice-Chair of the
PBC and one of the largest contributors to conflict
prevention and peacebuilding within the United
Nations system. We should encourage States that are
seeking assistance with peacebuilding efforts to come
to the Peacebuilding Commission. We should also
encourage others to contribute to the quantum leap in
the Peacebuilding Fund and jointly make better use of
the PBC's convening and advisory role.

In conclusion, cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
enables the sharing of responsibilities based on the
comparative strengths of each one. This leads to
complementarity and avoids competition. Germany
remains committed to supporting regional and
subregional organizations, and their cooperation with
the United Nations. We will continue to promote a
holistic and coordinated approach to sustaining peace.
We, as Member States, cannot afford to waste scarce
resources or lack coherence. We should be seeking
synergies and working closely together to sustain peace.

Let me finish by saying that Germany aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union

