Mr. Ryan (Ireland): Ireland welcomes today's
debate on peace-building. Remarkably, it is only in
very recent years that the Security Council has
formally addressed this subject, and today's meeting
offers a welcome opportunity to further develop our
thinking together. The Swedish Presidency of the
European Union will speak later, and Ireland associates
itself with that statement.

The debate on peace-building at the United
Nations began in earnest only in the early 1990s with
the publication of "An Agenda for Peace". We are
pleased that the pace of the debate has quickened so
markedly. A greater understanding of the concept has
evolved, and a recognition of the crucial role to be
played by peace-building has developed. This has been
reflected in our discussions and in the range of reports
of the Secretary-General, which have demonstrated the
centrality of peace-building to attempts to assist
conflict-riven societies.

The successful contribution of the United Nations
to the establishment of peace in Guatemala is, in many
respects, our first and exemplary case of peace-
building. The United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), which is
preparing East Timor for and accompanying it towards
independence, and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), which is
providing an interim administration while establishing
transitional institutions for democratic self-
administration in Kosovo, are ongoing examples of
how well-coordinated peace-building efforts can make
a difference.

From Ireland's perspective, peace and stability
are inextricably linked to the meaningful engagement
of people with the decision-making structures and
processes affecting their lives. Accountable public
institutions, inclusive political systems and the
opportunity to achieve a decent standard of living are
some of the basic foundations of any stable society.
Peace-building helps to create the conditions where
these can take root. The absence of these foundations
nourishes conflict. Our own national experience has
taught us that problems can often seem intractable and
that differences can run very deep. While we would not
wish to be over-prescriptive, we have, however, been
witness to the need for courage, compromise and the
support of the international community in building
peace out of violent conflict.

We are agreed that poverty and
underdevelopment are major contributing factors to
conflict. Of the 34 countries farthest from reaching the
international development targets set out in the United
Nations global conferences of the 1990s, 22 are
affected by current or recent conflict. In most cases,
populations in countries experiencing conflict are
denied basic human rights; governance is either bad or
non-existent; and the right to development is without
practical recognition. Clearly, conflict prevention and
peace-building call for emphasis on the full range of
human rights, including civil, political, economic,
social and cultural. Our support for conflict-affected
countries in capacity-building for good governance will
be a crucial peace-building task.

At last year's Millennium Summit, our heads of
State or Government agreed to halve by the year 2015
the large proportion of the world's people living in
extreme poverty. If we are to reach that goal and the
targets we all agreed at United Nations global
conferences, greater achievements must be realized in
conflict prevention, peace-building and development.
Violent conflict and underdevelopment undermine our
efforts while blighting the aspirations of many millions
of people. We rightly emphasize the need for each
country to recognize ownership and to tackle its
problems directly, but we also recognize the
indispensable contribution that can be made by the
international community.

In addressing the objectives of peace-building
programmes, we can draw on the processes in which
we have engaged over the past decade. The record is,
admittedly, a chequered one, but we should keep in
mind that this is difficult terrain in which recurring
factors have reappeared. Among these, I would
highlight the following: the evident, demonstrated
centrality of the United Nations system to major
peacekeeping challenges; the direct relationship
between the success of peace-building programmes and
the adequate commitment of financial and political
resources by the international community; the political
rhetoric and on-the-ground political obstructionism
which have in some contexts exacerbated the failure of
political leaderships to respond to peace-building
efforts; the accurate assessment and judicious
application of varying degrees of leverage that
particular characteristics of pre- or post-conflict
situations give the international community in
engaging in peace-building operations; the need to be
highly sensitive to the individual strengths and
weaknesses of the political and social fabric and the
impact these will have on the post-conflict peace-
building process. In countries emerging from conflicts
we need to ensure the development of local capacity to
manage differences, even deep differences, without
Violence. We have seen, repeatedly, intertwining
political and developmental dimensions of peace-
building which require the closest practical cooperation
and coordination between, particularly, the Department
of Political Affairs, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP). At the field level there is clearly
a significant role for UNDP as capacity-builder in the
governance area and in the context of the resident
coordinator system. Immediate efforts to assist crisis
and post-conflict countries should not distort long-term
development objectives, but should underpin and
reinforce them. Finally, we stress the need for lessons
to be learned from experience of the past, and for best
practice to be pursued. It is crucial that the structures
set up by the United Nations mutually reinforce and
complement each other. Coordination must begin in the
field if it is to be effective, and it must begin
immediately upon the cessation of hostilities.

The Secretary-General will tomorrow meet with
the regional organizations. We value these
organizations' commitment to the maintenance of
international peace and security. We are resorting to
them on an increasing basis, not least because we
recognize that intra-State violence has regional
consequences that must be addressed effectively at the
regional level. We have seen regional organizations
achieve real successes in addressing conflicts, while
mindful of the inherent practical, political and
organizational challenges. As a member of the
European Union, Ireland is very supportive of the
efforts for closer cooperation between the United
Nations and the European Union.

We strongly endorsed the Council's decision that
those to be responsible for implementing a peace
agreement should be present during the planning
phases to ensure that the operation is based on realistic
assessments, judgements and arrangements. This is
essential for the credibility and workability of an
agreement and for the integrity of the United Nations
when it entrusts an operation to a regional
organization. We recognize that the United Nations
relationships with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the European Union in
Kosovo are positive examples of what can be done in
this regard, and that other regional organizations, with
international support, also have crucial roles to play.

The Security Council's contribution to conflict
resolution is an important element of a broader United
Nations capacity. We welcome, for example, the fact
that it has now become fairly routine for the heads of
the funds and programmes to attend and work with the
Council. This is as it should be if we are to adopt a
comprehensive and flexible approach to peace-
building. Long-term peace-building strategies should
figure as a matter of course in the drawing up of
Council-mandated operations and missions.

This debate is taking place against the
background of rapid developments in the field and
within this Organization. The Brahimi report has
described peacekeepers and peace-builders as
"inseparable partners". They are working, in our
names, towards the same objective. It is our clear
responsibility to ensure that they are equipped to carry
out the tasks we assign to them. This includes clarity in
the mandates we give them.

These mandates will, because they must, reflect
increasingly an awareness of the spectrum of United
Nations peacekeeping, peace-building and development
work. They are inextricably linked and, if properly
harnessed, they point the route away from conflict and
its root causes, towards societies characterized by good
governance, human, civil, political, social and cultural
rights, and, crucially, sustainable development.

