Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I would like first of all to
warmly welcome His Excellency the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, and to
thank him for his presence here today and for what he
has told us. He has, indeed, offered us a very clear
picture of where we stand today. The big picture is
before us and, as he has told us, it is a positive picture.
Under-Secretary-General Gambari is right: hope and
confidence now appear to be well rooted.

I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your briefing on behalf of the Multinational Force in
Iraq (MNF-I) and to thank Under-Secretary-General
Gambari and Assistant Secretary-General Sach for their
very informative briefings.

Italy welcomes the progress made the Iraqi
Government in rebuilding an autonomous defence and
security capacity, and the recent actions it has taken
against Al-Qaida terrorist elements and to re-establish
legitimate State authority, which had been tainted by
illegal militias and armed groups. In that regard, it is
our hope that the Iraqi Government will follow through
on its decision to disband all militias, which are an
element of instability that threatens to impair the Iraqi
Government's ability to take full responsibility in the
field of security.

We applaud MNF-1's ongoing contribution to the
re-establishment of Iraq's security capacity. Italy has
undertaken a renewed and consistent commitment to
the re-establishment of the Iraqi security forces within
the framework of the NATO training mission, whose
mandate has recently been extended to the new
national police force.

We also greatly welcome the positive steps made
in the area of national reconciliation, in particular the
General Amnesty Law and the revision of the
de-baathification law, and the progress in rebuilding
the Iraqi society and economy. We welcome the 2008
budget and improvement in executing the budget, as
shown at the recent international Conference in
Stockholm, where Iraq indicated sources of
co-financing and technical assistance that will indeed
help activate the country's own enormous resources as
a priority for economic partnership with the
international community. We welcome the upcoming
the provincial elections as a meaningful towards
further consolidating the democratic process.

In another positive development and in the spirit
of building overall relations within the framework of
the expanded neighbours process, a number of
countries in the region have recently decided to open
embassies in Baghdad and to appoint ambassadors to
Iraq.

We believe that debt relief, in accordance with
Paris Club terms, is crucial at this juncture, and we
strongly hope that the countries of the region promptly
finalize the necessary agreements, thus giving a
tangible sign of their support for the reconstruction and
stabilization of Iraq.

Italy has always fully supported the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI) and its
broader mandate provided by resolution 1770 (2007).
We also welcome its role regarding the issue of the
disputed internal boundaries. It is our hope that the
United Nations agencies will have a more incisive
presence on the ground so that the United Nations can
provide effective leadership in coordinating
international contributions.

Finally, we encourage the Iraqi Government to
take further measures to address the situation of Iraqi
refugees abroad and of internally displaced persons and
to facilitate their return to their homes.

