Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I wish to begin by
expressing my delegation's heartfelt appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for the initiative you have taken to organize
this very important debate on small arms. This underscores
the importance your country attaches to small arms and
light weapons as instruments that whet the appetites of
belligerents to continue to seek solutions to political and
economic problems by military means.

Namibia, like many other countries emerging from
war, was awash with large numbers of small arms. Those
numbers have now been reduced significantly, but given
Namibia's geographical location, illicit trafficking continues
to this day.

Namibia holds the View that the uncontrolled
availability of small arms and light weapons encourages the
outbreak or continuation of hostilities which have the
capacity to ruin treasuries, destroy life and property and
cause panic.

Weapons force people to live in an atmosphere of
increasing insecurity where differences become more
polarized and where peace is at best fragile and at worst
illusory. This distressing state of affairs is attributable
largely to the impunity with which weapons manufacturers
and arms exporters transfer small arms and light weapons
to corrupt, unscrupulous and undemocratic regimes with
track records of human rights violations and to rebel groups
and anti-national elements which use these weapons to
subject populations to brutal savagery for their own
selfish ends.

The merchants of war, on the other hand, motivated
by the fortunes they make from arms sales, feel no
urgency to curb arms transfers nor are they concerned
with the devastating consequences those arms have on
developing countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa.
Arms transfers and trafficking, and the resulting armed
conflicts which they feed, are having a devastating impact
on social, political and economic life for Africa south of
the Sahara, a region endowed with natural resources but
which still has pockets in which live the poorest people
in the world today.

It is therefore imperative that the international
community should seek to address effectively the culture
of impunity related to arms trafficking. Many tend to
believe that it is the duty of African leaders alone to
constrain the availability and flow of arms in and into the
region. Against this backdrop, we believe that the effort
to rid Africa of its superfluous small arms is a shared
responsibility for the region's leaders and for the
international community as a whole.

Uncontrolled transfers of small arms, especially to
irregular forces, for cash, diamonds or other commodities
weaken or facilitate the collapse of States and result in
anarchy. Naturally, non-State parties to the conflicts have
a capacity for unusual cruelty and serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law. Such
violations are always the order of the day in areas where
the illicit supply of small arms and light weapons
flourishes.

Acquisition of weapons is always accompanied by
the diversion of scarce resources away from social
services. It discourages foreign investment and tourism.
It contributes to unemployment and its attendant problems
of organized crime, poverty, ignorance and lawlessness.

We would not be true to our consciences if we
confined ourselves to tackling the illicit traffic in small
arms: we need to include also arms transferred licitly to
irresponsible regimes by those who know full well that
they will be distributed among ethnic groups that are bent
on committing inhuman activities such as ethnic
cleansing. My delegation encourages the Governments of
arms exporting countries as well as those of receiving
countries to exercise a substantial degree of responsibility
in such transactions.

 

