Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would first
like to welcome our colleagues from Djibouti, Somalia
and Eritrea to the Council.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands has a long-standing
and strong commitment to peace and development in
the Horn of Africa. That is why we voted in favour of
resolution 2444 (2018) today. We see our decision as
a tribute to the positive developments that have taken
place in the region.

The peace agreement between Ethiopia and
Eritrea represents a historic step. It paves the way
for improved bilateral relations and stronger regional
peace and stability. We welcome Eritrea's decision to
start engaging with the international community and
working to consolidate the peace agreement. Those
are important steps, and we encourage Eritrea to
build on that momentum to give impulse to domestic
governance reforms, including reform of the economy,
the national service, democratization and human rights.
In particular, we call on Eritrea to cooperate better with
international mechanisms, especially those related to
human rights.

The positive developments in the Horn ofAfrica do
not relieve the Council of its responsibility to monitor
progress closely. In particular, we underline the need
for concrete steps in the normalization of relations
between Eritrea and Djibouti. That is why we welcome
the Council's decision to remain seized of the matter by
asking for regular reporting on this important issue. We
also emphasize that the Council's other decisions and
demands regarding Eritrea remain valid. That includes
its decision, stated in resolution 2023 (2011), by which
Eritrea must cease using illicit means to collect taxes
outside Eritrea.

Finally, we welcome the renewal of the Somalia
sanctions measures as essential support to the Somali
Government in its efforts to deliver stability and
security in Somalia. We especially welcome the
addition of stand-alone sanctions criteria for sexual and
gender-based violence. Those who commit such heinous
acts should know that today the Council showed its
commitment to responding to such practices.

In conclusion, as others have done, we condemn
in the strongest terms the horrific terrorist attacks in
Mogadishu last Friday.

