Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): It is
my honour to speak on behalf of the Human Security
Network, namely, Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece,
Ireland, Mali, Norway, Panama, Slovenia, Switzerland,
Thailand, with South Africa as an observer, and my
own country, Jordan. The Network is a cross-regional
group of States that advocates a people-centred, holistic
approach to security.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
one of the priorities of the Network, and we engaged
constructively in the Security Council debates on the
issue as early as 2002. We encourage the Security
Council to continue to advance the agenda on protection
and separate this important issue from other political
discussions that could undermine the potential of this
framework of action.

We thank the Secretary-General for his latest report
(S/2012/376) and, in particular, for his presentation
today. We also very much welcome the briefing by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the practice established in 2011 of inviting it to briefthe
Council on country-specific situations. We encourage
the Council to use all the information generated by
the different organs of the United Nations to better
implement the international norms and obligations for
the protection of civilians. Our thanks are also due to
the Director for International Law and Cooperation of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
for his insightful comments, in particular in view
of the annex to the report regarding constraints on
humanitarian access, as well as to Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.

We recognize that some progress has been made
not only in providing peacekeeping missions with the
necessary tools to implement the protection of civilians
mandates, but also in the consideration of protection
issues in the situation-specific resolutions and in the
use of targeted sanctions. We are also encouraged
by the recent verdicts of the International Criminal
Court and the Special Court for Sierra Leone and by
the forthcoming United Nations Conference on the
Arms Trade Treaty. However, the members of the
Network are deeply concerned by the fact that, since the
adoption of the most recent statement by the President
of the Security Council on the protection of civilians
(S/PRST/2010/25), the difficult situation on the ground
generally has shown little change. We concur with the
Secretary-General on the need to strengthen our efforts
to respond to the five core challenges identified in his
past two reports and welcome the recommendations
therein.

With regard to the lack of compliance with
international human rights and humanitarian law, we
would like to stress the need to pay further attention
to the dangers faced by journalists and other media
professionals. They play a crucial role by reporting
on the situation of civilians in armed conflict and on
violations of humanitarian law and human rights.
Further action is needed in order to implement resolution
1738 (2006). We also call for the implementation of
the Secretary-General's recommendations for a more
proactive role of the Security Council on attacks against
health-care facilities, including the collection of data.
Furthermore, we share the Secretary-General's concern
about the use of explosive weapons in densely populated
areas and welcome his recommendations on this issue.

We would like to highlight the importance
of focusing on the consequences for civilians if
engagement with non-State armed groups does not
take place. On the issue of strengthening the protection
provided by United Nations peacekeeping and other
missions, it is very important that the missions
continue to assist in creating protective environments,
including by supporting the establishment of effective
rule of law and security institutions, in addition to the
physical protection they provide. We also recognize the
protection role of other humanitarian actors, including
the ICRC and non-governmental organizations.

Our countries are especially thankful for the
important information shared about the constraints
on humanitarian access on the ground. It is clear
that obstacles to the deployment and movement of
humanitarian workers can significantly affect the
humanitarian response and the possibility to reach
affected people, in particular the most vulnerable
groups, including women and children. We should all
cooperate in order to implement humanitarian activities
from the outset and for the duration of an emergency.
We remain deeply concerned about violence against
humanitarian workers and wish to draw attention to the
fact that building acceptance for humanitarian action
among the communities and the parties to conflict
remains the best way to gain safe and sustained access
to people in need. As members of the Human Security
Network, we strongly agree with the warning about
the dangers of the "bunkerization" of humanitarian
operations and the use of armed guards and escorts, as
noted in paragraphs 20 and 21 of the annex to the report.

Last but not least, we welcome the follow-up
on the issue of accountability, which is vital for the
protection of civilians and for achieving sustainable
peace. First of all, as the international community,
we should do more in order to help build national
capacities to ensure accountability for Violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
As stated in the report, international commissions of
inquiry and fact-finding missions have also proved
useful in encouraging national authorities to provide
for accountability. Furthermore, their findings provide
a basis for remedies for the victims and grounds for
possible referrals to the International Criminal Court.

We support the Secretary-General's recommendation
urging the Council to play a more proactive role in
ensuring an appropriate international response when
national authorities fail to take the steps necessary to
ensure accountability, and reiterate the call for greater
regularity and frequency in the use of fact-finding
missions by the Council. We also stress the need for the
Security Council to consider thoroughly and follow up
on the recommendations of the commissions of inquiry
established in the past months by the Human Rights
Council. We are concerned by the difficulties in taking
action to ensure the protection of civilians in those
situations, in particular with regard to Syria.

The members of the Network value the
recommendations of the workshop organized by the
Permanent Mission of Portugal and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on this issue and
call for their consideration by Member States and by
the Council, including the proposal for the development
of a checklist for engagement with the International
Criminal Court.

Finally, we consider it extremely important that
the Council continue to consider this issue periodically
and with the appropriate inputs, including from the
Secretary-General and from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

