Ms. Lee (Singapore): We join our colleagues in
thanking the representatives of Switzerland and
Germany for their presentations and for their very
useful manuals on the Interlaken and Bonn-Berlin
processes, which they distributed at our meeting on
Monday. We applaud the laudable efforts of the
Governments towards the improvement of financial
sanctions, along with arms embargoes and travel bans.

As time is short, Mr. President, we hope that you
will let us make a targeted statement of three key
points.

First, in relation to the presentation by State
Secretary Dahlgren of Sweden, we would like to
express our sympathy for the frustration that he
endured as Chairman of the sanctions Committee on
Sierra Leone. As the Chair of the sanctions Committee
on Liberia, we have experienced similar highs and
lows. For example, as the Chair, we have had to
facilitate the implementation of a travel ban list. Since
this list was promulgated in June, we have experienced
many of the difficulties discussed in the seminars and
workshops organized under the two processes, in
particular for the removal of targets from such lists.
While we have noted the suggestion from the Bonn-
Berlin process that this could be dealt with by
empowering the sanctions Committees to keep such
lists up to date, the reality is that United Nations
sanctions Committees do not have the resources to do
this, nor is there any institutional follow-up within the
United Nations system to monitor the implementation
of sanctions.

Secondly, United Nations sanctions, if designed
and implemented properly, can do much good.
However, as Mali, Colombia, Jamaica, Mauritius and
other delegations have highlighted, the image of United
Nations sanctions has not been good. The United
Nations and United Nations sanctions are often blamed
for the economic woes of the targeted country. This
may be due in part to the unintended side effects of the
sanctions. However, in our view, much of the problem
can be attributed to the less than effective
implementation of United Nations sanctions to date. As
such, while the United Nations may have won the
Nobel Peace Prize jointly with the Secretary-General
this year, the credibility of the United Nations in
relation to the implementation of sanctions has eroded
badly in the last 10 years. We must arrest this slide.

Thirdly, as sanctions are one of the most
important tools of the Security Council, the Council
needs to ensure that its objectives are achieved without
disproportionate humanitarian effects. As the United
States has noted, this is to ensure that sanctions remain
a viable policy tool. As such, we were pleased to learn
that the Stockholm process, will focus on the
implementation and monitoring of targeted sanctions.
We would like to express our support in advance for
the Stockholm process, in the hope that its work will
result in more effective implementation of United
Nations sanctions.

