Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) for their respective briefings on assessing the
implementation of measures taken by the Secretary-
General concerning the implementation of the
completion strategies for the two Tribunals, in
accordance with resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534
(2004). I would also like to convey my warm
congratulations to Ambassador Mayr-Harting for the
skill with which he leads the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals. I assure him of our support.

My statement will focus on three points: the
progress made in implementing these measures, the
gaps therein, and the views of my delegation with
respect to questions we deem to be essential, especially
the cooperation of States with the Tribunals and the
capacity-building of national judicial systems.

Concerning progress, my delegation welcomes
the achievements in implementing the completion
strategies of the two Tribunals. To that end, we
welcome the firm resolve of the judges, Prosecutors
and all the staff of the Tribunals to accelerate the
completion of their judicial activities on schedule and
in accordance with applicable international norms
regarding procedural guarantees and the protection of
the rights of the accused. The efforts of the Informal
Working Group are indeed noteworthy, particularly
with regard to the drawing up of drafts for the statute
for the mechanism responsible for carrying out
essential functions once the Tribunals have concluded
the pending trials. The creation of such a mechanism
will be essential to preserving archives, which
represent a major institutional and legal legacy for the
countries concerned and the international community.

In this regard, we support the measures taken by
the Tribunals themselves, the United Nations, national
jurisdictions and non-governmental organizations, as
well as the contribution of universities, to make fruitful
use of this legacy, in particular in the strengthening of
the rule of law, peace and national reconciliation. It
would therefore be highly desirable for the Security
Council to adopt as soon as possible a draft statute for
the international mechanism that would ensure the
competent and effective management of the legacies of
these two Tribunals.

With respect to the challenges, my delegation
would highlight that, in spite of the progress made in
moving forward the cases under way, in accordance
with the established schedule, the Tribunals continue to
face real difficulties in carrying out their activities.
Given the many unknowns, it is unlikely that the
schedule for trials and appeals cases will be complied
with. In these circumstances, it is essential that the
Security Council take measures to extend the mandates
of first-instance and appeals judges, and adopt
appropriate provisions to retain staff who are essential
to the good functioning of the Tribunals, pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 63/256, which provides
for the renewal of contracts of the staff of the Tribunal
in line with the trial schedule and forecasts for the
renewal of staff contracts.

The essential role of the ad hoc Tribunals in
fighting impunity for the most serious crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda no
longer needs to be proven. It is up to the Council to
preserve this achievement. If the 13 fugitives,
including Ratko Mladie, Goran HadZic' and Felicien
Kabuga, are not tried as soon as possible, the impact of
the Tribunals could be weakened and the credibility of
the Council gravely affected. Indeed, the arrest of these
fugitives is important not only to compensating the
victims and ensuring justice, but also to promoting
reconciliation and the re-establishment of peace and
security in the countries and regions concerned.

Without their own police forces, the international
Tribunals must rely on the cooperation of States. While
welcoming the efforts of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to cooperate in arresting the 11 ICTR
fugitives who are still at large, we encourage the
Congolese Government and the countries of the Great
Lakes region to cooperate fully in arresting the
fugitives. We express the same wish with regard to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.

With respect to building the capacity of national
judicial systems, my delegation would like to
underscore the importance of that issue in the context
of the completion strategy, in particular the training of
qualified staff in the countries concerned, especially
Rwanda. That would enable national judicial
institutions to take on cases that the Tribunals will not
be able to consider before the end of their mandate.
The transfer of such cases would make it possible to
strengthen the rule of law in the countries concerned.
Finally, my delegation wishes to highlight the
urgent need to implement effective completion
strategies that take full account of the need for fair
trials and protection for victims, a principle that must
be at the heart of our efforts. Likewise, we encourage
the efforts of the ad hoc Tribunals to raise awareness
among the populations on the scope of their work since
their establishment, in particular by disseminating
knowledge of international criminal law and
international humanitarian law.

