Ms. Wronecka (Poland): In accordance with
paragraph 3 (a) (iv) of resolution 1591 (2005), I have
the honour to brief the Security Council on the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan, covering the period from
4 October 2018 to 17 January 2019.

During the reporting period, the Committee met in
informal consultations on 24 October to hear a briefing
by Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Sexual Violence in Conflict.
With regard to her visit to the Sudan, Ms. Patten said
that she was the first Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to be invited by the Government of
the Sudan. She noted during her visit that there had been
significant improvement in the security situation in
many parts of Darfur, but that women and girls still faced
considerable security challenges. Ms. Patten expressed
optimism regarding the framework of cooperation that
was to be concluded shortly, whose purpose would be
to prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence.
The framework would also emphasize accountability as
a central aspect ofdeterrence and prevention. Ms. Patten
said that the cessation of sexual violence, ensuring
accountability for such crimes and the implementation
of specific prevention and protection measures, as
envisioned under the framework of cooperation, were
also requirements for the delisting of Sudanese Armed

Forces and Rapid Support Forces from the reports of
the Secretary-General on sexual Violence in conflict.

On 15 November, the Committee issued a
press release (SC/13582) on Ms. Patten's briefing.
On 27 November, the Panel of Experts on the
Sudan submitted its final report (see S/2019/34) in
accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 2400
(2018). The Committee discussed the report and the
recommendations contained therein during the informal
consultations held on 14 December. The final report
was transmitted to the Council on 10 January, and I
will therefore not go into detail on its content in my
presentation. Given the period covered, the report of
the Panel of Experts did not take into account the latest
developments in the Darfur peace process, namely, the
signing on 6 December of a pre-negotiation agreement
between the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi
faction and the Justice and Equality Movement and the
Government of the Sudan, supported by the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

In terms of recommendations to the Security
Council, the Panel recommended that the Council
urge the Libyan warring factions to stop cooperating
with the Darfuri armed groups. The Panel was also
of the opinion that the Regional Operational Centre
in Khartoum and similar regional initiatives should
be supported by Member States as part of a holistic
and comprehensive approach to peacebuilding, border
management and addressing cross-cutting challenges
such as migrant smuggling.

