Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would first like to thank
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, for his participation in this debate and his
comprehensive statement. I would also like to thank
Special Representative Kubis for his comprehensive
and informative briefing on the important work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). I would further like to express my enormous
respect for the Mission staff for their deep commitment
and dedication to working on this difficult assignment.

As host and co-Chair of the Tokyo Conference
held in July, Japan would like to express its sincere
appreciation to all of our partners for helping to make
the high-level meeting a success. I would like to
reiterate our gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Ki-
moon for his presence and to Special Representative
Kubis for his untiring dedication to helping with the
preparation efforts in Kabul. On 8 July, in the presence
of President Karzai and representatives and leaders
from more than 80 countries and organizations,
including from civil society, we adopted the Tokyo
Declaration, in which the international community and
Afghanistan reaffirmed their historic partnership in the
form of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.
In this road map, the Afghan Government committed
to achieving more efficiency and transparency in its
governance, while the international partners gave their
word that they would stand beside Afghanistan in its
efforts to gain stability and self-reliance beyond 2015,
and also committed to providing more than $16 billion
through 2015. Japan's contribution to socioeconomic
development and security capability enhancement
will reach around $3 billion in about five years. Those
reciprocal commitments will be updated through
periodical senior official meetings and ministerial-
level meetings.

Building on the outcomes of the NATO Summit
on security, the Kabul Ministerial meeting on regional
cooperation and the Tokyo Conference on development,
Afghanistan now has a road map for working towards
a stable and prosperous future. Also, as stated in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/703), the third
tranche of the transition of security responsibilities to
the Afghan National Security Forces is progressing as
planned, and it outlines a path to self-reliance for the
nation.

In order to realize those road maps, sustained
political will and actions must follow. For that to occur,
we cannot, first of all, stress enough the necessity
of substantively improving the security situation on
the ground by strengthening the Afghan National
Police and Army. At the same time, however, we have
witnessed some recent shocking incidents, including
targeted killings of civilians and insider attacks within
various Afghan security bodies. Japan renews its call
for the Afghan Government, in partnership with the
international community, to make further efforts to
grapple with the task of stopping the cycle of violence.

In the field of development, we commend the Afghan
Government's efforts to devise an implementation
plan for the 16 governance targets in the five major
areas described in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. We welcome the issuance of the
presidential decree on governance as an expression of
the Government's firm determination. It is our strong
hope that concrete actions will be undertaken and
positive changes made on the ground. We look forward
to seeing tangible progress before the first ministerial
meeting, which the Government of the United Kingdom
has kindly agreed to host in 2014.

Iwould like to express our strong hope that a stronger
and more accountable Government in Afghanistan
under the committed leadership of President Karzai
will be able to achieve lasting stability in the country
through commitments fulfilled and follow-up efforts
undertaken. In the short term, conducting the upcoming
presidential election in a fair and inclusive way is
of utmost importance for lending legitimacy to the
Government. In the longer term, the predominant task
for a legitimate Afghan Government is to proceed with
the peace and reconciliation process.

In that regard, we are encouraged by the positive
trendofanincreasingnumberofformer anti-Government
personnel enrolling in the reintegration process through
the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme.
As a strong supporter of that reintegration programme,
Japan believes that the accumulation of successful
cases can support the reconciliation process as a
whole and lead to a successful peace process. It is also
encouraging to see that non-governmental and civilian
actors are making efforts to contribute to the process.

Recalling a series of recent large-scale insurgent
attacks against foreign missions, including the one
against the Japanese embassy in Kabul in April, the
Government of Japan would like to stress once again the
importance and urgency of properly securing the safety
of members of international organizations, such as
United Nations, diplomats, aid workers and, moreover,
the general public, in accordance with established
international laws and regulations. In that context, we
welcome the Security Council press statement issued
last Friday. I join my colleagues in calling upon the
relevant authorities to protect missions and fully respect
their international obligations in that regard.

