Judge Meron: It is my great pleasure today to
brief the Security Council once again on the progress
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals in the implementation of its mandate, and to
do so under the presidency of Bolivia. I wish Bolivia
great success in its leadership of the Council during this
month. I would also like to express my congratulations
to the incoming members of the Security Council, with
whom I very much look forward to working over the
coming period.

I also wish to take this opportunity to express my
sincere gratitude to the Council's Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals for its considerable
support and attention paid to the Mechanism. I am
particularly appreciative of Uruguay's skilled and able
leadership of the Group.

Finally, I would be remiss ifI did not acknowledge
the sustained and sustaining support provided to the
Mechanism by the Office of Legal Affairs under the
outstanding leadership of Under Secretary-General
for Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel
Miguel de Serpa Soares and Assistant Secretary-
General for Legal Affairs Stephen Mathias. I remain
deeply grateful to them and to their colleagues for all of
the assistance they provide to the Mechanism.

During my presentation today I will not refer to
those matters fully addressed in my written report
submitted on 17 May of this year (see S/20l7/434, annex I), but will simply draw members' attention to
some of the most salient issues and several important
developments since the filing of the report.

Before I turn to my update on the work of the
Mechanism, I would first note that, since I last
appeared before the Council (see S/PV.7829), upon his
appointment by the Secretary-General, Mr. Olufemi
Elias joined the Mechanism as Registrar on 1 January.
Mr. Elias has been working closely with colleagues at
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) to ensure that the Mechanism is ready to take
responsibility for all remaining functions of the ICTY.
In that respect, I fully anticipate that the Mechanism
will be entirely self-sufficient, including in terms of
its administrative capabilities, upon the closure of the
ICTY at the end of this year.

Turning to the Mechanism's core judicial work, I
am very pleased to inform the members of the Council
that, on the whole, the Mechanism continues to make
excellent progress in the handling of its judicial work
and is indeed seeing a steady increase in judicial
work over time. In 2012, the Mechanism rendered 25
decisions and orders; in 2013, it rendered 79; in 2014,
it rendered 192; in 2015, it rendered 209; and in 2016,
405 decisions and orders were issued. As of 1 June
2017, 146 decisions and orders have been issued. I
should note that, in carrying out their judicial work, the
judges are directly supported by a very small group of
approximately 25 legal and administrative Chambers
staff - spread over the two Branches of the Mechanism
and working as a unified team, fully in line with the
Council's vision of the Mechanism as one institution.

A number of the rulings from the current reporting
period were issued in the major trial and appeal cases
currently before the Mechanism. In that respect, I am
pleased to report that the retrial in the cases Prosecutor
v. Jovica Stanisic' and Franko Simatovie is scheduled
to commence next week at The Hague Branch of the
Mechanism. The beginning ofthat trial - the first trial
for the Mechanism - represents an important milestone.

The briefings in the appeal cases Prosecutor v.
Radovan Karadeic and Prosecutor v. Vojislav Seselj
were completed in the course of the reporting period,
and preparations for appeal hearings in those caes is
progressing rapidly. All the judges on those cases, with
the exception of myself, continue to work remotely and
will be called to the seat of the Mechanism when the
cases are ready for hearing. Updated projections with
regard to the rendering of a judgment in both cases are
set forth in my report.

I should underscore that the judicial work of the
Mechanism is not limited to the major cases I just
identified. Indeed, the Mechanism is regularly seized
of requests relating to everything from allegations
of contempt and challenges pertaining to the non bis
in idem principle, to motions seeking a review of
judgement, applications for early release and requests
for access to confidential information. For the most
part, those matters are assigned to single judges
working remotely and constitute a substantial portion
of the Mechanism's judicial activity.

A significant number of those requests are
made by national authorities or others engaged in
proceedings in national jurisdictions who are seeking
access to confidential materials or information held
by the Mechanism. Of the 366 decisions and orders
issued between mid-May 2016 and mid-May this year,
164 - or approximately 45 per cent - are related to
requests for a variety of protective measures and other
motions seeking access to confidential evidence or
information. We welcome those requests, which reflect
the degree to which national authorities are actively
seeking accountability for core international crimes.

A crucial component of those national efforts
involves the proceedings that have been referred
to national jurisdictions for trial and that are being
monitored by the Mechanism, in accordance with its
statute. In that area, too, there was important progress
over the reporting period, with a trial judgement
being delivered in Rwanda in the Munyagishari case
and, according to information received following the
submission of my written report to the Council, the
completion of the judicial investigation in France in the
Bucyibaruta case.

In sum, the Mechanism is making excellent
progress with its judicial work in general, all the while
continuing to learn from experience and recalibrating
internal practices as necessary to ensure optimal
efficiency and economy. However, as members of the
Council are aware, substantive proceedings in one
case - the Ngirabatware case - remain at a standstill
due to the continued detention of Judge Aydin Sefa
Akay by the Turkish authorities.

As Members are aware, the United Nations Legal
Counsel formally asserted diplomatic immunity for
Judge Akay in October 2016 and, as I reported to the
Council shortly thereafter, the failure to resolve the
matter in a manner that respected the privileges and
immunities of Judge Akay under article 29 of statute
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals places in jeopardy the integrity of the remote
model of judging envisaged by the Council under
article 8 of the statute. More fundamentally, the failure
to properly resolve the matter undermines the principle
of judicial independence - the core principle of any
judicial institution that abides by the rule of law.

The situation has been further exacerbated over
the course of the year by Turkey's failure to comply,
without undue delay, with a judicial order issued
by the Mechanism in January 2017 to cease all legal
proceedings against Judge Akay and to release him.
Instead of complying with binding obligations under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
domestic trial proceedings against Judge Akay
commenced earlier this year and have since been
adjourned repeatedly.

In two weeks, Judge Akay will have been in
ongoing detention for no less than nine months. By any
measure, that is an extraordinarily long period for the
resolution of the detention of an international judge,
whatever the legal complexities may be. The status quo
on the matter is untenable, and I call upon the Council
to take such measures as may be necessary to achieve an
appropriate resolution to that unprecedented situation,
consistent with the Mechanism's statute and with the

obligations incumbent upon all States under Chapter
VII of the United Nations Charter.

I am pleased to report on important developments
at the Mechanism in three other areas.

First, as members are aware, the Council has
repeatedly expressed concern as to the ongoing situation
of acquitted and released persons, and has called
upon States to facilitate progress in that area. In that
regard, I am very pleased that, after intensive efforts
by the former ICTY Registrar, Mr. John Hocking, in
December 2016 two such individuals were relocated to
a West African State. I am deeply grateful to that State
for its collaboration and commitment in response to the
call of the Council.
The number of such persons remaining in Arusha
has accordingly declined to 11 individuals. Our new
Registrar, Mr. Elias, is focused on achieving further
progress in respect of this long-standing humanitarian
challenge, both in building on existing relationships
with relevant States and exploring new opportunities.
I urge Council members to continue to support the
Mechanism in its efforts to achieve a full resolution of
that difficult situation.

Turning to the enforcement of sentences, I am
pleased to note that in May a revised agreement on
the enforcement of sentences was concluded with the
Government of Benin that reflects best practices in
the field and cementing further the strong relationship
that Benin and the United Nations have enjoyed over
many years.

Meanwhile, with the Government of Senegal, we
are in the final stages of the implementation of its
decision in principle to accept eight prisoners into cells
in Senegal that were refurbished with the support of
the United Nations. That new capacity will allow for
almost all of the remaining 10 prisoners in the United
Nations Detention Facility in Arusha to be considered
for transfer to serve their sentences. I am deeply grateful
for the broad and generous commitment ofboth of those
Governments to work with the Mechanism in the key
area of enforcement of sentences and for the sustained
support of other Member States that have likewise been
faithful partners in that regard.

Finally, I wish to note the commencement by the
Office of Internal Oversight Services of preparatory
work for its evaluation of the methods and work of the
Mechanism, as mandated by the Council in its resolution
2256 (2015). My colleagues and I look forward to
collaborating closely with the Office of Internal
Oversight Services in its review of the Mechanism's
work practices and to making the evaluation report as
valuable a document as possible for the Council and for
the Mechanism itself.

Today, we - and particularly the members of the
Council - face a number of challenges in the realm of
international relations. In a number of quarters, we are
witnessing a rise in suspicions and doubts concerning
global and regional institutions and undertakings.
To some extent, we are witnessing a retreat from the
shared vision of what the international community,
acting together, can achieve.

In many respects, it may all simply reflect the
natural ebb and flow of international affairs. We
cannot, however, allow a temporary tide to erode any
of the vital progress that the United Nations - and,
in particular, the Council - has made over the past
quarter of a century in strengthening the rule of law
and in ensuring greater accountability under and in
accordance with international law. Now, perhaps more
than ever, is the time to redouble our efforts in that
respect, to learn from and build upon the past and strive
for ever greater success going forward.

