Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): At the outset, I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the current month. I should also like to express my
appreciation to the previous President for the able and
wise manner in which he conducted the proceedings of
this body during his mandate.

Secondly, I should like to acknowledge the
foresight of the presidency of the Non-Aligned
Movement for requesting that this meeting be
convened, and the foresight of the Security Council -
particularly that of the current presidency - for
convening it, thus allowing for the participation of
every Member State in a discussion of the most
important and serious international crisis today. The
consequences of not reaching a consensus on the issue
before us could be far-reaching and could affect each
and every Member State, as well as the Organization.
The choice before us is between peace and war. And
the options are whether or not the international
community has a role to play in the resolution of this
crisis in a world that is becoming increasingly
multilateral.

Angola has always expressed its commitment to
the United Nations, especially to the Security Council,
whose mandate is to maintain international peace and
security. My Government, in joining the United
Nations shortly after its independence, affirmed the
principles and values that constitute the essence of the
Charter of this noble Organization.

My Government condemns any unilateral action
by any Member State that threatens international peace
and security, betrays the principles of the Organization
and undermines its role. Consequently, in 1990, Angola
unequivocally condemned the invasion of Kuwait by
the military forces of Iraq. My Government is
confident in the Security Council's ability to carry out
its mandate. Therefore, it is imperative that the
Government of Iraq redouble its efforts for the full and
immediate implementation of Security Council
resolutions 687 (1991) and 1284 (1999), as they
constitute the only internationally recognized avenues
towards achieving peace and justice through consensus.
Furthermore, the implementation of those two key
resolutions can be the cornerstone for a solution of the
current crisis. We believe the record of the
implementation of those two key resolutions has
provided the international community, as well as the
Iraqi Government, with the necessary understanding of
mutual concerns, thus removing all perceived obstacles
to their full and immediate implementation.

During the last few days, the Iraqi Government
has expressed its readiness to respect and implement
the resolutions of the Security Council, particularly
with regard to the unconditional return of inspectors to
Iraq. The United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission and the International Atomic
Energy Agency are the established mechanisms
through which that commitment should be carried out.
My Government welcomes the progress thus far
achieved. However, we share the concern of other
Member States in stressing that meaningful progress
will only be registered once unconditional and
unrestricted inspections actually take place.

I believe that the international community,
through the United Nations, and in particular through
the Security Council, should continue to work with the
Iraqi Government in order to achieve meaningful
progress in the resolution of the crisis. Security
Council resolutions 687 (1991) and 1284 (1999), and
all subsequent resolutions on the situation in Iraq,
remain viable and relevant instruments. Our efforts
should therefore be directed at ensuring their full
implementation.

In conclusion, Angola believes that before taking
any measures under Chapter VII of the Charter, the
international community must seek a peaceful solution
under the auspices of the United Nations, taking into
account that the measures foreseen in Article 42 of the
Charter must be taken only as a last resort, and then
only if they represent the collective will of the
international community as embodied by the Security
Council.
