The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

I too wish to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Prendergast, and the
representative of Djibouti, Mr. Olhaye, for their
briefings on the situation. I shall confine myself to
making a few general comments, as the representative
of Portugal will later make a statement on behalf of the
European Union, which my delegation fully endorses.

In the view of my delegation, the holding of
another open Security Council debate on the situation
in Somalia is of particular importance for three
reasons. First of all, it shows that the Council is
committed to the resolution of all crises, both those
that are covered by the international press and those
that are no longer in the spotlight. I want to state
clearly that there are no "forgotten" crises on the
agenda of the Security Council. The failure of one
method of intervention should not automatically lead to
inertia. We must learn from our past difficulties to see
how the United Nations can support peace in Somalia
and facilitate the rebirth of that country.

Secondly, this debate is important because it once
again underscores the Council's concern for sustaining
and supporting regional peace initiatives whenever the
opportunity arises. Here I would refer, of course, to the
initiative of the signatories of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement for the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
to the initiative of the Economic Community of West
African States on Sierra Leone, to the Organization of
African Unity initiative to resolve the conflict between
Ethiopia and Eritrea and, finally, to the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development initiative
for Somalia. With respect to the latter, we especially
welcome the involvement of Djibouti through the
initiative taken by President Guelleh to secure a lasting
solution to the crisis in Somalia.

Thirdly, this debate is important because it will
enable us finally to endorse a process which, although
it has sometimes been difficult, has nonetheless been
exemplary. Unlike previous peace plans for Somalia -
which, I need hardly recall, have all failed - the
initiative of the President of Djibouti refuses to let the
success of the plan depend on the whims of the
warlords. Ambassador Olhaye's statement earlier this
morning was eloquent testimony to that. The peace
process led by President Guelleh has given a voice to
civil society: to the population that has been a victim of
the conflict. Elders, intellectuals, local non-
governmental organizations, women's groups, religious
leaders and exiles have all without exception had an
opportunity to state their views about the future of their
country, and have demonstrated their profound
weariness at the continuation of the conflict.

France therefore considers it very important that
the international community now give unequivocal
support to Djibouti - not merely moral support but
support with a financial dimension as well, which will
make it possible to see through to the end a process
that is off to such a good start.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker is the Permanent Representative
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

