Mr. Westerwelle (Germany): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
We are also grateful to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2011/552) and his instructive
briefing today. Let me make three points.

First, it falls squarely within the responsibility of
the Security Council to prevent conflicts from
occurring wherever possible. In fact, it is one of its
central tasks. Conflict prevention is one of the chief
obligations set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations. It is the most efficient and cost-effective way
of promoting international peace and security.
Effective conflict prevention can avoid loss of life,
population displacements and economic chaos.
Working on improving prevention is therefore both a
humanitarian and a strategic necessity. Over the years,
the Security Council has considerably improved its
tools to shoulder that responsibility. Agreeing on the
right instrument from the broad spectrum available is a
crucial task and challenge for the Council.

At this point, allow me to add some remarks on
the current situation in Syria. Every day, peaceful
demonstrators are brutally repressed and innocent
civilians are killed. This has to stop. The Council
should send a strong and urgent message to the
leadership in Damascus in order to prevent the
continued senseless killing of people.
In our view, early warning is of key importance
to prevent escalation. We welcome the fact that the
Security Council has been increasingly prepared to
tackle new threats and situations of incipient conflict.
That is the way forward.

Secondly, in addition to operational
improvements, we also need a long-term structural
perspective. Part of the Security Council's
responsibility for conflict prevention is the need to
look at long-term threats to global security. To take one
example, it is our conviction that understanding the
implications of climate change for international peace
and security will be essential to prevent escalation in
many future crises.

Aside from facing these new threats, the best
prevention of conflicts remains respect for human
rights and economic development. There can be true
peace, sustainable development and shared prosperity
only when human rights are respected. A credible fight
against impunity can also have a preventive effect.

Thirdly, the Security Council cannot do this
alone. As stated in the Charter, the Security Council
shall encourage pacific settlement of disputes also
through regional arrangements. There has been a
notable growth in mediation efforts by regional
organizations such as the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, the African Union, the League of Arab
States and the European Union. Regional expertise
needs to be heard when dealing with conflicts in a
particular region. Germany has therefore always
underscored the central importance of the Arab
League's stance on the developments in its region over
the last half-year.

The European Union has assumed its regional and
global responsibilities. The European Union actively
participates in conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding. It has developed its own
instruments for enhancing stability and consolidating
peace, including crisis-management missions and
diplomatic initiatives. It also supports the African
Union and the United Nations in their efforts to bring
peace. Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations will be key to further improving
capacities and tools to deal with prevention. The
civilian capacities review also aims at making better
use of existing mediation capacities in Member States.

None of these efforts can replace direct talks
among the actors involved. We cannot make peace in

their place, but we can encourage the forces of reason,
reconciliation and compromise. Mediation can be a
very useful tool in this regard. Establishing a culture of
prevention is a question of political will, first and
foremost that of parties directly affected. The
international community has to lend its support
wherever possible. Developing a culture of prevention
is also a question of the political participation of those
affected, in particular women. Women should be at the
core of prevention and sustaining peace.

We fully support the conclusions drawn by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2011/552), notably
with a view to building integrated partnerships on all
levels and improving early warning mechanisms. We
also need to adopt a long-term perspective regarding
new challenges to peace and security. I conclude by
expressing my delegation's support for the draft
presidential statement to be adopted today.

