Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Mr. Marzuki Darusman, Chairperson of
the independent international fact-finding mission on
Myanmar established by the Human Rights Council,
for his briefing, which is crucial to the work of the
Security Council. Peru supported convening this
meeting, considering, among other things, that since the
Council's visit to Myanmar and Bangladesh in April,
which we had the honour of leading together with the
United Kingdom and Kuwait, the responses aimed at
resolving the grave humanitarian crisis there are still
insufficient. That is why we believe that the Council
should continue to pay due attention to the plight of the
Rohingya refugees, with a view to bringing about their
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable repatriation,
as well as to promoting justice, accountability and
reconciliation in order to build sustainable peace
in Myanmar.

We would like to reiterate our appreciation to
Bangladesh for its solidarity in taking in more than
1 million refugees, and to stress the importance of the
international community's support in addressing the
refugees' critical humanitarian situation, especially in
the light of the impact of the recent monsoon. We also
stress the role of regional and subregional organizations,
particularly in preventing and responding to emerging
conflicts. In that regard, we welcome the involvement
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in
addressing and contributing to a solution to the situation
in Myanmar.

We have high hopes for the ongoing technical
meetings held by the joint working groups established

by Myanmar and Bangladesh, as well as the efforts of
the Burmese authorities to advance the implementation
of the memorandum of understanding signed with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the United Nations Development Programme. We also
underline the recent visit of the Special Envoy and
in that context, we stress the urgent need for all the
current efforts and developments to produce concrete
results on the ground with a view to enabling the return
of refugees and internally displaced persons.

Addressing the root causes of the crisis by fully
implementing the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State is urgent, although
we recognize that these are complex tasks within
the framework of a delicate national process of
peace, reconciliation and democratization. While
we acknowledge the significant effort involved in
establishing an independent investigative commission,
we must point out that in order to fully understand this
tragedy, its jurisdiction cannot be restricted to events
prior to 25 August 2017. In that connection, we take
careful note of the conclusions of the report of the
fact-finding mission (A/HRC/39/64), in which, after
considering the violence that occurred after 25 August
2017 and its causes, it finds reasonable evidence for
the commission of crimes of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes.

Given the gravity of the situation, we take note
of the decision of the International Criminal Court
to affirm its jurisdiction over the crime of the forced
deportation of the Rohingya people. We look forward
to the results of the preliminary examination by the
Office ofthe Prosecutor ofthe Court. We also stress the
importance of Human Rights Council resolution 39/2,
which approved the establishment of a new independent
mechanism to collect, consolidate, preserve and analyse
evidence of violations of international law. We believe
that this is an urgent task that requires cooperation with
the private sector, particularly in the area of information
and communication technology, and that it should also
serve to develop strategies aimed at preventing the
dissemination of distorted information and narratives
of hatred and discrimination.

In conclusion, I would like to stress how important it
is that the Council continue to focus on this situation. It
can count on my delegation's full support in that regard.

