Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): We thank
you, Mr. President, for your initiative of inviting the
Council to reflect on the United Nations response to
complex crises.

The past two decades have been particularly
marked by a considerable development of the United
Nations role in armed conflicts. The complexity of
those conflicts has led the international community
more thoroughly to study their root causes and to find
new ways to deal with them effectively. That is the
result of a broader approach to threats to international
security, responding to the urgent need henceforth to
include non-military threats and to take greater account
of the preventive dimension of the maintenance of
international peace and security.

That led the Security Council to state at the end
of its first summit meeting, held on 31 January 1992,
that

"The absence of war and military conflicts
amongst States does not in itself ensure
international peace and security. The non-military
sources of instability in the economic, social,
humanitarian and ecological fields have become
threats to peace and security. The United Nations
membership as a whole, working through the
appropriate bodies, needs to give the highest
priority to the solution of these matters."
(S/PV.3046, p. 143)

The changes that have taken place are due, above
all, to awareness of the many factors contributing to the
gestation and persistence of crises and to the outbreak
of armed conflict: factors which must be more
precisely examined in settlement and peace-building
efforts. Thus, the United Nations system has been led,
on the one hand, to outline a strategy for gradually
transforming a culture of reaction into one of conflict
prevention and, on the other hand, to replace its
practice of unsystematic, separate actions with globally
coordinated interventions.

In that connection, development assistance must
provide a framework for enhancing and intensifying
dialogue between donors and recipients to promote the
creation of inclusive structures and the greatest
possible national absorption capacities. That way,
development assistance can become a preferred
instrument for promoting peace and preventing
conflict.

Broadening the concept of peacekeeping and
international security also touches upon the issue of the
legitimacy of the Security Council's mandate with
respect to the new challenges and the legality of its
legislating initiatives in areas where international law
has not yet established norms and regulations.

The changing nature of conflicts makes the
commitment of significant resources necessary over a
longer term. There is unanimous agreement that
development is the best way to prevent conflicts. The
Security Council, which has primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
has many duties and must henceforth deal with both the
nature of crises and the prevention of the grave
violations of humanitarian principles that are at the
origin of these conflicts - or that result from them.

The presence at this meeting of the President of
the Economic and Social Council and of the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator is highly significant in
that regard. Increasingly, the main criterion for
deciding when to intervene is the actual or foreseen
human and social cost of complex crises. That requires
the Council to monitor the development of crises and to
take the appropriate measures within its purview to
protect populations and ensure their right to life where
necessary.

The Council has at its disposition a wide range of
instruments that it has used over recent years to bring
critical situations under control and to steer them
towards a more positive outcome. More than in the
past, the obligation to act flows from the Council's
responsibility to protect and its exclusive right to
authorize the legal use of force for that purpose. That is
why the Council is more often questioned on its
slowness to respond: humanitarian crises bring greater
attention to the principle of protecting human dignity.

From this perspective, it is particularly important
that the Secretary-General fully and effectively
exercise his power to draw the attention of the Security
Council to any matter that in his opinion could threaten
the maintenance of international peace and security, as
set out in Article 99 of the Charter.

It is true that, for a long time, the historical
circumstances surrounding the creation of the United
Nations and the principle of non-interference in the
internal affairs of States as set out in the Charter have
led to priority being accorded to international crises
and conflicts. The increase in intra-State conflict,
however, has given rise to a new factor in terms of the
exercise of the responsibilities of the Secretariat and
the Security Council in the area of preventive
diplomacy. In that respect, they have an important
asset: the representation of the United Nations in the
great majority of countries throughout the world. We
must therefore accord high priority to the functions of
preventive diplomacy, which, based on the
Organization's global representation and on its
legitimacy, must refine its ability to analyse and
anticipate crises and help defuse them in the early
stages of development by the use of good offices in the
context of joint action by the Security Council and the
competent bodies of the regional and subregional
organizations concerned.

In terms of policy planning, actions aimed at
eradicating the deep-rooted causes of conflict,
peacekeeping operations, humanitarian assistance,
post-conflict peace-building and national reconciliation
efforts and long-term development cannot, therefore,
be seen as separate stages or isolated issues. In this
regard, we are pleased to note that a clear awareness of
the need to include the response to complex crises in a
strategy that is both global and regional in nature is
beginning to emerge in the international community,
especially the United Nations system. Thus the
Security Council is required to provide strategic
momentum in a multidisciplinary approach, including
in its field of action all of the institutions of the United
Nations system, because of the linkage between the
causes of conflict and the way in which they interact
with one another - hence the need for coordinated
action on the part of all those involved.

Such action on the part of the Security Council
would enable it to reaffirm, in a durable manner, its
leadership in the promotion of international peace and
security. To that end, the way in which the Council
cooperates with and consults the relevant bodies of the
United Nations system should be reconsidered and
improved. It goes without saying that, in this context,
the question arises of a more flexible reading of the
Security Council's mandate.

The Council should also take another look at its
own instruments, such as general or targeted sanctions,
commissions of inquiry, observation missions,
preventive disarmament and the establishment of
demilitarized zones - all useful tools available to the
Council for the effective conduct of preventive
diplomacy.

Because of the level of financial resources that
are now required, the creation of special trust funds,
especially for short-term initiatives, requires some
thought. Recent successes have made clear the
relevance of another underutilized tool: the group of
friends. That concept, which has been used in a number
of different ways, has had varied degrees of success,
most recently in the context of the situation in Haiti.

Given the role that regional and subregional
organizations could play in the prevention and
management of conflict, in reconstruction and in
maintaining peace, the Council should promote the
strengthening of such institutions and make full use of
the potential that they offer so as to enable them better
to fulfil their responsibilities.

In this regard, I welcome the fact that this debate
is taking place a few days after the launching of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union. That
noteworthy development should be supported and
encouraged. My delegation would therefore like to
repeat the appeal made by the African Union to the
entire international community to provide support for
that significant example of progress in Africa's
determination to manage its own affairs in dealing with
problems that have hindered its prosperity and
development.

