Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank the Russian Federation for having requested
this briefing and Mr. Stephen O'Brien for the very
important information that he has provided us on the
humanitarian situation on the ground.

My delegation fully endorses the very relevant
statements made by previous speakers, which is why
I would simply like to touch upon several points, so as
not to repeat what others have said.

We are particularly concerned by the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in the four countries:
Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia and Nigeria. Indeed, the
figures and the very sombre predictions are chilling
and canot but prod our collective conscience.

Concerning Yemen, my delegation would like to
remind the parties to the conflict, in particular the
Houthis and their allies, of their obligations pursuant
to international law, among which is the need to ensure
immediate, lasting, secure and unhindered access to all
those who require assistance throughout Yemen. My
delegation wishes also to urge the parties, in particular
the Houthis and their allies, to resume in good faith
negotiations based on a realistic approach and trust so as
to achieve a political solution, which is the only way to
put an end to this crisis and its disastrous humanitarian
and security consequences.

The famine that is afflicting several areas of South
Sudan is obviously a great source of concern to us. More
than ever before, the country requires the assistance
and support of the international community to enable
it not only to overcome this humanitarian crisis but
also to strengthen its own capacity to urgently address
extreme situations such the current famine.

Concerning the situation in the countries of the
Lake Chad basin and in Somalia, we believe, as Stephen
said, that the situation and in particular the famine that
is approaching is not inevitable. We acknowledge the
efforts that have been made by partners and the United
Nations to help these countries, but we believe that the
international community must do better and do more on
an urgent basis given the current context, characterized
by the proliferation in some of those countries of
terrorist groups, which are the primary beneficiaries of
any deterioration in the humanitarian situation.

On this point, we wish to express the hope that the
visit that the Council has just made to the Lake Chad
basin countries, which made it possible to take stock of
the scale of the challenges, is just the first step towards
not only mobilizing the international community
in order to make it possible for all four countries to
overcome the humanitarian ordeal they are facing, but
also allowing them to demonstrate greater resilience in
the face of the many challenges that confront them.

