Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the delegation of Lithuania for
having organized this open debate to commemorate
the 15 years since the Security Council gave fresh
impetus to the task of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We are also grateful to Ms. Navi Pillay,
Ms. Valerie Amos, Mr. Herve Ladsous and Mr. Yves
Daccord for their respective statements.

We also appreciate the concept note (S/2014/74, annex) circulated by the presidency among all
delegations, which contains valuable guidelines to focus
our debate, since the issue is extraordinarily complex
and the mandate is so broad that we must prioritize our
activities in order to be able to generate the necessary
funding.

In the past two years, we have had the privilege
of having contributed to the development of the
evolving conceptual framework behind the protection
of civilians in situations of armed conflict. It was
during our membership of the Council that the Security
Council adopted resolutions 2086 (2013) - the first
to recognize the importance of the protection of
civilians as part of the multidimensional mandate of
a peacekeeping operation - and 2106 (2013), which
also established the practice for staff of peacekeeping
operations - military and civilian alike - to be given
extensive training in gender issues, including on sexual
Violence and gender-based violence, all of this in the
framework of the protection of civilians.

In his tenth report on the subject (S/2013/689),
of 22 November 2013, the Secretary-General
clearly identifies that the protection of civilians is a
fundamental duty, and for the parties to a conflict a
legal obligation to be met by all. He also indicates that
his previous recommendations, including the five basic
challenges for improving the protection of civilians, are
still in force. He also requests the Council to review
them and add them to those contained in the present
report. Our delegation shares that point of view.

At the same time, it is worth reiterating that United
Nations contingents cannot substitute for the State
in complying with the latter's basic commitment to
protect its civilian population. When States are unable
or unwilling to honour that basic commitment, we face
major humanitarian disasters, as we have seen again
and again in recent years and even in the past few
weeks in Syria, the Central African Republic, South
Sudan and the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, among others.

The recent joint investigation by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
criticizing the Council for not having offered clearer
and more detailed guidelines that would have permitted
the United Nations to improve the ability to offer
effective protection to civilian populations is eloquent
in that regard.

On the other hand, let me return to one of
the recommendations contained in the report of
the Secretary-General concerning support for the
investigation of serious violations involving the use of
modern technologies, such as distance-guided aircraft
and remotely controlled weapons. Those technologies
make it more difficult to apply the fundamental
norms of international humanitarian law concerning
the distinction and proportionality of those methods
or asymmetric conflicts and precautions. That may
prevent the determination of responsibility and the
prevalence of impunity that allows the proliferation
of mass atrocities and serious violations of human
rights. We have insisted on the singular utility of the
Rome Statute and the International Criminal Court
in making determinations of individual or collective
responsibility, as the case may be.

Finally, I should like to acknowledge OCHA
for preparing an update of the aide-memoire, which
constitutes a practical guide to the study of issues
related to the protection of civilians and which describes
various measures that can be considered and adapted
to each situation in the preparation of the mandates of
peacekeeping and other relevant missions.

