Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (Spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/20l2/703).We would also like to welcome Mr. Jim
Kubis and thank him for his briefing and his excellent
work at the helm of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Let me also
recognize the presence of Minister Zalmai Rassoul,
whom we wish to thank for his helpful intervention.
The Secretary-General's report discusses some relevant
events that we would like to highlight.

First, we commend the success of the Tokyo
Conference, which has further consolidated the
commitments of the Government of Afghanistan and
the international community and thereby strengthened
a lasting partnership. We support the new Mutual
Accountability Framework, focused on security,
sustainable and legitimate Government structures
and, no less important, the promotion of economic
development in Afghanistan. We will follow attentively
the implementation of the commitments attentively,
and we welcome the Government's efforts to formulate
ways to implement the results.

In that regard, we know that Tokyo addressed
the importance of holding credible, inclusive and
transparent presidential and parliamentary elections
in 2014 and 2015, in accordance with the Afghan
Constitution. We hope that it will be possible to agree
on a legal and technical framework to facilitate those
efforts in a timely manner. It will be particularly
important to ensure that an electoral law and a law on
the duties and structure of the Independent Electoral
Commission are passed in the first quarter of 2013, one
year before the elections.

Secondly, we are pleased that the transition process
in the security sector has, up to now, gone forward as
expected and hoped, though not without significant
challenges that continue to be a cause for concern. On
the one hand, we are encouraged by the continuing
progress being made in the process of transferring
responsibility for security, which now covers 75 per
cent of the population. On the other hand, as we know,
Afghanistan's problems cannot be resolved through
military means alone. That is why we would like to
see the same degree of progress and resolve directed at
the peace and reconciliation process, which should be
guided and led by the Afghans. We support UNAMA
in its continued role of supplier of good offices. We
also believe that the sanctions regime established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) is a worthwhile and
appropriate tool.

Thirdly, we again raise the issue of the protection
of civilians. While we have noted a drop in the number
of civilian victims, we are nonetheless alarmed by the
complexity and intensity of those attacks. We agree
with the report's assessment that attacks on colleagues
and international counterparts by persons in Afghan
uniform are a worrying development affecting trust
during a security transition that needs to be based on
close coordination between the parties. We also feel
that the situation of women and girls in Afghanistan
is deplorable. We therefore call for concrete steps to be
taken to protect and ensure their rights, and we firmly
support the United Nations in that area.

Finally, we cannot fail to express our concern about
the substantial decline in the resources allocated to
UNAMA, and we hope that efforts will be made to have
that decline affect its operational capacity and ability to
fulfil its mandate as little as possible. This is a delicate
time during which we should rather be considering
strengthening the presence of the United Nations in
order to ensure that Afghanistan will be ready and able
to deal adequately with the stage to come after 2014.
Also, taking into account the enormous humanitarian
needs in Afghanistan, we were struck by the fact that
on 1 August financing of the Consolidated Appeals
Process was at a level of 33.5 per cent - in other words,
much less than half of the amount that was available
during the same period of 2011.

I would like to conclude by saying that Guatemala
supports Afghanistan's aspirations to become a
democratic, prosperous and stable country, which is
a vision shared by the international community and
which should be demonstrated in the form of political
will.

