Mr. Minton (United States): The United States
concurs with the Secretary-General's assessment that the
process which the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT) was created to support is now over.
With the recent violence-free parliamentary elections, the
transition set forth in the peace accords has been completed.

We agree that UNMOT should be formally terminated
upon expiration of its current mandate on 15 May 2000.
For this achievement, we wish to congratulate Special
Representative Petrov and the staff of UNMOT. We are
aware of the sacrifices made by UNMOT personnel,
recognizing in particular that some gave their lives for this
cause, and we feel the deepest gratitude for their
contributions.

My delegation now hopes that the Government of
Tajikistan will build on the successful work of UNMOT by
taking further steps to consolidate the gains of the peace
process. It is particularly important that the emerging
democratic institutions of Tajikistan be nurtured and
solidified, so that all groups within the country have a voice
and a stake in the political process.

Although the recent elections constituted a significant
step towards democracy, they were marked by serious flaws
and cannot fully be characterized as free, fair and
transparent. The process of reconciliation among various
political and social groups in Tajikistan is still far from
complete. The United States therefore believes that the
closure of the peacekeeping mission should by no means
signify an end to the international community' s engagement
with Tajikistan and that support for the peace process there
must continue.

We concur that there is a need for the establishment
of a small follow-on United Nations mission to support
peace-building and further national reconciliation. We
welcome further discussion of the follow-on mission, and
we are open to ideas and suggestions as to how it can
best be organized, staffed and administered. We anticipate
that this mission will build effectively on the
accomplishments of UNMOT.

The United States looks forward to working with the
international community and with the Government and
people of Tajikistan in bringing about full national
reconciliation and stability in that country.

