Mr. Mendoza-Garcia (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We congratulate the Jordanian delegation
on its accession to the presidency of the Council this
month. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Jordan,
Mr. Nasser Judeh, for his statement.

Costa Rica decided to participate in this debate
because of the importance we attach to the situation
in the Middle East as a peace-loving country that
voluntarily disbanded its army more than 65 years ago.
We firmly believe in peaceful solutions to conflicts
between peoples and States in the framework of
international law and multilateral diplomacy.

Turning to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, we
reiterate our categorical condemnation of the escalation
of violence in a conflict that has cost the lives of
civilians, including women and children. We renew
our call on both parties to resolve the differences
that have long undermined the right of both peoples
to live in peace and security. In that regard, we urge
them to return to negotiations on the core issues of
the conflict, on the basis of ongoing obligations and
agreements previously reached between the parties,
backed by international law and the decisions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly, with the
aim of laying the foundations for direct negotiations
leading to the achievement of the objective of the
international community f the peaceful coexistence of
an independent Palestinian State and the State of Israel.

Costa Rica welcomes Palestine's membership
as the 123rd State party to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court on 1 April. As the Foreign
Minister of Costa Rica, Manuel Gonzalez Sanz, said at
the time, for Costa Rica, a country that believes firmly
in the rule of law, the role of international bodies as
instruments for peaceful coexistence, is crucial. This
rings particularly true in relation to treaties the goal of
which is the protection of human rights, fundamental
freedoms and international humanitarian law as
embodied in the Rome Statute.

On the current situation in Yemen, my delegation is
concerned about developments there and the escalation
of the conflict. The crisis represents a threat to the
security and stability of Yemen, the region at large and
international peace. A ceasefire is therefore urgently
needed. As the World Health Organization has reported,
some 650 people have already died in the conflict and
more than 2,000 have been wounded as a result of the
recent escalation in the conflict. The humanitarian
political situation is crucial at this time. The support
of the International Committee of the Red Cross has
been essential, but as its spokesperson has said, if the
war continues at this rate, we will need more resources.

On 14 April, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2216 (2015), which establishes an arms
embargo and affirms that a solution to the crisis must
be political. We must follow that path and not allow
Yemen to become a theatre for other nations proxy
wars. Likewise, we emphasize the call for the respect of
international humanitarian law; the need for all parties
to ensure the security and safety of civilians, including
those receiving assistance; and the need to ensure the
safety and security of humanitarian staff, including
United Nations and associated personnel, in order to
prevent a recurrence of the sad events that took place
yesterday in Somalia, where United Nations staff were
killed in the line of duty.

Costa Rica believes that if we wish to prevent
the further deterioration of the conflict in Syria,
we must put an end to the armed conflict as soon as
possible and seek a political solution, as agreed in the
recent negotiations in Moscow, based on the terms
of the Geneva communique issued on 30 June 2012
(S/2012/522, annex) by the Action Group for Syria,
which calls for the establishment of a transitional
Government that could offer a neutral environment in
which change would involve and be brought about on
the basis of the mutual consent of all parties, be they
members of the current Government, the opposition or
other groups.

We urgently call on the Syrian authorities to
respect their commitments under international law
and, in particular, under international human rights
law and international humanitarian law. Because the
Government bears the responsibility for protecting
its own population, it is urgent that the necessary
measures be taken to avoid further bloodshed and
human rights violations. This obligation falls mainly
on the shoulders of the country's authorities, but it is
also the responsibility of the armed opposition and
any other country directly or indirectly involved in
the conflict. We stress that the decision of how Syria
organizes its Government and institutions is one that
the Syrian people alone can make, through a broad
and inclusive political dialogue based on respect for
diversity, tolerance, peace and democracy.

In light of all this, we hope that the Security Council
can fully exercise its mandate to maintain peace and
international security in the Middle East, and to ensure
the full exercise of international law and the rule of law
in the region. We hope to return to this Chamber in the
near future, not to call for negotiations and tolerance
between the parties, but to celebrate agreements and an
end to their conflicts, and discuss plans for a sustainable
and harmonious development among peoples.

