Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): Let me
first of all bid a warm welcome to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Uganda and thank him for his
important statement. I would also like to say how
pleased I am to see you, Sir, presiding over the Council
during November. We reaffirm that my delegation will
continue its traditional cooperation. I would also like to
commend the outstanding work done in the month of
October by the delegation of Cameroon under the
leadership of my brother, Ambassador Martin Belinga-
Eboutou.

My delegation is grateful to Ambassador Kassem
and the Panel of Experts for the quality of its report
(S/2002/1146) on the illegal exploitation of natural
resources and other wealth of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The report establishes quite clearly the
close link between the Great Lakes conflict and the
exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in violation of that country's
territorial integrity and of international law.

The reports submitted by the Panel of Experts
between April 2001 and October 2002 eloquently
demonstrate our determination to put an end to the
plundering of those resources and to find a lasting
solution to conflict throughout the region. The facts
given in these reports have enabled us to cast light on
the role of some and the intentions of others, which
have unfortunately meant 3.5 million deaths and an
ever disturbing humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. With regard to the
many consequences of the years of war, in all their
various and complex dimensions, the Council must
take the necessary steps with regard to those
responsible for the plundering once their responsibility
has been established.

With regard to our consideration of our reports of
the Panel of Experts, my delegation would like to
highlight some relevant aspects of its conclusions and
recommendations. While we must welcome the official
withdrawal of foreign troops from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, my delegation
remains concerned over the continued presence of the
ground of elite networks, with the goal of perpetuating
the illegal exploitation of these resources in all its
forms. That is why we support not merely verification
that the withdrawal is genuine, but also an in-depth
investigation of the elite networks.

My delegation agrees to establish a monitoring
body for putting an end to the illegal exploitation of the
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
that regard, priority should be given to Congolese
expertise. To ease the humanitarian impact of planned
measures and restrictions against companies and
individuals involved in the plunder of resources, we
agree that appropriate technical and financial assistance
should be provided to Congo. Moreover, in its
paragraph 155, the report indicates that an embargo or
a moratorium banning the export of raw materials
originating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
does not seem to be a viable means of helping to
improve the situation in that country.

This approach, as we see it, is different from that
suggested by the initial recommendations of the Panel
of Experts. Are we to conclude that this is a new
approach? My delegation would like some information
in this regard. We endorse the interpretation of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with regard to the concept of invited and not-invited
countries. That analysis is based on the sovereign right
of every State. The Council should take it into account.
Moreover, we agree with the recommendation in
paragraph 157 that the establishment of a transitional
government in Kinshasa should be accompanied by the
disarmament of the rebel groups, the genuine
withdrawal of foreign troops, the adoption of measures
to curb illegal exploitation, and the application of
serious multilateral pressures and incentives. The
institutional reforms envisaged by the Panel of Experts
are part of that approach and are aimed at restoring
State authority throughout the country.

We welcome the significant progress in the
multiparty negotiations on the formation of a
transitional government in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which would guarantee a promising future.
Such progress will bolster the Pretoria and Luanda
Agreements. Can the Group give us further information
on the real nature of its collaboration with the Porter
Commission in Uganda? We find this collaboration
contradictory since it is called an "amiable working
relationship" (S/2002/H46, para. 132) based on
exchanges of information and evidence, whereas it is
also stated that the Porter Commission doubts the
credibility of the Panel's evidence.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reiterate its support for the holding of an international
conference on peace, security, democracy and
sustainable development in the Great Lakes region.
That initiative, which deserves the attention of all,
should be a priority based on an integrated approach to
the settlement of the ongoing conflict in the region.

