Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): In July 2008, the
Council wound up its successful mandate on the
oversight and resolution ofthe bloody civil conflict on the
island of Bougainville in Papua New Guinea. Initiated
by the good offices of then Secretary-General Kofi
Annan - one of today's speakers 4 the decade-long
mandate enabled the resolution of the conflict, which
in its essence resulted from disagreements related to
the massive Bougainville copper mine, which at the
time was the largest open cut mine in world, after the
Escondida copper mine in Chile. At its operational
peak and prior to the start of the conflict in 1989, the
Bougainville mine contributed about 20 per cent of
Papua New Guinea's national budget.

Since the conclusion of the Security Council mandate
in 2005, the Autonomous Region of Bougainville has
been created under the Bougainville Peace Agreement,
along with several elections for the Autonomous
Government led by a President. In real terms,
Bougainville's post-conflict peacebuilding continues
as a work in progress, with numerous milestones
and institutional strengthening still to be achieved.
The Papua New Guinea Government continues to be
involved at the highest levels throughout this critical
phase as we jointly continue the peacebuilding process.
I emphasize the word "jointly" here because it is the
operative word.

As a nation on the cusp of enormous economic
growth, underpinned by the past decade of positive
sustained economic growth of over 5 per cent per
annum, the Papua New Guinea Government continues
to plan and engage in many different ways to ensure that
the wealth that will flow from the massive multi-billion
dollar LNG project, funded by Exxon, alongside other
mining and multinational corporations and other
natural resources ventures, will benefit all of the people
of Papua New Guinea.

In light of its infrastructure and its attempts to deal
with social inequities, our Government is determined
to ensure that the distribution of wealth throughout
the country is balanced and effective. As noted in
our country's statement made at the opening of the
session of the General Assembly in September 2012
(see A/67/PV.18), the Government proposed to share its
wealth with other Pacific countries, and that is already
happening in a very small way.

The Papua New Guinea Government is aware
of the huge responsibility emanating from the great
opportunity that has emerged from the exploitation
of our vast natural resources, including copper, gold
and other base metals, along with gas and petroleum.
Our unique land tenure system lends itself to creating
a picture that anywhere else would be tantamount to
distraught confusion. With a population of just over
7 million people, our diversity, based on more than
800 languages and tribes, provides an elaborate mosaic
from which to address our massive wealth in natural
resources, which also include our marine resources, of
which many are jointly shared with our Pacific island
neighbours.

The question of whether we have learned any
lessons from the Bougainville conflict, along with the
reasons as to why that conflict arose, remains seared
in our collective minds, and provides an important
yardstick by which we as a nation must properly address
the exploitation of our natural resources.

The bedrock of all natural resource exploitation
in Papua New Guinea is underpinned by specific
prerequisites, framed through legally sanctioned and
compulsory natural resource development forums,
whereby the Papua New Guinea Government must
consult all landowners and groups within the resource
areas, often including those on the periphery, in order
to obtain their approval for developing those resources.
What seems - and is - a very cumbersome process
works because our Constitution guarantees traditional
ownership of land by our peoples, wherever they come
from in Papua New Guinea. That is a sacrosanct part of
our nationhood's ethos and continues to serve us well,
notwithstanding the conflict on Bougainville.

Finally, working with development partners,
along with our participation in the recent Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative Conference in
Sydney and recently in the United Nations Office for
South-South Cooperation Energy Initiative, has, in
our view, allowed Papua New Guinea to participate
meaningfully in many of the processes that have been
described by other delegations in this debate today.

