I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. We are incredibly grateful for his dedicated and honourable service as the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace for more than five years; his diligent efforts to help resolve this conflict have been invaluable. We wish him all the best as he makes the transition out of Jerusalem, and I look forward to seeing him in the next couple of days and working with him on his next assignment. As this year comes to a close, I would like to reflect on the progress we have made to date and how that progress has overturned a number of assumptions that framed our thinking on Middle East peace in ways that stood in the way of progress. The dispute between the Israelis and the Palestinians in this forum dates back to the earliest days of the Security Council. Since 1948, there has been a stream of efforts to resolve the conflict, yet they have generally failed. Those decades-old approaches have not only fallen short but they have stymied regional economic cooperation and growth and have largely prevented Israelis and Palestinians from establishing friendly relations. Recognizing the impasse we found ourselves in, President Trump presented a bold new vision for Middle East peace - a realistic, detailed plan to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, while making Israelis, Palestinians and millions of others in the region both safer and more prosperous. President Trump's Vision for Peace saw Israel commit itself to working towards a two-State solution at an event that was witnessed by other Arab nations, including the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain, which attended the initial presentation of the Vision. Building on that momentum in August, the President then brokered a historic agreement to normalize relations between the United Arab Emirates and Israel - now known as the Abraham Accords - which was the first such agreement between Israel and an Arab country since 1994. The following month, Bahrain joined the United Arab Emirates in signing the Abraham Accords declaration at the White House, committing to an exchange of Ambassadors and launching a flurry of activity, including the first direct flights between those countries, as well as cooperative initiatives across a broad range of sectors, each of which was a major step forward in achieving an enduring and warm peace in the region. By October, the Sudan and Israel had also agreed to end the state of belligerence between them, thus extending the reach of the Abraham Accords to the African continent. Finally, on 10 December, Morocco announced that it would resume diplomatic relations with Israel and expand economic and cultural cooperation to advance regional stability. In less than four months, four States opened diplomatic relations with Israel, paving the way for still more engagement that will help bring about the prosperity envisioned under President Trump's peace plan. For decades, the prevailing assumption was that the world would see normalized international relations with Israel only following a resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian dispute, but we have proven that assumption wrong. Instead, Israeli entrepreneurs are now making regular trips to Dubai and Manama to explore economic opportunities that will benefit all their citizens, while Emirati and Bahraini entrepreneurs travel freely to Israel with the same goals. Those economic exchanges are a bright spot in a global economy that has been overshadowed by the regional conflict and the coronavirus disease. For decades, we had also seen little progress in resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as parties continued to reflexively resort to the same old tired rhetoric and hardened positions. Today we see instead practical, real examples of genuine economic and cultural ties being formed. As a result, all of us in the Security Council should think long and hard about what else we may have missed or misinterpreted over the years. We once again encourage our regional partners and the members of this body to thoughtfully consider the United States Vision for Peace. We continue to urge the Palestinians to consider the opportunities within the Vision and to negotiate with Israel and present their objections within the context of direct talks based on the Vision. A peace deal would bring much needed economic support and investment to the Palestinians and open up an even broader world of opportunities - for Palestinians, regional partners and the world. We look forward to the day, hopefully soon, when the Security Council no longer needs to debate this matter. Last week, Jewish communities in Israel and around the world celebrated Hanukkah, the festival of lights, and there is a brightly lit Christmas tree in Manger Square at the Church of the Nativity. I hope that, amid the darkness of the winter, a global pandemic and far too many conflicts around the globe, we as a Council, and the international community more broadly, which represents so many religious and cultural traditions, will embrace the light represented by the Abraham Accords. May we all work together to seek ways to spread that light to other nations.
