Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset to welcome to New York
Minister Agba Otikpo Mezode and to thank our guests
from the World Bank, the United Nations Development
Programme and the International Organization of la
Francophonie for their presence and for their
exhaustive statements.

The Tunisian delegation has read with interest the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Central African Republic and the work of the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in the Central
African Republic (BONUCA). I should like in
particular to thank Mr. Cheikh Tidiane Sy, the
Representative of the Secretary-General in the Central
African Republic, for his briefing. We have noted the
progress that has been made, but we remain deeply
concerned by the situation that has prevailed there for
some time, as described by Mr. Sy.

It is clear that the consequences of the 1996 crisis
are still being felt everywhere and that, despite
enormous efforts, the challenges facing the Central
African Government are far from having been met
because of its many difficulties at the political, socio-
economic and security levels.

My delegation would encourage all parties to
begin a constructive dialogue in order to ensure the
survival of the young democratic institutions of the
country, with the ultimate goal of achieving genuine
and lasting national reconciliation. In that respect, the
work of the Secretary-General's Representative, Mr.
Cheikh Tidiane Sy, and BONUCA will be invaluable
and will certainly facilitate negotiations among all the
political forces of the country.

The economic situation in the Central African
Republic is also disturbing and could easily lead to
political instability. It is obvious that the Central
African Government is incapable of leading the
country out of this situation without the assistance of
the international community and the Bretton Woods
institutions. We therefore welcome the decision of the
World Bank to approve the release of the second
tranche of the fiscal consolidation credit. We also
welcome the decision of the International Monetary
Fund to approve the Central African Government's
request for debt relief. This initiative will allow the
Government to resume the regular payment of wages
and gradually to pay off its arrears, which cannot fail to
soothe the growing social anger in the country.

My delegation believes that, despite tensions and
a few incidents, the security and military situation in
the Central African Republic is encouraging. My
delegation welcomes the efforts of the Government in
this connection and wishes in particular to commend
the initiatives that have allowed the defence and
security forces to be restructured, units to be deployed
in the countryside and ex-combatants to be reintegrated
into the army.

We also welcome the significant results achieved
in the disarmament process, which have allowed the
Government to recover 95 per cent of heavy weapons
and 65 per cent of light weapons. This positive picture
is somewhat overshadowed, however, by the inability
of the Central African Government, due to a lack of
resources, to pursue the programme to demobilize and
reintegrate ex-combatants. Moreover, the emergence in
the country of new weapons from neighbouring States
in conflict demonstrates that the threat of
destabilization is ever present and that the Central
African Government must remain vigilant and intensify

its efforts to end the illicit distribution of these new
weapons.

My delegation believes nevertheless that the
search for a definitive solution to all these security,
humanitarian and socio-economic problems in the
Central African Republic would benefit in some ways
from the adoption of a comprehensive subregional
approach. In this respect, we feel that the assessment to
be carried out by Mr. Amara Essy, the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy to the subregion, will be very
helpful to the Council.

Finally, we wish to pay tribute to the strenuous
efforts of BONUCA. We deplore the recent incident
involving one of its staff members. Much remains to be
done, inter alia, in combating such abuses as the so-
called "neighbourhood justice". We are convinced that
the many steps being taken by BONUCA are extremely
helpful to the Government and people of the Central
African Republic and will assist in particular in
fostering a culture of peace, dialogue and tolerance
throughout the country.

The Government of the Central African Republic
has demonstrated its firm resolve to create conditions
conducive to lasting peace and development. Thus,
aware of all the political, security, economic and social
priorities it faces, we join the Secretary-General's
appeal to the international community, which has
always supported peace-building efforts in the Central
African Republic and elsewhere, to reiterate its
commitment to that country and to stand with it at this
sensitive phase of peace-building.

We support the presidential statement to be
adopted later today.

