Mr. Wittig (Germany): May I join others in
thanking Ambassador Nestor Osorio for his first
briefing in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). As he
assumed responsibility for that crucial Committee at
the beginning of this year, let me congratulate him on
taking over that important task. I assure him that my
delegation will support him unconditionally.

The Committee plays a vital role in pursuing the
dual-track strategy. That strategy can only produce
results if the existing measures as agreed by the
Council in four resolutions are thoroughly
implemented. Germany wishes to express support for
the Committee's work. We welcome the fact that the
first meeting of the Committee two weeks ago
11-27294
provided its members with an opportunity to express
their concerns and expectations.

We welcome the establishment of the Panel of
Experts as laid out in resolution 1929 (2010). The
Panel is operational and is pursuing its tasks with
dedication and commitment. The Panel's interim report
contains a number of practical recommendations. We
fully support those useful recommendations, which
provide a solid basis for improving the implementation
of existing sanctions measures. Let me draw the
Council's attention to three issues mentioned in the
report.

First, Germany is concerned about the high
number of cases of violations recently uncovered and
reported to the Committee. Many of those cases
involve the extensive delivery of weapons from Iran to
unstable regions in West Africa and the Middle East. I
join others in expressing our particular concern about
two cases that occurred last week and that underline
once more the urgency of proper sanctions
implementation. We now need a proper assessment of
the patterns of sanctions violations to better understand
the circumvention of the existing regime.

More accurate reporting by Member States will
be helpful in that regard. We encourage Member States
to cooperate with the Committee and the Panel of
Experts and urge them to promptly report incidents of
sanctions violations and denials of export licenses in a
detailed and comprehensive manner. We welcome the
report of the Panel on implementation reporting in
accordance with resolution 1929 (2010). That report
contains a useful checklist that may enable Member
States to improve their reporting practice.

Secondly, let me state the obvious: obligations
deriving from resolutions of the Council have to be
fulfilled by all Member States. We are aware that this
requires firm commitment and significant efforts. Best
practices may prove to be useful in that regard. I would
like to recommend that the Panel of Experts develop a
toolbox for best practices concerning the
implementation of sanctions.

Thirdly, with regard to a proactive outreach
campaign with the broader membership, Germany
welcomes outreach activities to inform Member States
of the current sanctions regime. The efficiency of
measures could be improved by providing other States
with assistance in developing export-control
5
mechanisms and by pursuing in-reach activities on
internal compliance procedures of private companies.

Today's briefing follows the latest report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the
implementation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons safeguards agreement and relevant
provisions of the Council's resolutions on Iran. The
report clearly states that Iran has not suspended work
on all heavy-water-related projects, which is a
violation of the relevant resolutions of the Council.
Although it is obliged to suspend all enrichment-
related activities by the same resolutions, Iran is
continuing to pursue enrichment activities and is once
again in Violation of its international obligations.

The IAEA summarizes Iran's obligations in its
report, which need to be fully implemented in order to
restore confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of
Iran's nuclear programme. In that regard, we call on
Iran to cooperate with the Agency by implementing
and ratifying the additional protocol. We also believe it
is time to finally apply the modified Code 3.1 of the
subsidiary arrangements to the safeguards agreement.

We are particularly concerned about possible
military dimensions of the Iranian nuclear programme.
We urge Iran to discuss the outstanding issues with the
Agency and to facilitate the provision of additional
information, as well as to grant access to persons and
installations as required by the Agency.

Let me conclude by highlighting that, together
with our partners in the international community, in
particular in the framework of the E3+3, we remain
committed to finding a long-lasting and peaceful
solution to the Iranian nuclear file. Iran must restore
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. The first step in that direction is
the establishment of mutual confidence. The recent
talks in Istanbul were meant to create such confidence.
From our perspective, the conversations in Istanbul
were very disappointing.

We call on Iran to reconsider its intransigent
attitude and to return to the negotiating table in good
faith - ready to engage constructively. We deplore the
fact that talks have not yet led to substantial
conclusions. As set out in resolution 1929 (2010), we
remain committed to our offer of June 2008. Additional
proposals were made in Istanbul. We continue to
believe that a solution will only come about through
negotiations and dialogue. Dialogue requires that both
sides be ready to engage. We are. The door remains
open for Iran. We call on Iran to seize this opportunity.

