Mr. Daeic' (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I would like to thank Secretary-
General Guterres and his Special Representative,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for their submission of the report
before us (S/2017/911) and their overall engagement in
the realization of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
under resolution 1244 (1999). I also thank the President
and members ofthe Security Council for recognizing the
importance of the continued review and consideration
of the issue.

UNMIK's presence in Kosovo and Metohija
in an undiminished scope and under an unchanged
mandate as a guarantor of the status neutrality of the
international presence is of paramount importance to
promoting security and stability and to building trust
between the communities of Kosovo and Metohija.
Strengthening its financial and human resources will
enable the international community to comprehensively
and sustainably assess and address the problems
and challenges facing the Serbian and non-Albanian
populations every day.

The political situation, given its sensitivity in
Kosovo and Metohija, has a major impact on building
trust and confidence among its communities. Therefore,
UNMIK's undiminished presence ensures the necessary
security and provides guarantees and impetus to
Serbs and non-Albanians to involve themselevs in the
processes initiated by the Brussels Agreement, without
fear for their future or the future of their families.

The fact that 18 years after the arrival of the
international presence in the province, some 200,000
internally displaced persons (IDPs) who were forced to
flee Kosovo and Metohija continue to live in Serbia,
outside the province, is a powerful argument that
UNMIK's scope should not be changed. Sustainable
return has been achieved by only 1.9 per cent of IDPs,
and I am sure that the Secretary-General will agree that
that is one of the key questions that UNMIK should
accentuate in the future. I would also point out, however,
that the number of IDPs in Kosovo and Metohija cited
in the report does not adequately reflect the magnitude
of the problem and does not call for the commensurate
attention of the Mission.

A number of structural shortcomings in the
institutional and judiciary systems of Kosovo and
Metohija are noted in the report. Those shortcomings
have negative consequences for vulnerable
communities, primarily regarding the protection of the
rights of the Serbs and other non-Albanians in the south
of the province and the rights of returnees, as well as
the process of reconciliation among communities.
The negligible number of returnees is due to the
failure to bring to justice offenders who have incited
racial, ethnic and religious hatred and intolerance,
ongoing institutional discrimination against Serbs, and
ethnically motivated restriction measures, including
arbitrary arrests. In particular, instances of arrests
executed on the basis of trumped-up charges in the
south of the province testify to the general physical and
legal insecurity. Such measures seek to enable usurpers
to take possession of property by illegal means.

The report of the Secretary-General should therefore
accord attention in a separate section to the Violation of
human rights and freedoms of the returnees to southern
Kosovo and Metohija. UNMIK must invest additional
efforts in strengthening all its capacities in order to
ensure the necessary level of protection of the human
rights and freedoms of internally displaced persons,
and to create optimum conditions for sustainable
returns, including through the restitution of property
or, put simply, the guarantee of property rights.

The report notes that no progress has been made
with regard to the implementation of the ruling of
the Kosovo Constitutional Court, confirming the
ownership by the Visoki Deeani monastery of the
surrounding land. The monastery, which features on
the UNESCO World Heritage List, was founded in
the first half of the fourteenth century by the Serbian
King Stefan Decanski. It has been vandalized many
times in the past, including by adherents of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. The report also draws
attention to other disputes related to the property of the
Serbian Orthodox Church. Those issues provide ample
evidence of the importance of the protection of Serbian
historical, cultural and religious heritage that is part of
the invaluable heritage of Europe and the world.

The international community should also make
additional efforts to establish a society in Kosovo and
Metohija in which the rule of law is respected, in which
conditions are created for effective, impartial and
credible trials of war criminals, and in which the fate
of missing persons is clarified, thereby contributing to
the process of reconciliation among communities. As
the legal framework for prosecuting perpetrators of war
crimes in the Specialist Chambers has now been fully
put in place, we expect that those suspected of carrying
out crimes against Serbs and other non-Albanians in
Kosovo and Metohija will be indicted and tried.

Serbia continues to be firmly committed to dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, facilitated by the
European Union. Despite the many doubts, second-
guessing and challenges encountered on the way, Serbia
has demonstrated great resolve to find compromise
solutions, which are not always simple or easy to
come by. That constructive approach is evinced by the
implementation by our side of a number of obligations
assumed in the dialogue, including the recent integration
of judges and prosecutors into the judicial framework
of the province. Serbia's commitment to resolving all
outstanding issues peacefully and through dialogue is
motivated first and foremost by its strong conviction
that there is no alternative to such an approach and that
only within a status-neutral framework is it possible to
contribute to regional peace, security and stability, as
well as to the region's progress towards integration into
the European family of nations.

Our responsible approach has also been reaffirmed
by the bold political decision of the representatives
of the Serbian list to enter Ramush Haradinaj's
Government after the parliamentary elections. The
decision once again confirmed the political unity of the
Serbs of Kosovo and Metohija and the perpetuation of
the constructive policy of protecting their status and
interests. Explaining their decision, the representatives
stated that the conditions in which they decided
to participate in the Government of Kosovo were
very clear. They pointed to the need to protect the
interests of Serbs and their central demands for the
establishment of the association/community of Serb-
majority municipalities, the protection of property and
the guaranteed return of IDPs.

Regrettably, the efforts made by Serbia to find
realistic, status-neutral and mutually acceptable
solutions through compromise have not been
reciprocated by the other side, particularly with respect
to implementing the agreements that have been reached
thus far. Let me point out in that connection that, even
four and a half years after the obligation to establish
the community of Serbian municipalities was assumed
as the key part of the first agreement of principles
governing the normalization of relations, no progress
has been registered in its implementation. Surprisingly,
no mention is made of that fact in the report. For us, the
establishment of the association/community of Serb-
majority municipalities is the most important question
and a cornerstone of the protection of the interests of
the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija.
I take this opportunity to call on the representatives
of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in
Pristina to demonstrate goodwill and commitment to
dialogue and to proceed to establish the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities without
delay - in other words, to implement the obligations
they have assumed and carry out the most important
element of the Brussels agreements of 2013, which
was signed by me in my capacity as Prime Minister of
Serbia, by Catherine Ashton on behalf of the European
Union, and by former Prime Minister Hashim Thaci.
This confirms the credibility of the statement made
by Ramush Haradinaj, to the effect that there is no
alternative to dialogue and that direct talks must occur
between peoples and not the political elites.

The stalemate in the dialogue accounted for
the emergence of a whole range of problems in the
implementation of the agreements. Pristina continues
to violate the provisions of the agreement on official
visits and without a valid reason banned entry into
Kosovo and Metohija to Serbia's Minister of Education,
Science and Technological Development, Mr. Mladen
Sareevic', and the Director of the Office for Kosovo and
Metohija Marko Djurie. In addition, the problems in the
sphere of freedom of movement and integrated border
management continue. Internally displaced persons
are treated inadequately by being requested to provide
additional personal data, while their passports, issued
by the Coordination Directorate of the Ministry of the
Interior of the Republic of Serbia, are not recognized
when they attempt to enter the province.

Motivated by a desire to find a lasting solution to
the question of Kosovo and Metohija, the President of
Serbia Aleksandar Vueie has called on the citizens of
Serbia to embark on an internal dialogue, which was
institutionalized by the establishment of a working
group. A long-term solution is a precondition of
Serbia's progress and that of the entire region. We need
a serious, responsible and forward-looking approach in
our relations with Pristina, and we are ready to offer
a soluton that would contribute to regional stability,
political cooperation and economic prosperity. Rather
than be a cause of new divisions, misunderstanding and
conflicts, it will provide an opportunity for a historic
agreement with the Albanian community of Kosovo
and Metohija.

I therefore take this opportunity to call on Security
Council members and Pristina's representatives to
make a joint effort to focus on substantive issues and
on the quest for a lasting and sustainable solution for
Kosovo and Metohija rather than on technical aspects,
such as the dynamic and format of Security Council
meetings. Calls to change the long-standing modality
of informing the Security Council and States Members
of the United Nations about this important issue, at a
time when we are trying to find a lasting solution for
this problem, can only create new divisions within the
Council and deepen the differences between Belgrade
and Pristina. They counterintuitive and not conducive
to the creation of a constructive atmosphere for the
continuation of dialogue.

Serbia's efforts are aimed at protecting, in a
legitimate way, its national and State interests and at
asserting the authority of international law, the Charter
ofthe United Nations and resolution 1244 (1999), which
guarantee Serbia's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Any attempt to resolve any issue in Belgrade-Pristina
relations unilaterally is unacceptable and may negatively
affect the implementation of obligations assumed in the
dialogue. In that context, I stress the disapproval of my
country and of the international community of efforts
to establish a Kosovo armed force. Such unilateral acts
by Pristina are fraught with the potential to destabilize
the security situation in the region and threaten the
process of normalizing relations between Belgrade
and Pristina.

At the same time, Pristina's efforts to promote its
unilateral declaration of independence by applying
for membership in international organizations and,
by the same token, of politicizing their work have
been denounced by many countries, including some
that have recognized the unilateral declaration of
independence. I take this opportunity to thank them
for standing firm in the defence of international law
in order to emphasize that the only right thing to do
in this international context is to discourage Pristina
from seeking admission to international organizations
and to focus on a good-faith dialogue as the only way
to resolve all issues. It is also worth mentioning in that
connection that recent events have shown that States
can and do backtrack and renounce their recognition
of Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence. Sao
Tome and Principe and Suriname have proved that it
is possible.
Before I conclude, let me take this opportunity to
recall that Serbia has warned for the past 10 years of
the danger of unilateral acts and drawn attention to the
fact that recognition of Kosovo's unilateral declaration
of independence may open a Pandora's box of many
other separatist and secessionist movements around the
world. Regrettably, we have seen this happen of late.
Serbia condemns each and every attempt to declare
independence unilaterally in the strongest terms and
unequivocally supports the principle of the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of all States.

In conclusion, I express special thanks to States
that have not recognized the unilateral declaration of
independence of Kosovo for their principled position
and their respect for resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Charter of the United Nations.

