Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation would like to welcome the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Ruud Lubbers, and to express its pleasure at seeing
him here today. We are profoundly grateful for his
comprehensive briefing and for his contribution to the
cause of refugees - seeking solutions to the problems
that they face and sensitizing the international
community to their tragic situation and prompting it to
make further efforts to address the increasing problems
faced by refugees throughout the world.

Syria recognizes the fact that, over the past few
years, an enormous burden has been placed on the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) as a result of the mounting needs
of refugees and internally displaced persons who have
found themselves caught in the crossfire of conflict.
We appreciate the efforts made by the High
Commissioner to meet the needs of such refugees and
internally displaced persons.

The question of refugees is prominent in areas of
conflict all over the world. The resolution of the
refugee problem is an important component of dispute-
settlement processes. Furthermore, the influx of
refugees and the arming of refugees are factors that
contribute to instability in conflict regions. The return
and repatriation of refugees are key factors for
restoring durable peace and stability during the post-
conflict stage.

We must not forget the root causes of conflict in
many parts of the world. Many conflicts have their
roots in the prevailing economic and social conditions,
as well as in the consequences of colonialism or
foreign occupation, as is the case in the Middle East
region and in many countries, especially developing
countries.

Although the problem of refugees in the Middle
East does not fall within the jurisdiction of the
UNHCR, it does fall within the mandate of the United
Nations and the United Nations system as a whole.
Therefore, we must bear in mind the fact that millions
of Palestinian refugees remain displaced, outside their
homeland, after being expelled from their homeland by
armed force in 1948. This has been a chronic
humanitarian problem for the last 54 years.

More recently, displaced persons have been made
refugees by Israel since 1967. These persons include
half a million Syrian citizens. Contrary to logic and all
legislation and relevant United Nations resolutions,
including General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of
1948, these refugees continue to live without hope. In
fact, they continue to face allegations and perverted
logic that are not in accordance with international
standards for dealing with the issue of refugees. For
instance, Israel totally rejects the return of these
refugees to the towns and villages of their homeland,
under the pretext that they are not covered by the
measures adopted by the Council and the United
Nations in general to facilitate the return of all refugees
to their homelands.

Some 1 million Palestinian refugees live in
Jordan; approximately half a million are in Syria, and
about the same number reside in Lebanon. Israel insists
that these refugees have no right to return to their
homeland, while it allows many others to return to
States that are not their countries of origin and to
places that are not their legitimate homes. What is
important here is that these Palestinian refugees refuse
to become residents or naturalized citizens of the
countries where they live; their only hope and fervent
desire is to return to the villages and towns of their
homeland.

Syria agrees completely with all the points made
by the High Commissioner and the remarks made by
many other speakers here today. We are also deeply
concerned over the refugee situation in Africa and
believe that the African refugees, who continue to
suffer the bitterness of displacement and poverty, must
remain a top priority. In addition, we support the High
Commissioner's remarks concerning the need to invest
in areas to which refugees return.

While we express our thanks to the donor
countries and our appreciation for their great efforts to
ensure the return of refugees to their homelands, we
note that the developing countries continue to bear the
brunt of refugees on a global scale. We also call for the
international protection of refugees so that their
voluntary repatriation will be secured, while
recognizing that voluntary repatriation under
conditions of safety and dignity remains the best
solution for refugees.

