Mr. Mulet (spoke in French): I should like to thank
the Security Council for this opportunity to present
the special report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
(8/2013/197). The report contains the conclusions and
recommendations of an assessment mission, which I
led, in Cote d'Ivoire last February.

As is underscored in the report, Cote d'Ivoire has
made good progress since the post-electoral crisis and
has now moved into a new phase of peacebuilding,
achieved after considerable effort. There has been
significant progress in Cote d'Ivoire since our
assessment in February 2012, particularly in recent
months with regard to the security situation in general.

However, the recent instability in the western part
of the country, along the border with Liberia, makes
clear the fragility of the situation. That instability
includes at least one confirmed cross-border attack
that, unfortunately, resulted in a number of deaths
and injuries as well as the displacement of people,
particularly in sensitive areas close to the border.

The report takes note of the decisive direction
taken by President Ouattara to deal with the immediate
security challenges, speed up economic recovery
and initiate sensitive processes such as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, as well as reform of
the security sector.

Although considerable challenges remain, the
security situation in the border area with Liberia has
improved significantly, following efforts at the highest
level accompanied by strengthened cooperation between
Abidjan and Monrovia at several levels, including with
respect to the deployment of their national security
forces along the border. The improvement in bilateral
relations between Cote d'Ivoire and Ghana has also had
a positive impact on the security situation, including
along their common border.

(spoke in English)

Since the report was issued, Cote d'Ivoire and
Liberia have taken further steps to enhance cross-
border cooperation. On 5 April, in Monrovia, a
quadripartite meeting was held that brought together
the Governments of Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia, as well
as UNOCI and the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL). During the meeting, participants agreed
to reinforce coordinated border patrolling, revive the
tripartite refugee commission and hold meetings with
local communities, authorities and traditional chiefs
from both sides of the border. The two Governments'
agreement on such specific deliverables is very positive
and demonstrates the impact of their strengthened
relations and contacts at several levels. UNOCI and
UNMIL will continue to work closely in support of the
respective Governments in addressing border security
challenges.

The overall progress notwithstanding, Cote d'Ivoire
continues to face significant threats to its peace and
security. Some of the major threats identified include
political dynamics and remaining deep divisions; the
continued existence of networks affiliated with the
former regime aimed at destabilizing the Government;
the reported presence of mercenaries, former
combatants and other armed elements along the border
with Liberia; the uncontrolled circulation of weapons;
the slow progress with regard to reconciliation and
security-sector reform; halting progress in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; divisions within and
among the security agencies; continued human rights
violations by formal and informal security agencies
with impunity; and intercommunity violence, land
conflicts and poverty. The incidence of sexual and
gender-based violence remains of particular concern.

Local elections will be held on Sunday, 21 April.
Preparations are under way with UNOCI providing
limited support, including to planning efforts of the
Independent Electoral Commission, as well as enhanced
coordination with, and limited logistical assistance to,
Ivorian security forces to ensure a peaceful conduct of
the elections. The electoral campaign opened on 6 April
and has been conducted relatively peacefully. Both
President Ouattara's Rassemblement des republicains
(RDR) party and the former President Bedie's Parti
democratique de Cote d'Ivoire issued statements
calling on their candidates to respect the Code of Good
Conduct during the campaign period for the local
elections. The former ruling Front populaire ivoirien
(FPI) party chose not to participate in the elections,
in spite of efforts to encourage them to occupy their
legitimate political space.

As outlined in the report before the Council, the
Government's gestures towards the opposition and
its engagement in direct discussions are encouraging.
Agreement was reportedly reached on a number
of issues, including the need to return Forces
republicaines de cote d'Ivoire (FRCI) to barracks;
disarm unprofessional armed elements associated with
the FRCI; equip the gendarmerie and police; protect
opposition stakeholders; and end the illegal exploitation
of land. Differences persist regarding the composition
of the Independent Electoral Commission and the FPI
request for a general amnesty. It will be important that
such discussions continue to pave the way for political
reconciliation, which remains essential to ensuring
lasting peace and stability and to moving critical
processes forward, including security sector reform
and DDR.

Progress on the complex issue of reconciliation and
social cohesion remains slow. The Dialogue, Truth and
Reconciliation Commission is struggling to complete
its work and produce concrete results by 30 September,
when its mandate expires. The national authorities have
taken some steps to improve social cohesion, but local
authorities lack sufficient resources to support such
processes at their level.

As highlighted in the report before members,
progress on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration is essential to establish lasting peace
and stability. DDR is a top priority for President
Ouattara's Government. The establishment of the DDR
Authority and the commencement of DDR operations
are encouraging steps. To date, more than 4,000 former
combatants have been disarmed and demobilized,
some of whom are in the process of being employed in
public-service positions. There is an expectation that
progress will now accelerate more steadily. Following
verification efforts by the Government, the estimated
caseload of former combatants has been revised, from
110,000 to 64,000 combatants from both sides and
among militias meeting the eligibility criteria.

In spite of the endorsement of the national security
sector reform strategy by the National Security Council
last year, the process remains at the planning stage.
The reform of the security sector, while sensitive, is
essential to ensure that Cote d'Ivoire has republican
national security forces and a police and gendarmerie
that fully assume their law-and-order responsibilities,
ensure a secure and stable environment and protect
civilian populations. It will be important that concrete
steps be taken to fully implement the national security
sector reform strategy.

In the light of those challenges and threats, the
presence of UNOCI remains necessary, particularly
with regard to its core priorities, namely, the protection
of civilians, supporting security sector reform and
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of former combatants, as well as to help address
border security challenges. However, adjustments
to its structure, strengths and priorities are needed
to meet the evolving situation on the ground. The
Secretary-General therefore recommended reducing
the authorized military strength of UNOCI, as
previously decided by the Security Council, through
the repatriation of one battalion by 31 July. At the same
time, he recommended a further progressive reduction
of two additional battalions by mid-2015. No reductions
are recommended for the UNOCI police component.

Consequently, ongoing discussions with the
Government on the development of benchmarks to
measure and track progress towards the achievement
of long-term stability in Cote d'Ivoire are an important
opportunity for the Government and the United Nations
to identify jointly minimum conditions that would allow
UNOCI to begin drawing down. Those benchmarks
will be included in the next report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Cote d'Ivoire.
(spoke in French)

In conclusion, I should like to underscore the need
to bring to justice those accused of having committed
serious crimes, without regard for their status or
political affiliation, so as to put an end to the vicious
cycle of impunity and to build a culture of responsibility.
There is also a need to step up efforts to promote
reconciliation among communities and to address the
underlying causes of conflict in the country.

