Mr. Mammadyarov (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to join others in congratulating Germany on
its successful presidency of the Security Council this
month and to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this timely meeting on an important topic. We are
also grateful to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
the Secretary General of the League of Arab States,
Mr. Nabil Elaraby, for their briefings.

Today's meeting is taking place at an important
time in the sense that the Middle East region is
experiencing historic changes that testify to the desire
and determination of its societies to shape their destiny.
The transformation process has yielded encouraging
trends towards ensuring respect for human rights
and guaranteeing economic and social well-being
for everyone. At the same time, there is an obvious
need for an in-depth analysis of the root causes and
ultimate implications of this complex process for the
regional and global security architecture. While the
international response to developments in the Middle
East has varied in its essence and intensity, the primary
role in maintaining adequate international engagement
belongs to international and regional organizations,
particularly to the United Nations and the League of
Arab States.

It should be noted that not all regional organizations
can boast of their ability and political will to understand
the root causes of security problems and to contribute
effectively to their resolution. The League ofArab States
has proved to be one of those regional organizations that
are able to take the lead in promoting peace, security
and stability in the region. In that regard, we are pleased
to see that cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States is motivated by the common
objective of enhancing peace and security and helping
the States of the region through this difficult period of
their history. Their combined engagement and presence
have been instrumental in carrying out important tasks
in such areas as conflict prevention and resolution,
crisis response and management, and the fight against
terrorism and organized crime.
Against the background of regional fragilities,
which go hand in hand with the challenges of the
transformations experienced in the region, maintaining
the high profile and ongoing active involvement of
the United Nations and the League of Arab States has
acquired increased importance. Therefore, mutually
reinforcing cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States has become ever more
essential for maintaining peace and security in the
region and working out sound strategies to assist the
States in transition.

The role of the League of Arab States as an insider
in the region is particularly valuable in connecting
regional specificities with the global dimension by
interacting with the United Nations, its specialized
agencies and field presences. The United Nations and
the League of Arab States should further galvanize
their efforts to achieve the best results for the States
and peoples of the region.

In that regard, we commend the appointment of the
Joint Special Representative of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States for Syria as an important
step forward in the cooperation between the two

organizations, and we reiterate our full support for his
activities.

The international community must continue to be
consistent in its efforts to facilitate solutions to regional
crises and conflicts based on the norms and principles
of international law and relevant Security Council
resolutions, as required by the United Nations Charter.
Azerbaijan strongly supports that approach in working
to resolve protracted conflicts in different parts of the
world.

While recognizing the historic opportunities that
recent waves of transition have opened up for the Middle
East, we should not neglect the long-standing security
problems. Solving them is a prerequisite for maintaining
peace, stability and sustainable development in the
region. All stakeholders in the Middle East should
regard the latest developments as a unique chance
and an urgent call to take courageous steps towards
achieving tangible results in the Middle East peace
process. A comprehensive, just and lasting settlement
is long overdue in that conflict, which undermines the
security, stability and well-being of the entire region
and has an impact stretching well beyond regional
boundaries. We consider it essential for the Security
Council and the League of Arab States to cooperate on
this issue of paramount importance to all of us.

Once again, we cannot but express our deep concern
over the recent escalation provoked by blasphemy
against Islam. We strongly condemn all assaults against
religions. At the same time, attacks on civilians, in
particular diplomatic personnel, cannot be justified in
any circumstances.

We would truly like to believe that, irrespective
of all the challenges and difficulties, the pursuit of
peace and progress in the Middle East will never be
abandoned, and that the endeavours of its peoples to
build stable, secure and democratic States will continue
to be bolstered by the international community. In this
context, we are confident that continued engagement
by the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
together with strengthened cooperation between them,
consistent with Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter, will effectively contribute to peace and
security in the region. As a member of the Security
Council and an observer to the League of Arab States,
Azerbaijan will continue its utmost efforts to that end.

In conclusion, I would like to express our full
support for today's draft presidential statement, aimed
at helping to develop effective cooperation between the
two organizations.

