I would like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Ms. Noura Ghazi for their briefings. Looking at north-western Syria, we express growing concern about the recent ceasefire violations and military build-up of the Syrian army around Idlib. In order to avoid civilian casualties and another wave of mass displacement, preventing military escalation must remain the Council's priority. Continued fighting in the Idlib area may also accelerate the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), as it limits the work of humanitarian aid organizations. It is unfortunate that we are hearing of few new developments in the political process. We call on the parties to set a date for the meeting of the Constitutional Committee as soon as possible. We reiterate the need to implement resolution 2254 (2015). The plan of the Syrian regime to hold parliamentary elections in July is in clear violation of the road map set out in that resolution. A credible and inclusive political process must be in place before any such actions. As Ms. Ghazi described, an important step towards national reconciliation is solving the situation of detainees in Syria. We call on the Syrian Government to abide by the international human rights law and relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2139 (2014), and to release immediately all arbitrarily detained persons, particularly women and children. Forced disappearances must stop. Unfortunately, past announcements of general amnesties have not led to any significant releases of arbitrarily detained Syrians. We remind the Syrian Government and its allies that the European Union (EU) will not provide aid to Syria's reconstruction before a genuine political process is in place. I would also like to stress that the current economic crisis in Syria is not the outcome of international sanctions, but rather a result of widespread corruption and lack of good governance. The difficult economic situation in neighbouring Lebanon also greatly affects Syria. Finally, these points will be repeated in two weeks during the fourth Brussels Conference to support the future of Syria, convened by the EU. We welcome the inspiring video-teleconference on accountability for crimes committed in Syria, held by the EU within the framework of that Conference on 8 June in Geneva. Participants included EU member States; human rights activists; the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011; the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons; the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, and others trying to shed light on Syrian rights violations and bring perpetrators to justice. The Security Council should also consider this kind of holistic approach to accountability.
