Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Mr. President, let us join
others in expressing our deepest condolences to you,
Sir, and to the people of the Russian Federation. Please
accept our heartfelt condolences for the loss of
innocent lives in the two plane crashes in your country
yesterday.

I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Jean
Arnault, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his briefing to the Council on the current
situation in Afghanistan.

President Karzai has just completed a two-day
official Visit to Islamabad, in which he held wide-
ranging talks on a number of issues with President
Musharraf and Prime Minister Chaudhry Shujaat
Hussain. At the end of the talks, President Karzai said
that the outcome of that discussion was the
reaffirmation of brotherly ties between the two
countries and the reaffirmation of our joint struggle
against terrorism. President Musharraf, for his part,
stated that anybody trying to carry out terrorist
activities in Afghanistan or to disrupt the election
process will not be allowed to do so from Pakistan. We
will act against them, he declared. The Pakistan army
is operating very strongly against Al Qaeda. We know
that they are on the run; they are dispersed and
displaced from a number of valleys which were their
sanctuaries.

Thus, Pakistan is sparing no effort to assist
Afghanistan in all possible fields, and especially
security. As we have heard from Mr. Arnault, security
in Afghanistan remains a major concern. We agree with
that assessment. Without security, there can be no
stability, no progress in the political process and no
reconstruction or recovery.

Afghanistan now faces a major challenge in the
forthcoming elections. Pakistan attaches great
importance to this important landmark of the Bonn
process. It is equally important that these elections are
free, fair and credible. While we are pleased to note
that some 10 million Afghan voters have been
registered, we remain concerned that sufficient
registration has not taken place in the south and south-
eastern parts of Afghanistan, mainly due to security
concerns. At the same time, we remain concerned that
vested interests in powerful warlords will seek to
undermine or unfairly influence the electoral process.
Therefore we believe it is of the utmost importance for
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to
provide early, effective and enhanced security for the
elections throughout the country.

Pakistan is extending full cooperation and support
to the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), the International Organization
for Migration (IOM) and the Government of
Afghanistan in their preparations for the out-of-country
participation of Afghan refugees in Pakistan in the
9 October presidential elections. To this effect,
Pakistan has signed a memorandum of understanding
with UNAMA and the Afghan Government on 20 July.
We have also pledged $5 million for that purpose.
Currently, Pakistan is facilitating the movement of
UNAMA and IOM. personnel to various refugee camps
located in the north-west frontier province and
Baluchistan.

While we are pleased that the Afghan refugees in
Pakistan will be participating in the presidential
elections, we hope that they will also have an
opportunity to participate in future elections for the
parliament. These people are Afghan citizens and, as
such, they retain their democratic rights to vote in any
future Afghan elections. Those Afghans who are
currently in Pakistan are not economic migrants, but
refugees who fled war and suffering in their home
country. We hope that, ultimately, ways will be found
to return and repatriate all Afghans currently in
Pakistan to their places of origin in Afghanistan.

The threats to Afghanistan's security lie inside
Afghanistan, and we agree that these threats arise from
faction leaders, from criminal lords and from
extremists, including Al Qaeda and the Taliban. But as
President Karzai himself stated on 12 July, the warlords
and their private armies are the greatest threat to
Afghanistan's security, even more than the Taliban.
An article that appeared in the journal Foreign
Afiairs three months ago, by Kathy Gannon, who
knows Afghanistan well, stated the following:

"The warlords have now ruled the country for two
years and Afghanistan seems to be degenerating
into a sort of narco-State, which could spin out of
control. Not only are the warlords complicit in
drug-running and corruption but, according to
Afghanistan's Human Rights Committee, they are
also guilty of abusing and harassing the
population. The warlords have stolen people's
homes, arbitrarily arrested their enemies and
tortured them in private jails."

The primary mistake, in our View, has been to
rely on the warlords and factional forces to provide
stability in Afghanistan. The result of this mistake is
the creation of security vacuums in large parts of
Afghanistan, to which the authority of the central
Government does not extend and where lawlessness,
corruption and drug trafficking thrive. This has
alienated a large part of Afghanistan's society and
created the conditions for extremists and others to
undermine the political process.

The insecurity in the south and south-east is not
difficult to understand. There is, first, alienation due to
political exclusion and the activities of drug rings and
criminals. These are similar circumstances to those that
existed in 1992 and 1993, when the Taliban emerged.

There is also no security presence in the south or
south-east. Coalition forces are engaged mainly in anti-
terrorist activities. The International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) is deployed in Kabul and
Kondoz but has no real presence to provide real
security in the south. The Afghan National Army itself
is small - 13,500 troops at the moment - and is not
in a position to cope with security challenges.
Moreover, in the south, it suffers from what I would
call an ethnic deficit or imbalance. Until the Afghan
national forces are in a position to provide credible
security, it will continue to fall on the international
forces - and in particular on ISAF - to step into the
breech and to create circumstances for security,
particularly in the south and south-east. It is our View
that, without a substantial increase in ISAF's strength
and its robust deployment throughout Afghanistan,
there is likely to be no disarmament and no credible
demobilization or reintegration of factional forces.

I would like to ask Mr. Jean Arnault how the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) reached the conclusion that the factional
militias now number around 50,000, instead of the
100,000 previously estimated. Does that reduction
result from the exclusion of militias attached to certain
members of the Government, or has some other form of
calculation been resorted to that has changed the
figure? In our view, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) will proceed when all the factional
leaders accept the demobilization and genuine
disarmament of their militias, and not their recapping
under so-called national commanders. That will not
change the nature of the militias.

As the security situation continues to deteriorate
and the warlords and criminals wreak havoc, conditions
very similar to those that prevailed in 1992-1993 are
being recreated. That is when the Taliban emerged.
Chaos and insecurity in Afghanistan are once again
breeding extremism. Unfortunately, instead of
addressing those problems head on, there are some in
certain quarters who are seeking to shift the blame for
the insecurity in Afghanistan onto Pakistan. There
seems to be a compulsion on the part of some,
including certain individuals, who wish to find
scapegoats for failing to address the real security
threats in Afghanistan. Unfortunately as well, even
some UNAMA officials seem to be playing into their
hands, or playing their game. Pakistan has taken
serious note of that, and we will look for assurances of
objectivity and impartiality on the part of the United
Nations.

Pakistan has followed a strict hands-off approach
to internal developments in Afghanistan. We are
extending our full cooperation in the war against
terrorism. Our agreement on good-neighbourly
relations, the memorandum of understanding on
security and narcotics and the functioning of the
Pakistan-Afghanistan-United States tripartite
commission are clear manifestations of our
commitment and of our policy. Pakistan has undertaken
the following concrete measures in counter-terrorism to
interdict suspects and to check infiltration across the
Pakistan-Afghanistan border.

We have deployed 75,000 troops and established
800 posts and a number of forts along the border with
Afghanistan. We have absorbed no-go areas in other
tribal areas in South Waziristan, Khyber and Mohmend.
We have established a quick-reaction force to deal with
terrorists. We carry out aerial surveillance of the border
and use helicopter-borne troops. We have fenced off a
25-kilometre stretch of the border and installed search
lights and video cameras at border crossings. We have
established an interdiction force in Baluchistan to
prevent infiltration. In addition, the operations of the
Pakistan army in South Waziristan Agency continue.
Our forces have killed 165 terrorists and militants,
including Commander Nek Muhammad, and arrested
several hundred others. Our forces are operating in the
most inhospitable and difficult terrain. We have lost
100 of our personnel in this operation.

Pakistan is sustaining its efforts despite technical
capacity deficits in equipment, unmanned air vehicles,
surveillance equipment, attack helicopters, night Vision
devices and long-range communications systems. We
have also persisted in this campaign in the face of
fierce opposition from certain extremist groups within
Pakistan. There can therefore be no doubt as to our
commitment to wipe out the terrorist menace from our
region. Our commitment was acknowledged yesterday
by President Karzai when he spoke about the
reaffirmation of the brotherly ties between Pakistan and
Afghanistan and "the reaffirmation of our joint struggle
against terrorism".

Security is also essential for reconstruction and
development in Afghanistan. But reconstruction will
also improve the prospects for security. Pakistan has
pledged $100 million for Afghanistan's reconstruction.
Those funds are being used in sectors identified by the
Afghans themselves. Projects are under way for the
development of infrastructure, schools and hospitals;
the construction of Turkham-Jalalabad road, which will
be completed in July; and the Chaman-Kandahar rail
link. Pakistan is also assisting Afghanistan in capacity-
building for important State institutions in law
enforcement, diplomacy, the judiciary, customs, postal
services, taxation, banking, finance, audit and
accounts. During President Karzai's visit, we agreed to
boost trade further from the $1 billion at which it now
stands and we are working together with Afghanistan
and Turkmenistan to build a gas pipeline, which holds
great potential for the whole region.

We remain concerned, however, that despite the
substantive pledges made both at Tokyo and Berlin,
Afghanistan continues to receive far less reconstruction
than what it requires. Even if pledges from both those
conferences are realized, Afghanistan will still receive
far less per capita assistance than that provided in
similar circumstances provided in other crisis
situations.

Two years ago, during President Musharraf's first
visit to Kabul, he told President Karzai, "Your plan is
our plan". That still remains Pakistan's policy. A
peaceful, stable and prosperous Afghanistan is in the
best interests of Pakistan. To achieve that objective, we
are doing, and we will continue to do, all that we can,
including securing the long, difficult and inhospitable
border between our two countries.

However, there should be no attempt to underplay
the enormity of the internal security and political
problems in Afghanistan. Nor should we be complacent
about the insufficient levels of security in
reconstruction support deployed by the international
community in Afghanistan. Much more needs to be
done by the international community in all the areas
affecting security and reconstruction. Shifting the
blame, finding scapegoats for failures in Afghanistan
and asking those who are already doing more to do
even more is unfair and unacceptable and will be
ultimately self-defeating.

