The President: I thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.

Recently, a Dutch photographer working with
Save the Children published a photo album featuring
48 Syrian children, all seven years old. Those photos
were school portraits, like we all had taken when we
were young. The children were born in Syria, but they
had to flee. They are as old as the Syrian war, so they
have never seen their country at peace. Their memories
of their homeland are fading. Sometimes they cannot
remember their country at all, nor their family members
left behind. But by giving those young children a public
face, the photographer has tried to restore some of the
dignity sacrificed to a war in which all humanity seems
lost. I have here a photo of Nour.

Those children were relatively lucky; they were
able to escape. At the same time, inside Syria, during
seven years of war, thousands of children have been
killed. I myself am a father, and I am certainly not
the only parent in this Chamber. Images of children
affected by war should leave no one unmoved. Despite
any differences between us, we should at least have one
thing in common: the belief that protecting children
should come first. Yet, such protection is lacking.
The Syrian crisis is, above all, a protection crisis - a
grave violation of the long-established norm to protect
civilians and their belongings in the time of war.

Together, we -the international community-have
expressed our determination to prevent conflict and
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
And where conflict cannot be prevented, we have
agreed to regulate the conduct of warfare. One of the
very first steps to that end was taken in Russia, almost

150 years ago. In Saint Petersburg, it was decided to
forbid weapons that cause unnecessary suffering. Since
those first steps, the body ofinternational humanitarian
law has grown considerably, including through the
adoption of the Hague and Geneva Conventions. The
imperative of those laws has always been to protect
civilians in conflict, to spare them from disaster, save
them from harm and respect their dignity.

Sadly, what we see in Syria today is the exact
opposite. Every day, many are showing total disregard
for civilians.

In eastern Ghouta, the Syrian regime and its allies,
including Russia, have trapped hundreds of thousands of
civilians and are relentlessly continuing their offensive.
The United Nations has reported air strikes on densely
populated areas, blatant attacks targeting hospitals and
medical personnel, the use of starvation as a weapon of
war and the use of chemical weapons. Many innocent
children, women and men are suffering. They should
be protected. Yet instead, families are seeing their
homes destroyed, their loved ones killed and their
dignity shattered. In Afrin, the effects of the Turkey-
led offensive are clear for all to see: a worsening of the
already precarious humanitarian situation, with more
than 160,000 displaced people and a further obstacle to
efforts to fight the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS). I ask Turkey not to extend its military activities
to other border regions in Syria or Iraq.

Four weeks ago, the Council adopted resolution 2401
(2018). It is telling that in 2018, the Council should need
to spell out that warring parties should immediately lift
all sieges in Syria and grant unimpeded humanitarian
access to those in acute need. Those are by no means
exceptional demands. They are basic obligations under
international humanitarian law, developed over decades
to instil minimum standards of human decency in
warfare. Not even the presence ofterrorists is an excuse
for disregarding those standards. It is humiliating
that the Council is unable to enforce those minimum
standards. If the Council is not willing or able to do it,
who is? With all that in mind, we should not forget that
the responsibility, and indeed the obligation, to execute

the Council's decisions lies with individual Member
States. So what should be done?

First, we should reaffirm these norms and enforce
the relevant resolutions. We call on all parties to the
Syrian conflict - including the Syrian regime, Russia,
Iran, Turkey and armed opposition groups - to respect
and implement the Council's decisions. Secondly, we
must strengthen resolution 2401 (2018), with United
Nations monitoring of the implementation of the
ceasefire and with full access for fact-finding missions
to sites and collective shelters housing internally
displaced persons. These missions are ready to go; we
need their impartial information. Thirdly, with regard to
accountability, if there is to be any credible, stable and
lasting peace in Syria, the current culture of impunity
must end. All those guilty of crimes must be brought
to justice. The perpetrators of crimes, including ISIS
and Al-Qaida, must know that they are being watched,
followed and identified. They must know that files are
being compiled with a view to prosecuting them for
crimes that may include genocide. They must know that
one day they will be held accountable.

We urge all States to increase their support for the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, which aims to ensure that
information about serious crimes is collected, analysed
and preserved for future prosecutions. The Netherlands
again calls on all Council members to support referring
the situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.

What will become ofthe children in the photographs
I mentioned? Will they one day be able to return to
Syria? Like all children, they long for a normal life,
for stability, for safety. The Syrian regime believes in a
military solution. But there is none. There are no winners
in this war. But it is clear who is losing - the ordinary
people of Syria. In these most extreme circumstances
we commend the incredible courage and perseverance
of the humanitarian aid workers.

It is up to us to restore credibility to the Council.
It is up to us to ensure a negotiated political process,
in which all Syrians and other relevant actors are
represented. And it is up to us to end the agony and
restore dignity and humanity to the people of Syria.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements.

