Mr. Martin: The Council is being asked to
mandate a larger United Nations mission in Timor-
Leste after successive downsizing - from the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor to
06-46776
the United Nations Mission in East Timor to the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste and its previously
proposed successor office. This might be seen as a
reversion to an earlier stage of United Nations
engagement with Timor-Leste, but I want to stress that
that is not the case. Timor-Leste is today a sovereign
State that struggled hard for its right to self-
determination and its independence. Its second
constitutional Government, headed by Prime Minister
Jose Ramos-Horta, represents a political compromise
forged by Timorese to manage the most serious crisis
faced by the new State and to steer the country towards
its first post-independence parliamentary and
presidential elections.

The international support provided to the young
institutions of Timor-Leste has achieved a great deal.
Increasingly, it is being provided not only through the
successive missions but by United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes and by bilateral and multilateral
donors. The proposals in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2006/628) would not reverse that process.
What they envisage is a more effectively coordinated
partnership between Timor-Leste and the international
community: a compact, which will be Timorese-led, to
ensure that its Government's own programmes, funded
by its growing budgetary resources, are complemented
in the most helpful ways by international assistance
and advice. The compact should ensure too that the
international community, in providing that assistance
and advice, does so in a context of coordination and
complementarity, not one of confusion or competition
among donors. Within the United Nations mission
itself only a small group of civilian advisers would
promote that coordination, principally in areas most
crucial to the mission's key roles: the governance of
the security sector, the administration of justice and the
functioning of democratic institutions.

Assisting and ensuring the credibility of the 2007
elections will be a central task for the new mission's
first year. But we are by now well aware that even the
most successful elections are only one element of
building a democratic State. We are aware too that the
time-scale for developing institutional capacity,
especially in areas such as policing and the justice
system, is a long one.

The central failure revealed by the recent crisis
has been in the security sector, and the reconstitution
of the police service of Timor-Leste is the core task
requested and proposed for the new mission, together
06-46776

with executive international policing in the interim.
Regrettably, the task is a substantial one, because the
diagnosis undertaken by our assessment mission made
clear the weakness of the police throughout the
country, and not only in Dili, where it is so keenly felt
by internally displaced families today. But it is a task
that must also be seen in a wider context. A
fundamental review of the whole security sector is
required to clarify the roles of the defence force and
the police in relation to each other, together with
strengthened Ministries of the Interior and Defence, to
ensure sound institutional development and civilian
oversight.

The challenge to the justice system as it confronts
serious crimes, old and new, is greater than ever. The
role of both official institutions and non-governmental
organizations to protect human rights needs further
strengthening. Our proposals would ensure that
international assistance to those key related tasks is
coordinated in one pillar of the new mission.

Timor-Leste's new Government, aided by the
Church and civil society, is embarking upon the twin
challenges of dialogue across political divisions and of
community reconciliation, which must address societal
tensions, in particular between those from the west and
those from the east of the country. The new mission
must be ready to support that process.

The demand for accountability for those
responsible for crimes committed in the course of the
crisis, as part of the necessary basis for reconciliation,
is a strong one. The crucial work of the Independent
Special Commission of Inquiry will provide an
objective starting point. Some have drawn a connection
with the unfinished business of both justice and
reconciliation for the serious crimes of 1999 and
before. The proposals for the new mission incorporate
a role in assisting with the implementation of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General's separate
report (S/2006/580) on justice and reconciliation.

The moments when Timor-Leste is in the
international spotlight are rare and fleeting. But in each
of its discussions of the response of the United Nations
to the recent crisis, members of the Council have been
united in their willingness to assist the country at a
time of difficulty. Today I urge the Council to send a
strong message to the people of Timor-Leste that the
renewed determination of the international community
to stand by them will indeed be a sustained
3
commitment, by supporting this and all other
recommendations set out in the Secretary-General's
report for a new mission - which correspond, I
believe, to the appeal of Timor-Leste's Government
and people.

