Mr. Simonovie (Croatia): We welcome the
presence of Macedonia's Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Kerim, at this meeting.

The Government of the Republic of Croatia
condemns the extremist attacks and expresses concerns
about the possible escalation of violent conflict in
Macedonia. Accordingly, the Croatian Foreign Ministry
issued a statement yesterday voicing concern that such
attacks are destabilizing the security situation in
Macedonia and impairing the process of normalization
in Kosovo, thereby leading to the deterioration of
relations in the entire region.

We regret deeply the loss of life resulting from
these terrorist acts. We condemn the incidents along the
northern border of Macedonia as well as the threats
directed at representatives of the international
community in the area. At the same time, we salute the
restraint demonstrated by the authorities of the
Republic of Macedonia. Unified and determined action
on the part of the international community to prevent
any further deterioration of the situation in the
region - still corrupted by the negative legacy of the
former Milosevic regime - remains indispensable.

The sufferings of the Albanian population in
Kosovo should not be forgotten, but violence only
breeds more violence. Together with their brethren
elsewhere in the region, the Albanians in Macedonia
must strive, as the majority of them do, to protect their
rights and interests through democratic institutions. In
such efforts they enjoy our full support.

The Republic of Croatia wishes to reiterate that
its primary interest and commitment remains the
maintenance of peace and overall security in the area,
for the benefit of all citizens of Macedonia as well as
all peoples of South-eastern Europe.

It remains very important, for the long-term
stability of South-eastern Europe, to clarify the tragic
events of the recent past, to establish responsibility for
them and to break the cycle of impunity by punishing
the persons responsible, first of all Mr. Milosevic, for
committing war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide. At the same time, it is absolutely crucial to
depart from the tradition of using violence to achieve
political aims and to accept dialogue as the only
legitimate means for resolving the remaining
differences and disputes.

