Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, on behalf of my delegation, I should like to
thank the delegation of the United States for its
initiative in organizing this important debate on
securing borders against illicit cross-border trafficking
and movement. I should also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his detailed briefing. The theme
chosen by your delegation, Madam President, involves
the entire international community. We appreciate the
perspective from which your delegation has chosen to
holistically take up the issue of securing borders in the
face of various cross-border challenges that pose a
threat to international peace and security. This debate
also provides an opportunity for all delegations
participating today to undertake a broad and
constructive exchange of views on this important issue.

The United Nations was established to ensure the
maintenance of international peace and security. In line
with their respective competencies, the problems posed
by illicit cross-border trafficking and movement have
been addressed by various bodies through conventions,
protocols, mechanisms, action plans and sanctions
regimes. Today there is no doubt that the work of the
United Nations, along with the steps taken by Member
States at the national, regional, subregional and
interregional basis, has made it possible to better
secure our borders.

We must acknowledge, however, that in this new
era of globalization the various networks involved in
illicit cross-border trafficking and movement have
unfortunately been able to benefit from the growing
interconnectedness of our world and to evade our
collective efforts to combat them. The increasing
fluidity at the international level has made it possible
for those various networks - whether they are
associated with trafficking in weapons, natural and
mineral resources, drugs or human beings - to link up
in non-transparent ways and set up mutually supporting
alliances that sometimes involve terrorist networks,
armed groups and separatist movements.

That state of affairs is especially worrying in that
such interconnectedness is not just a mere potential
threat, but a reality in various regions of the world. It is
unfortunately a reality on the African continent. The
Sahelo-Saharan and Atlantic coastal regions have been
especially affected, as has the Gulf of Guinea. The
recent developments in the Sahel must be the focus of
our attention, as they illustrate the impact that the
tangle of networks involved in illicit cross-border
trafficking and movement could have on the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the countries of
those regions, as well as on international peace and
security.

Combating this threat must first and foremost be
a concern for Member States, which must in a
sovereign manner identify and take the necessary
appropriate measures to secure their borders while
observing their international obligations. Given the
nature of this cross-border challenge, our efforts must
also be both collective and effective.

Securing borders also entails heightened dialogue
and cooperation at the bilateral level, as well as the
subregional, inter-regional and international levels, on
the basis of the principles of solidarity and shared
responsibility to address the underlying causes that
make possible the continuation and development of
illicit cross-border trafficking and movement. The goal
should be to provide a concrete, tailored and
sustainable response.

The issue of assistance is also crucial. In that
regard, it is essential that the international community
demonstrate greater solidarity by providing effective
support to States that desire such assistance in
strengthening their capacities to secure their borders,
all the while respecting their national sovereignty. It is
also important to support those States in their efforts to
combat the various types of cross-border movement by
putting an end to the safe havens enjoyed by networks.

To that end, the United Nations and the various
existing cooperation and coordination mechanisms
have a key role to play.

The Kingdom of Morocco has always been an
active member of the international community in
combating this scourge. We have constantly called
attention to the danger posed by the growing
interconnectedness of illicit cross-border trafficking
and movement in our region. It is in that spirit that
Morocco hosted the launching of important
international initiatives, in particular the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the African
Initiative for the Atlantic, which aim to provide a
coordinated and concerted response to illicit cross-
border trafficking and movement and to facilitate
cooperation and the exchange of best practices.

Morocco has also organized numerous events
dealing with various aspects of the phenomenon we are
addressing today. I should also like to take this
opportunity to inform the members of the Council that,
before the end of this year, Morocco will host the
holding of the second meeting of the regional
ministerial conference on border security in North
African and Sahel countries.

We should all continue to work together to
combat illicit cross-border trafficking and movement
and the various networks involved, as well as to ensure
that the legal instruments and mechanisms that have
been established are able to respond to the evolving
nature and scope of the dangers they pose. The United
Nations, its Member States and the various
organizations concerned should coordinate their efforts
and demonstrate genuine political will to continue,
update and adapt the international norms and the
mechanisms that have been established in order to face
this phenomenon.

In conclusion, my delegation takes note of the
proposal to request the Secretary-General to prepare a
report on illicit cross-border trafficking and movement.
We hope that the report will contribute to the
Organization's efforts to provide a collective response
that can help us to effectively overcome the challenges
we face.

