Ms. Mueller: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
challenging humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine.
Five months ago, I briefed the Council (see S/PV.8270),
together with Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo. Today
I regrettably advise that millions of men, women
and children continue to face dire humanitarian
consequences in Europe's forgotten armed conflict, and
that the effects are worsening as the situation becomes
more protracted.

More than 3,000 civilians have been killed and
up to 9,000 have been injured since the conflict began
in 2014. This crisis affects the highest proportion
of elderly people - more than 30 per cent - in the
world. A 400-plus kilometre contact line divides the
area of hostilities. The households close to that line
live in fear of shelling, sniper fire and pervasive mine
contamination. People's access to basic services is
constantly disrupted. There is extensive damage to
homes, hospitals, schools and other critical civilian
infrastructure. In 2018, more than 70 serious incidents
have disrupted the vital supply of water to millions of
people. Risks from communicable diseases are rising
due to the water shortage, extensive damage to health
facilities, lack of access to health care and extremely
low immunization rates. It is imperative that parties
to the conflict respect civilians and civilian objects,
consistent with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. Civilians are not a target.

The contact line has dramatically altered the lives
of millions of civilians. People are separated from
their families, services and livelihoods. In October
2017, I met people making the arduous journey at the
Mayorsk checkpoint. Since then we have seen more
than 1.1 million civilian crossings per month through
the five official contact points. Half of the people who
cross are over 60 years old. Most are women. They
are regularly exposed to harm as they wait in long
lines with limited facilities amid hostilities. So far
50 civilians have died or been injured while crossing
this year. I welcome the efforts of the Government to
improve crossing conditions, but I appeal for more to be
done on both sides. Essential services at crossing points
require urgent improvement, especially water and
sanitation facilities. Heating points are an acute need as
winter approaches. Addressing the specific needs of the
elderly, especially the long-standing barriers for them to
be able to easily access their pensions, remains critical.

So far this year more than 100 civilians have been
killed or injured due to extensive mine and unexploded
ordnance contamination. On 30 September, an
explosive device killed three children and seriously
injured another close to the contact line. Earlier this
month, two workers were injured by a land mine when
trying to restore vital water supplies to 45,000 people.
For three years running, Ukraine has had the highest
anti-vehicle mine casualties in the world. I implore all
parties to immediately cease using mines, including in
populated areas and close to civilian structures. They
must respect international humanitarian law. Ukraine
also requires an appropriate national mine action
framework and coordination mechanisms.

Over 3.5 million people will require humanitarian
assistance and protection in 2019. Yet funding for
humanitarian action has steadily decreased over the
years. The 2018 humanitarian response plan, which
requires $187 million, is only 32 per cent funded. That
is simply not enough. Without adequate funds, food,
health care, water and sanitation and other life-saving
assistance cannot be provided. Humanitarians can
and do deliver. So far in 2018, the United Nations,
the International Committee of the Red Cross and
non-governmental organizations have assisted more
than 1 million people on both sides of the contact line.
While humanitarian access is often unpredictable,
particularly in the non-Government-controlled areas,
today we have slightly more access than before. Since
July 2018, humanitarians have rapidly scaled up their
efforts to deliver essential humanitarian assistance and
protection services to the people in the non- Government-
controlled areas. An allocation of $6 million from the
Central Emergency Response Fund was an important
catalyst. I appeal to donors to increase their support
for consolidating these humanitarian gains, especially
with Ukraine's harsh winter fast approaching.

I would like to conclude by commending the
Government of Ukraine's efforts to implement a
national strategy and action plan in support of its
1.5 million internally displaced persons. I also welcome
the recent adoption of the law on the legal status of
missing persons. I look forward to its implementation,
which should facilitate the search and identification of
missing persons and provide support to family members.
I reaffirm the commitment of the United Nations and its
partners to supporting Ukraine's displaced and conflict-
affected people across the spectrum of emergency and
early recovery assistance.

I thank you once again, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the critical
humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine.

