Mr. Rowe (Australia): This open debate presents a
timely opportunity to examine the situation in Burundi and
how the international community can respond effectively to
recent developments there.

Australia is seriously concerned about recent
developments in Burundi. It holds grave fears that unless
the parties to the conflict, with the support of the
international community, can reach a negotiated settlement,
the cycle of violence will escalate, causing violence and
bloodshed on a horrific scale and further upheaval and
human misery throughout Burundi and the Great Lakes
region.

We urge all sectors of Burundi's population to engage
in constructive dialogue to bring about a peaceful, durable
solution to the conflict in Burundi and to achieve, without
delay, the restoration of democratic institutions and
processes.

In particular, Australia calls upon all sides to exercise
restraint, thereby creating an environment which allows for
their fears to be put aside and for the restoration of
confidence throughout the community. Australia urges the
parties to the conflict to recognize that continued violence
will not bring peace to Burundi.

Australia commends the efforts of countries in the
region to find ways to restore peace and democracy in
Burundi. My Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Alexander
Downer, attended the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
summit in Yaounde from 8-10 July 1996, as a guest. He
was impressed by the determination of African leaders to
work for a solution to the situation in Burundi.

In welcoming the regional initiative, the Australian
Government emphasizes the importance of implementing
measured responses which, as well as seeking to bring
about a political solution, ensure that the basic needs of the
population can be met.

Unimpeded provision of, and access to, humanitarian
assistance is imperative if the situation in Burundi is to be
stabilized. Further human displacement will have serious
ramifications for peace and security throughout the Great

 

Lakes region and its prevention must be regarded as a
priority by the international community. Should further
upheaval lead to an exodus of refugees from Burundi, the
international community must be prepared to come to
their assistance.
Australia continues to support the Mwanza peace
process, facilitated by former Tanzanian President
Nyerere, and urges the parties involved to resume
negotiations under this process. While the hurdles are
significant, the mediation efforts of Mr. Nyerere must be
given every chance to succeed, representing as they do
the most realistic opportunity for pursuing dialogue
between the key players. The momentum towards peace
established during the early stages of the Mwanza peace
process must not be lost.

If intervention by outside parties is left as the only
means to prevent a slide into anarchy and genocide, there
is an obligation upon Members of the United Nations to
see that the objectives of such action are clearly defined
and that the means of achieving them are sufficient and
well prepared. With that contingency in mind, the
Secretary-General must continue, in conjunction with the
OAU, to plan for the prevention of another humanitarian
disaster, an outcome which the international community
is not prepared to countenance.

Australia has sought to play a modest but
constructive role in efforts to resolve the present crisis in
Burundi and to assist in the process of peace-building in
the wider region. To this end, we have contributed
financially to the Nyerere peace initiative, to the peace
fund of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution, and to the International
Peace Academy Conflict Management in Africa
Programme.

The Council must not become complacent over
Burundi. It is imperative not only that it monitor the
situation there but that it continue its efforts to examine
how best to encourage all sides in Burundi to work
together for an enduring political settlement.

