Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2014/163), Special Representative Jan Kubis for his
briefing and Ambassador Tanin for his statement.

I would also express Italy's condolences to the
families of the victims of the terrorist attack on
17 January in Kabul.

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union, and I
would like to add a few remarks in my national capacity.

Italy wishes to express its satisfaction over the
renewal ofthe mandate ofthe United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which is a pillar
of the international civilian presence in Afghanistan
and a fundamental contribution to the development
and stabilization of the country. UNAMA has made a
remarkable contribution in accompanying Afghanistan
on its road to growth, human rights protection and
institutional strengthening. We greatly appreciate the
generous efforts of the women and men of UNAMA
to bring assistance to the Afghan people, under the
commendable leadership of the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative for Afghanistan.

Between now and the end of 2014, Afghanistan has
to meet a series of crucial appointments. The election
will mark the first time in the country's history of a
turnover from one Head of State to another through
a democratic process, and the completion of the
transitional process will pave the way for the withdrawal
of the International Security Assistance Force and for
NATO mission Resolute Support.

It is vital that the electoral process, from start to
finish, be regular, leading to the proclamation of the
new Head of State. Acceptance of the result by the
defeated parties and public opinion will depend on the
perception that the electoral process has been legitimate,
credible, transparent and inclusive - consequently, so
will a peaceful and seamless political transition. To that
end, the United Nations should also dedicate its support
to continue aiding the country on its path to civil and
economic development.

The proper and orderly holding of the presidential
and provincial elections will have to contend firmly
with the security factor. That is the responsibility of
the Afghan National Security Forces, which are making
constant progress in the difficult daily challenge
of controlling the territory. Unfortunately, terrorist
assassination attempts and attacks define everyday
life in Afghanistan - a circumstance that means we
cannot lower our guard and that the road to the final
stabilization of the country will require more time.

On the completion of the transition process, it is
of fundamental importance that Afghanistan and the
United States sign the bilateral security agreement in
the near term, since the delay is having a clear impact
on planning NATO's future presence in Afghanistan.

Italy reaffirms its conviction that, until there is
reconciliation within Afghanistan, there will be no
prospects for stabilization, nor will any stabilization
last without the contribution of the other regional
stakeholders. Italy therefore confirms its support for
the peace process, recognizing the full ownership of
Afghanistan. In doing so we also voice our expectation
that there will be no backtracking in the area of
democratic gains and civil and gender rights, or yielding
to terrorism.

It is essential not to lower ambitions or to sacrifice
the quality and quantity of the benchmarks the Kabul
authorities are called on to respect. We therefore expect
our Afghan friends to honour the legacy of Tokyo and to
achieve certain and measurable results in areas such as
the democratic and electoral process, the fight against
corruption, administrative and economic governance
and human rights. That is another reason that Italy
so appreciates the important space that the resolution
just adopted (resolution 2145 (2014)) dedicates to those
aspects, in particular the protection of human rights.

