Ms. Amos: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to speak about the still extremely grave
humanitarian conditions in Haiti and for your
continued attention to the situation there.

The one year anniversary of the earthquake was
an occasion on which we remembered the terrible
tragedy that took the lives of more than 200,000
people, among them so many of our colleagues. We
will never forget them or their sacrifices.
3

Those of us who are involved in the humanitarian
response have also been taking stock of what has been
done to help earthquake-affected people over the past
year and charting the course for the next 12 months
and beyond. Looking back at the humanitarian work
done over the past 12 months, and taking into account
the devastation that the earthquake caused and the pre-
existing difficult conditions in Haiti, a great deal has
been accomplished. The United Nations humanitarian
agencies, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), which gave unwavering support
to humanitarian work even before the earthquake,
without which far less would have been accomplished,
the Red Cross and the non-governmental organizations
we work with in Haiti have all played their part.

Since 12 January 2010, some 1.5 million people
have received help with shelter. Of those, about
800,000 are still in camps. The rest have been able to
return home or have been provided transitional shelters
or other arrangements. At least five litres of drinking
water per person are being delivered to 1.2 million
people daily. Over 11,000 latrines have been
constructed, providing many people with the first
modern sanitation they have experienced in their lives.
And over 1.1 million children are receiving daily meals
through the national school feeding programme,
supported by the World Food Programme. Sixty-eight
per cent of damaged schools have been cleared of
debris, allowing more than 2 million children to return
to school.

Over the past months, Haiti has been tested
further by two shocks that required a major
international response. In October, everyone working
in Haiti pulled together to prepare the country for
Hurricane Tomas. Thankfully, the hurricane did not
have the devastating effect that had been feared. But
the exercise highlighted the extremely serious
vulnerabilities that exist for many of Haiti's poorest
people, earthquake survivors and others.

Also in October, the cholera outbreak was
confirmed. The outbreak has spread nation-wide and
affected almost 200,000 people, with over 3,700 deaths
so far. Haiti has ideal conditions for cholera's spread:
poor and non-existing water, sanitation and health care
infrastructure in many urban and rural areas and the
density of population, especially in the slums of urban
cities. And because cholera has not been present in
Haiti for over 40 years, knowledge of how to prevent
infections was non-existent, and still is, especially in
the remote parts of the country.

Nonetheless, today the overall case fatality rate
has declined from a peak of 9 per cent to around 2 per
cent overall, although there are still spikes in some
regions. This indicates that while the infection is still
spreading around the country, the treatment facilities
and the intensive public information campaigns
launched to educate people about how to protect
themselves are working. In Port-au-Prince the
mortality rate has dropped to 1.2 per cent. Continuing
this work requires stability in the country. If aid
supplies and aid workers cannot move around freely, or
if sick people cannot reach help in time, the fatality
rate will quickly rise again. There is still an urgent
need for massive mobilization activities to promote
prevention and early treatment.

Malnutrition, chronically weak health systems,
appallingly low literacy rates and widespread lack of
access to clean water, sanitation and other basic services
mean that humanitarian assistance is still an essential
lifeline for hundreds of thousands of Haitians. Aid
agencies are still providing water to more than 1 million
people every day and food to 2 million people every
month, as well as helping to keep over 2 million
children in schools. These efforts need to continue at
least through this year, which is why we have launched
another humanitarian appeal for 2011, this time for
$906 million - about 50 per cent less than we required
in 2010. From that, $174 million is for the cholera
response, only 27 per cent of which has been provided
to date. We therefore need to scale up and do more, and
do it quickly. Much more attention to the cholera
response is needed if the improved response of the past
weeks is to be sustained.

The relief effort has helped millions of people,
but it has not, and will not, provide the long-term
solutions that are desperately needed. Accelerating
recovery efforts must be the absolute priority for 2011.
For humanitarian assistance to phase down, recovery
and reconstruction need to pick up. The Interim Haiti
Reconstruction Commission is central to this effort. We
welcome the increased strategic role of the
Commission and its support to technical ministries and
partners in defining national plans in key areas, such as
housing, debris removal and health. But even with that
happening, it is important to still be realistic about how
long it is going to take to get everybody to where they
want to be and need to be.
11-21162

We cannot expect that Haiti, the poorest and least
developed country in the western hemisphere before
the earthquake, will be rebuilt in one year, or even two.
Humanitarian agencies are prepared to stand beside the
poorest and most vulnerable Haitian people for as long
as it takes to recover from this terrible past year, and
through whatever the years ahead might hold. I thank
the Council for its continued support.

