Mr. Lancry (Israel): At this time, I would like to
make some comments regarding certain statements that
have been made so far. I would like to begin by
responding to the irresponsible statement made
yesterday by the Permanent Observer of Palestine, who
referred to Israel's statement, at the outset of this
debate, with a series of derogatory and quite frankly
undiplomatic terms that have no place in a serious
discussion of this nature.

I could not help but be reminded of the use by the
Permanent Observer of Palestine of similarly
irresponsible language in his letter of 9 January 2002 to
the Secretary-General, contained in document
S/2002/39, in response to Israel's interception of
50 tons of sophisticated and illegal weapons bound for
the Palestinian territories. The Permanent Observer of
Palestine called Israel's claims of official Palestinian
responsibility for that shipment "absurd" and claimed
that no reasonable and sane person could believe it. In
the second paragraph, he writes - and I quote from the
official text:

"The Israeli story defies logic and any common

sense. No sane person could imagine this quantity

of weapons to be successfully smuggled into

Gaza through the many serious barriers, including

the Israeli naval siege, irrespective of any talks of

floating devices and the like. Neither could any
sane person imagine the possible use of weapons

such as Katyusha rockets against Israel from a

place such as Gaza, without catastrophic results.

Furthermore, no sane person can imagine in the

circumstances this sort of 'military cooperation'

between the Islamic Republic of Iran and the

Palestinian Authority, which have both denied

any involvement."

Yet we all know now that responsibility for the
weapons about the Karin A ship rises to the highest
echelons of the Palestinian Authority, even to the
Chairman himself. Clearly, Israel's allegations at the
time were not quite as absurd as the Permanent
Observer of Palestine would have had us believe.

We are in a similar situation today. Israel has
come into possession of a substantial quantity of
documentary proof that support and financing for
terrorist operations have been supplied by the
Palestinian Authority and by Chairman Arafat himself.
These are the facts. They are known to all. They cannot
be ignored or dismissed by theatrical rhetoric.

I will be sending a letter in this regard to the
Secretary-General shortly. I have no doubt that in the
coming days, we will see that Israel's claims of official
Palestinian complicity in the murder of innocent
Israelis is not as "silly" or "stupid" or "absurd" as the
Permanent Observer of Palestine now claims.

It is unfortunate, but it appears as if the duplicity
for which Chairman Arafat is now so well known has
pervaded much of the Palestinian Authority. Chairman
Arafat's duplicity allows him to reach out in peace with
one hand, while he incites violence and terror with the
other. It allows him to appeal to the highest ideals of
the international community, while he consorts with the
lowest and most disreputable elements of the
Palestinian terrorist campaign. It leads him to arrest
terrorists one day and release them through his
revolving door the next. It is precisely this duality -
this revolving policy towards peace and terrorism -
that must be resolved if Israel is able to believe that the
Palestinian leadership intends to conduct negotiations
in good faith and if we are to conclude a genuine and
lasting agreement with our Palestinian neighbours and
partners.

I turn now to statements made by other
representatives, to which we are always extremely
attentive. We were dismayed, however, by the
excessively one-sided statement made yesterday by the
representative of Mauritius, who turned a completely
blind eye to the practices of Palestinian terrorists. In a
seemingly Manichaean view, it appears that there is
one party that is totally guilty and one that is totally
innocent. Clearly, Mauritius does not find Palestinian
suicide bombings that have claimed hundreds of
innocent human lives since the beginning of the Oslo
process to be very impressive. Nor did Mauritius think
to assess this inhuman practice in terms of international
humanitarian law.

We do believe, however, that statements of
members of the Council which stipulated that the
demand for Israeli withdrawal does not mean an
acceptance of Palestinian suicide bombing were a far
more accurate reflection of the situation in the region.
As members will by now know, Israeli troops have
withdrawn from the Palestinian cities of Tulkarm and
Qalqiliya, while there is no indication of any
Palestinian willingness to implement their obligations
under resolution 1402 (2002) in a reciprocal fashion.
Yet, some Member States still chose to present a one-
dimensional reading of resolution 1402 (2002), feeling
no compulsion, out of a basic sense of fairness, to call
for a concomitant Palestinian implementation of
Security Council resolutions.
I would also like to respond to allegations that the
deaths incurred on the Palestinian side were mostly
Palestinian civilians. I cannot help but wonder at the
source of this information. Such a claim can be
credibly made only if one considers armed Palestinians
as civilians, a consideration that clearly runs counter to
the provisions of international law. I reiterate that
claims regarding large-scale Palestinian civilian
casualties are completely unsubstantiated. The fact is
that Israeli soldiers are under strict orders to avoid
causing harm to civilians and to engage only against
armed Palestinians.

I should also like to express my total rejection of
remarks from speakers that have equated Israeli
practices with some of the most reprehensible deeds of
the Nazis. Such analogies are absolutely indefensible
and offensive. Can anyone accept a parallel between
the genocide of 6 million Jews and the Israeli campaign
against terror? Is this kind of repulsive analogy a part
of legitimate debate in the Security Council? Even
Israel's harshest critics, if they are honest and decent,
do not level accusations of this type.

If there is any factor in the modern Middle East
whose practices resemble such ideologies, who
demonstrate a total disregard for humanity, who are
obsessed with the murder of innocent men, women and
children and who make no distinctions among the
targets of their rage, it is the Palestinian suicide
bombers. Among their victims have been survivors of
the Holocaust, who escaped Hitler's campaign of mass
murder, rebuilt their lives in the State of Israel and fell
victim to the spiritual progeny of these ideologies.

