Mr. Fall (Senegal), Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People: First of all, Mr. President, allow me
to congratulate you warmly on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June. I am confident that under your able leadership the
work of the Council will be carried out in a
constructive and efficient manner. I also wish to take
this opportunity to congratulate your talented
predecessor, Ambassador Mahbubani, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Singapore to the
United Nations, on the exemplary manner in which he
steered the work of the Council during the month of
May.

I am grateful to you and to your esteemed
colleagues on the Council for having given me once
again the opportunity to address the Council in my
capacity as Chairman ofthe Committee on the Exercise
ofthe Inalienable Rights ofthe Palestinian People.

(spoke in French)

I should like to take this opportunity, through
you, Mr. President, to ask the representative of Guinea
to please convey our heartfelt congratulations to
Ambassador Francois Fall on his well-deserved
promotion to the distinguished post of Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Guinea. We extend
to him our best wishes for every success in the mission
he will be carrying out in the service of his country's
diplomacy.

(spoke in English)

In recent days, it has become ever clearer,
according to most observers, that the occupying
Power-Israel-under the Government of Prime
Minister Sharon, is apparently intent on destroying the
Palestinian Authority, the entire framework of the
peace process and the prospect for the resumption of a
meaningful political dialogue for peace in the region.

Our Committee has also been very disturbed by
the situation in Ramallah. Although it appears that the
Israeli troops have, for now, pulled out of the city,
because of the siege, closures and harsh restrictions on
movement, the new Palestinian Cabinet has been
unable to meet for the past three days. The little good
news that there is, is that, following the Israeli
withdrawal, the Cabinet finally met for the first time
earlier today. Other Palestinian towns, both in the West
Bank and in the Gaza Strip, are also suffering under
continuous closures and regular incursions. The
extrajudicial detention and killing of civilians
continues on a daily basis, as do illegal settlement
activities.

In the face of all this, the Israeli Prime Minister
insists on commanding the moral high ground and on
unilaterally dictating the terms of settlement of the
conflict. It appears that an attempt is being made to
reinterpret Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 242 (1967), and the principle of land for
peace, so that they will suit Israeli goals with a long-
term interim arrangement, which is mentioned as the
maximum the Palestinians can get and can expect. This
certainly has nothing to do with a comprehensive, just
and lasting settlement of the question of Palestine, and
it sets a very dangerous precedent of distorting the
intention of the international community and the
decisions of its deliberative organs to serve one's own
ends. What the occupying Power is trying to do is
unacceptable and should be condemned as such in no
unclear terms by the international community and by
this body.

To what extent can the Council tolerate the
contempt with which its resolutions, including
resolutions 1402 (2002), 1403 (2002) and 1405 (2002),
are treated by the Israeli Government? To what extent
can all norms of international legitimacy, such as those
enshrined in the Fourth Geneva Convention, be flouted
by any particular State? The Council should seriously
ponder this, and it should ponder the impact of its
prolonged inaction on its own credibility and on that of
our Organization as a whole. What is needed most of
all is a clear framework for the immediate resumption
of negotiations between the parties, with the active
involvement of the international community and within
a specific time frame.

Negotiations have to take place between the
parties, but they cannot start from zero or from
nowhere, and they cannot be highjacked by the
occupying Power, which has the military upper hand
and wants to dictate the terms. As members of the
Council know, there is a clear outline of the final
settlement, consisting of Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002), as well as
other resolutions and decisions of representative organs
of the international community. Within this framework
the parties should be invited to negotiate on specific
issues, such as alteration of the 1967 borders and
options for refugee repatriation. A party refusing to
participate in this process, or attempting to stall or
undermine it, should, from the start, be warned of
severe consequences. The Arab peace initiative
adopted at the Beirut Summit last March has gone a
long way in the right direction. Our Committee thinks
that Israel has to reciprocate without any further delay,
without any attempts at occlusion and without any
preconditions and demands. The leadership of all sides
should face their responsibilities.

Before concluding, let me return briefly to the
issue of attacks on innocent civilians to say once again
that our Committee joins the world community in
strongly condemning such acts, irrespective of their
provenance, irrespective of the circumstances and
irrespective ofthe motivation ofthe perpetrators.

The international community has unanimously
agreed that the State of Palestine has to be established
and that it must coexist in peace with the State of
Israel. Mere visions of that desired outcome are not
sufficient. The suffering of the Palestinian people
should not be allowed to last much longer. Those
visions have to become a reality as a matter of urgency,
and the Council has a historic responsibility to clear the
way and oversee the process to that end. Our
Committee looks forward to prompt and decisive
action by the Council.
