Mr. Kolby (Norway): The Great Lakes region
continues to be among the most important items on the
agenda of the Council. My delegation would therefore
like to pay tribute to Ambassador Levitte for having
headed the Security Council mission to the area. We
would also like to thank all the other members for the
important work that they have undertaken. We also
welcome the statements made this morning by the
Secretary-General and the countries of the region. We
have listened to their views and will consider them
carefully in our further discussions on this important
topic.

I would like to reiterate my Government's support
for the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. The mission
report confirms our View that this document continues
to serve as the key denominator for a sustainable peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The fact that,
in spite of recent setbacks and difficulties, the major
players in the process have reconfirmed their
commitment to the agreement, is indeed an
encouraging sign. The challenge ahead is to secure
continued support for the implementation of the
Agreement as the process of disengagement and
withdrawal of forces continues. In this regard, we
strongly endorse the view put forward by mission
members that the two aspects of the accord - its
military provisions and the dialogue i should be
conducted in parallel. We also believe the setting of a
timetable for implementation would be an appropriate
undertaking at this stage.

My delegation is encouraged by the reports that
some foreign contingents have already been withdrawn
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we
would strongly urge those that still remain to withdraw
their forces in a phased and organized manner, in
accordance with the Lusaka Agreement and relevant
Security Council resolutions.

Regarding the process of disarmament,
demobilization, resettlement and reintegration, we
welcome the assurances given to the mission by the
Political Committee that the Committee will indeed
provide the necessary information on the armed groups
in order to facilitate the process. This is a key
component of a successful operation, and we therefore
urge the Committee to deliver on its promises as soon
as possible. I would also like to stress the urgent need
for a consolidated effort by donors to support this
process. The lasting integration of ex-combatants
remains the cornerstone of any peace-building strategy.

My delegation would also like to stress that all
the rebel groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including the former Rwandan Armed Forces
and the Interahamwe, must participate in the process of
disarmament, demobilization, resettlement and
reintegration. If not, we are afraid that the progress
towards sustainable peace has limited hope for success.
The continued presence of the negative forces that
operate in the region could seriously undermine the
efforts to create peace and stability.

My Government welcomes the Secretary-
General's decision to increase, in cooperation with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the number of human rights observers in the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC). We would also like
to stress the need to deal with the issue of impunity and
to bring to justice those responsible for the most severe
crimes.

The Norwegian Government has provided
financial support for the efforts to facilitate the process
leading towards the inter-Congolese dialogue, and we
are positively inclined towards further support when
tangible progress is made on the ground. Thus, it is of
crucial importance that all parties concerned, including
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, cooperate closely with Sir Ketumile Masire and
support his efforts to advance the dialogue. We
welcome President Masire's announcement that a
preparatory meeting for the dialogue will be convened
on 16 July. Furthermore, we urge the parties to settle
the issues of timing, location and the agenda for the
dialogue as soon as possible. The people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have suffered too
much for too long. We hope that the international donor
community will heed the Secretary-General's appeal
today to urgently increase support for the 2001
consolidated appeal. Norway also looks forward to the
report of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, on the issue of child soldiers.

Turning to Burundi, we would like to make some
brief remarks. We certainly share the concern about the
situation in the country, as expressed in the mission
report. My Government has been among the sponsors
of the peace negotiations in Arusha. We therefore
commend President Nelson Mandela for his effort to
promote the implementation of the Agreement. We
must continue to support this mandate for peace. The
current situation calls for urgent action, and we would
therefore like to see further momentum in the peace
process. We therefore look forward to discussions on
the idea of strengthening the facilitator's office and
broadening the role of the Representative of the
Secretary-General, as indicated in the mission report.
We would also like to confirm that our humanitarian
assistance to the region will remain at a high level for
the near future. In our efforts, we will continue to focus
mainly on vulnerable groups, such as refugees,
internally displaced persons and returnees - the true
victims of nearly a decade of armed conflict.

In conclusion, we urge the parties to the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement and the Arusha peace Agreement
to maintain the momentum that has been created over
the past months, and we are looking forward to further
dialogue on the next steps. We would like to remind the
belligerents that the main responsibility lies with them.
The Security Council cannot bring peace to the region.
It can only promote and facilitate a process in which
local actors are the key players.

