Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting on
the subject of Palestine. We are also grateful for the
briefing by Assistant Secretary-General Taye-Brook
Zerihoun.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela continues
to be very concerned about and firmly condemns the
violent situation in Palestine. However, we want to
point out that the new cycle of violence affecting the
occupied territories is not the result of Palestinian
attacks on Israelis or of Israelis on Palestinians; it is
the product of a prolonged illegal occupation for nearly
70 years, during which the Palestinian people have
been denied their human rights and their right to self-
determination.

It is regrettable that the United Nations has been
considering the Palestinian question almost since its
founding without ever reaching a political solution
to that bloody conflict. That fact should weigh on
everyone's conscience, particularly those entities who
wield decision-making power in the Security Council
and have blocked the way to a political solution,
resulting in thousands of victims, including refugees
in neighbouring countries who are denied the right of
return.

Israel, the occupying Power, pursues its policy
of denying the Palestinian people their right to self-
determination and a sovereign and independent State.
As long as they are deprived of their rights, we will
continue to see the repeated cycles of violence that only
produce more victims among the civilian population
and increase the bitterness, pain and frustration of
young Palestinians, one of the main elements fuelling
the extremist groups that are currently ravaging several
countries in the region.

Israel's strategy is clear. It wishes to provoke
Palestinians into launching cycles of violence to which
Israel responds in a brutal and disproportionate way that
continues to oppress the Palestinian people, through
its unending settlement process. For that reason, we
condemn Israel's aggressions of the past week, which
tragically left 34 people dead, most ofthem young people
aged between 11 and 22, and more than 1,400 injured.
We also condemn the recent demolitions of houses that
Israel has carried out in the occupied territory of the
West Bank, leaving hundreds of families homeless,
most of them children, who are now refugees. Such
acts are part ofa deliberate process of colonization and
expulsion by Israel, an illegal practice that so far no one
has put a stop to.

We echo the recent denunciation by the Palestinian
Red Crescent stating that Israeli forces have deliberately
attacked ambulances and medical and nursing staff more
than 53 times, resulting in many casualties. Such attacks
have also destroyed 20 ambulances, in contravention of
international humanitarian and human rights law. And
the outrage does not end there, for the same report notes
that more than 24 ambulances carrying casualties were
blocked on their way to hospitals, an illustration of
the Israeli Government's deliberate policy designed to
exacerbate the suffering it has inflicted during the past
seven decades of illegal occupation.

We condemn the attacks on holy places by
settlers and the Israel Defense Forces, such as those
on the Palestinian population attending the Al-Aqsa
Mosque in Jerusalem. These recurring acts violate the
agreement between Israel and the Hashemite King of
Jordan in his capacity as custodian of the holy sites of
East Jerusalem.

The humanitarian crisis in Gaza is also part of this

bleak scenario. The brutal blockade that its inhabitants
are subjected to shrinks its capacity for economic and
social development. The lack of opportunity and the
vacuum created by Israel's relentless policies should be
a matter of concern for the Council and the international
community. Israel's aim is clear - it wants to divide the
Palestinians and render the existence of a Palestinian
State impossible. The world continues to be shocked
by the devastating effects of Operation Protective
Edge, whose indiscriminate attacks on civilians
killed more than 500 children and left thousands more
injured and some who are still hospitalized, many of
them with a stunted future and no immediate hope of
being able to resume their lives and build a promising
life. Humanitarian organizations in Gaza continue
to report cases of children with severe psychological
trauma that persists despite the attention and care they
receive in health centres. Israel's brutal campaign
of assassination, persecution and incarceration of
Palestinian children - I am talking about children, not
just men and women - is deplorable and unacceptable,
an act of brutality against innocents that constitutes
an act of State terrorism, a crime of war and a crime
against humanity for which its perpetrators must be
made accountable before an international tribunal.

It is quite paradoxical to note that, as the Quartet
is deploying its good offices to initiate peace talks, the
Israeli Government should unleash this new wave of
repression through generalized violence that hinders
the path towards a fair and lasting peace. We call on the
Security Council to take a position as soon as possible,
that it demand that Israel put an end to this new cycle
of violence and that it place the Palestinian population
under international protection, in accordance with the
Fourth Geneva Convention and resolution 904 (1994).
We must renew our support for the Palestinians' appeal
that the life of their citizens be protected against the
continuing and systematic violence and attacks by the
occupying Power.

The despair that overwhelms Palestinian youth on
account of no political solution to the illegal occupation
being found is irrefutably demonstrates the need to
achieve a negotiated and inclusive political settlement.
Recurrent actions by Israel form part of a deliberate
strategy to deny the Palestinian population the right
to an independent State, since violence justifies its
objectives of expansion and domination.

Venezuela reaffirms its full support for the
right to self-determination for the nationals of the
State of Palestine, who should be able to live within
internationally recognized borders, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.
The hoisting of the flag of the Palestinian State at the
seventieth session of the General Assembly is evidence
of the commitment of the overwhelming majority of the
States Members of the Organization to upholding the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.

In conclusion, we should like to say that we support
all initiatives aimed at finding a permanent solution
to this conflict. It is vital that the Security Council
act promptly and urgently to give a new impetus to
the negotiations, taking into account the fact that the
non-resolution of this problem seriously jeopardizes
peace, security and stability in the Middle East. The
Council should assume its responsibilities. It should
focus on resolving this very serious issue, which is a
threat to international peace and security. We must act
in an honest manner if we, in the Security Council,
really believe in a two-State solution. The Council has
the authority to recommend that Palestine be accepted
within the United Nations as a fully fledged State.
Palestine needs to exist as a fully fledged State, on the
basis of a two-State solution.

The Security Council should issue a presidential
statement condemning the Israeli violence and calling
upon the Israeli Government to stop its violence and
profanation of holy sites, and it should adopt a resolution
calling for a sustained peace process. We are convinced
that the Council can and must take specific and urgent
action to assist Palestine and its people. It must break
the deadlock. By doing so it would be be taking a
courageous step forward- a step towards negotiations
between Israel and Palestine.

