Ms. Pillay: First, let me welcome the
contribution of my colleague Valerie Amos and
congratulate her on her appointment. The work of our
respective Offices is complementary at many levels,
something I was reminded of listening to her speak
today.
Let me also thank the members of the Security
Council for giving me the opportunity to address the
Council today on the subject of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. This is a subject that has
rightly become a central focus of the Security Council.
It is also an important priority for my Office as we
seek to promote and protect human rights worldwide.
Protecting civilians from the atrocities of war is an
essential element of our human rights work. It is also
an indispensable part of any strategy for managing
threats to international peace and stability.

The concept of the protection of civilians, which
is rooted in international humanitarian and human
rights law, has been developed as a way to encourage a
more comprehensive and coordinated approach by
Member States, international organizations and
agencies to our efforts to protect civilians from the
imminent threat of violence during armed conflicts.

Over time, in responding to emerging threats to
civilians, the Council has looked beyond situations of
actual armed conflict to situations of civil strife
preceding full-fledged conflict, as well as post-conflict
and natural disaster situations. In situations such as the
ones in Haiti, Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia, the Council
has established broader protection mandates to ensure
that the populations' human rights are protected.

Today, human rights are thoroughly integrated in
United Nations peace missions. There are currently 17
human rights components of peace missions led by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs, established at the
behest of the Council and supported by my Office.

Of the five core challenges to the protection of
civilians identified in the report of the Secretary-
General before the Council (S/2010/579), my Office
and human rights officers on the ground are directly
engaged in four. We work to enhance compliance with
international law, compliance by non-State armed
groups, protection in the context of peacekeeping and
accountability for violations.

Our approach to protection is first and foremost
to prevent the commission of human rights violations.
Where that fails, as regrettably it sometimes does, we
also contribute to mitigating the effects of conflict on
populations at risk and to ensuring proper
accountability for violations once they have occurred.
Establishing accountability, in turn, can help serve the
8
longer-term goal of prevention by making a recurrence
of violations less likely.

Effective prevention begins with the facts.
Through human rights monitoring and reporting, we
are able to build up a detailed picture of the situation
on the ground, anticipate emerging threats and take
appropriate preventive action in a timely manner. Time
and again, human rights reports and their
recommendations have provided the basis for decision-
making by heads of missions, whether in relation to
responses to immediate threats, longer term preventive
measures or following up with relevant national
authorities and international actors.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example, the preliminary report on the horrific mass
rapes that took place in Walikale in August 2010,
which was released on 24 September by the United
Nations Joint Human Rights Office, was a key
document in helping to establish the facts and identify
protection gaps. In the week following the publication
of the report, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo set up two additional temporary operating
bases in Binyampuri, deployed additional staff and
equipment and stepped up day and night patrols in the
area. These actions have reportedly provided much-
needed reassurance to local populations.

Monitoring and reporting on human rights and
the protection of civilians can also play a role in
raising awareness of the impact of military operations
on civilians and in encouraging the parties to a conflict
to take steps to strengthen the protection of civilians.

Since 2007, the human rights contingent of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) has monitored and reported on civilian
casualties in the conflict in Afghanistan, and engaged
in advocacy to strengthen the protection of civilians.
The Afghanistan mid-year report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict in Afghanistan, released on
10 August, found that in the first half of 2010 there
was an overall decrease of 29 per cent in civilian
deaths attributed to pro-Government forces, as
compared to the same period in 2009, with a 64 per
cent decrease in civilian deaths caused by aerial attacks.
UNAMA concluded that the implementation of tactical
directives governing air strikes, night searches and the
escalation of force contributed to this significant
reduction in civilian casualties.
10-64592
Effective monitoring and reporting of human
rights violations and encouraging greater compliance
with international human rights law require
opportunities to engage directly with both State and
non-State actors, as well as access by human rights
officers to populations at risk. In that context, it
remains of grave concern that human rights officers
still cannot access large parts of Darfur for security
reasons.

Further, in Somalia, intense fighting in
Mogadishu and other parts of the country severely
limits the access of human rights officers. Human
rights officers of the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia have been working with internally
displaced persons in Somaliland and Puntland and
interviewing on a regular basis individuals who had
fled southern and central Somalia. Their testimonies
indicate a pattern of risk and violations occurring
throughout the country. Human rights officers also
work with national monitoring networks in order to
gather relevant information from within Somalia.

Apart from these constraints, it is essential that
the Council give missions the requisite mandate and
resources, including the prioritization of logistical
support and access of human rights monitoring and
investigation. Unfortunately, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, insufficient access to
vulnerable populations by human rights officers, due in
part to limited air assets or military escorts, has
impeded our ability to adequately identify threats, plan
accordingly and ultimately protect civilians from
violations.

While our primary concern is to prevent the
commission of violations, where prevention fails we
collectively bear the responsibility to ensure
accountability. The Secretary-General's report rightly
identifies accountability as one of the core elements of
the protection of civilians. Not only is accountability
required to fulfil international legal obligations; it is
also our best tool for preventing the recurrence of
violations.

My Office's efforts to enhance accountability are
multifaceted. As Council members will be aware, my
Office has recently concluded a mapping report of the
most serious violations of human rights committed in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo between 1993
and 2003. Through its assessment of existing
accountability mechanisms and the challenges faced in
addressing the violations documented, the report
provides a road map for engaging the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Congolese
population and the international community in a
constructive dialogue on how to ensure accountability
and offer remedy to victims within the overall goals of
reconciliation and peace. I hope that we will be able to
make a further contribution on the question of what
measures or mechanisms can provide a sense of redress
for victims when we receive the report of a high-level
panel of experts, led by my Deputy, who went to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in October and held
hearings around the country with survivors of sexual
violence.

Human rights officers work closely with national
authorities and civil society to support national judicial
institutions and other accountability mechanisms.
Again taking an example from our work in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Joint Human
Rights Office, through its joint investigation teams,
provides direct support to military prosecutors to
investigate cases of violations, including by helping
them access populations to carry out their
investigations and by ensuring judicial follow-up. This
support has allowed prosecutors to bring many cases to
court that might not otherwise have been pursued,
including cases of sexual violence. A recent example of
facilitating national efforts for accountability is the
arrest of General Jerome Kakwavu, who was accused
of rape and whose file is being transmitted to the high
military court of Kinshasa.

In some cases, the longer-term challenge is to
build up the capacity of non-United Nations security
forces, including national forces and institutions, to
take on the task of effective protection of civilians
once the international presence has been withdrawn. In
this context, my Office has been playing an essential
role, including by participating in the training and
technical advice being provided to police and military
officers and contributing to necessary legislative and
policy reforms. There is an important discussion to be
had in this context - specifically, on how to ensure
that United Nations support to non-United Nations
security forces is based on respect for human rights
and international humanitarian law. My Office is
currently contributing to the review of United Nations
experience in this respect.

Our expertise has also increasingly been called
upon to conduct commissions of inquiry in the context
of political crises where there is no peace mission but
where the lack of protection of civilians and of
accountability for violations of their rights represents a
threat to peace. An example is our involvement in the
Secretary-General's international commission of
inquiry to investigate the violence that occurred in
Conakry, Republic of Guinea, on 28 September 2009.
In Guinea, as in many other cases, establishing the
facts is a first step on the road to remedy and eventual
reconciliation. I am pleased to confirm that, in line
with the Secretary-General's recommendation, my
Office will work actively with co-lead departments
directly involved in inquiries of this kind with a view
to reviewing past experiences and making proposals as
appropriate.

In conclusion, my Office stands ready to assist
the Council as it seeks to strengthen the protection of
civilians threatened or affected by the effects of armed
conflict. Every day around the world, human rights
officers mandated by this Council make a vital
contribution to protecting civilians, often working in
very challenging conditions and with limited resources.

I encourage the Council to ensure that the
mandates that it establishes provide the necessary
elements for this work to continue as effectively as
possible: robust and well resourced mandates that
ensure that human rights officers are present
throughout areas affected or threatened by conflict,
including remote areas; that allow such violations as do
occur to be properly documented and reported; and that
provide for support to national authorities to restore
and strengthen the rule of law.

Finally, I would welcome the opportunity to share
information relating to this topic with the Council in
future, including reports and recommendations arising
from our human rights monitoring work on the ground,
and to keep it apprised of evolving situations where
civilians are at risk. In addition to formal meetings
such as today's, my Office stands ready to contribute to
Arria Formula meetings and expert-level meetings of a
less formal character, as the Secretary-General
recommends in his report.

I thank members of the Council for their attention
and for this opportunity to speak here today. I look
forward to our continued dialogue.

