Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
His Royal Highness Crown Prince Al Hussein Bin
Abdullah II for joining the Council to preside over
today's meeting. His presence here is yet another
testament to Jordan's deep commitment to combating
violent extremism among youth and people of all ages.

On Monday, 20 April, six young Somali-American
men, aged 19 to 21, were charged in Minneapolis
with terrorism-related offenses. They had planned to
travel to Syria to join the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL). Five of the six were United States
citizens, and one was a permanent resident. The young
men had reportedly been inspired in part by another
young Somali-American, Abdi Noor, who left the same
city in May 2014 shortly after his twentieth birthday
and joined ISIL in Syria. They had also in part been
encouraged by one another, in what is known as peer-
to-peer recruitment, through regular meetings to plan
their trip and discuss their violent ideology. Their case
is just one of the many recent instances in which young
people have attempted to join ISIL or other terrorist
groups. In some instances, as with the Minneapolis
arrests, we have succeeded in stopping youth before
they could reach their destination. In other instances,
we have not, as happened in February, when three
British girls of ages 15 to 16 travelled to Turkey and
likely onwards to ISIL-controlled territory, where they
presumably remain.

ISIL is showing increased sophistication in
recruiting young people, particularly in Virtual spaces.
The group disseminates some 90,000 tweets each day,
Its members and supporters routinely co-opt trendy
hashtags to disseminate their messages. ISIL even
reportedly developed a Twitter app last year that allows
Twitter subscribers to hand over control of their feed
to ISIL, allowing ISIL to tweet from the individual
subscriber's account, thereby exponentially amplifying
the reach of its messages. In February, ISIL published
a polished 50-page online guide called the Hijrah to
the Islamic State, which instructs potential recruits
on how to make the journey to its territory, including
everything from finding safe houses in Turkey to what
kind of backpack to bring and how to answer questions
from immigration officials without arousing suspicion.

It is not just ISIL that is aggressively targeting
children and youth, but Al-Qaida, Boko Haram,
Al-Shabaab and other groups as well. There is a clear
consensus that we - and by we, I mean, of course, not
just the United States but all countries committed to
combating terrorist groups - must make countering
Violent extremism a central part of our counter-terrorism
efforts. That is particularly true among children and
teens, whose youth makes them especially vulnerable
to recruitment. Yet even with increased attention to
the problem, the reality is that we are being outspent,
outflanked and out-innovated by terrorist groups intent
on recruiting new young members. We have to catch up,
for their welfare and our collective security. That is one
of the reasons why we look forward to the Secretary-
General's plan of action to counter Violent extremism,
which will, we hope, galvanize the United Nations to
take a leading role in empowering and uniting Member
States to tackle this very grave problem.

That is also one of the main reasons that President
Barack Obama convened a White House summit to
counter Violent extremism on 19 February. More than
60 Governments took part in the summit, including
most of the members of the Council, together with
civil-society representatives from over 50 countries
and private-sector leaders. As many members know,
we look forward to a leaders' summit on the margins
of the General Assembly in September to evaluate the
progress that has been made and the challenges that
most definitely remain to implement the White House
agenda to combat Violent extremism.

One of the participants in the White House summit
was a young Moroccan woman, Zineb Benalla. Zineb
works for the Arab Center for Scientific Research and
Humane Studies, a non-governmental organization
that, with support from the United States Agency
for International Development, has helped lead an
innovative effort to counter violent extremism in
northern Mali. As Council members know, terrorist
groups seized large swaths of the region in 2012 and
continue to carry out attacks and recruit young people.
Zineb's project was focused on reaching vulnerable
youth studying in the region's madrassas. Research
showed that madrassa instructors were teaching
only religious texts and focusing mainly on rote
memorization. Zineb's programme aimed at broadening
the curriculum to foster more critical thinking and
reasoning skills, which help young people question,
and ultimately reject, the narrow ideologies of terrorist
groups. Zineb did not go directly to the schools,
knowing that she would be turned away. Instead, she
met repeatedly with imams and elders in Timbuktu
and Gao, gradually earning their trust over cups of tea.
When she eventually laid out the proposal to start book
clubs in the madrassas, they accepted. With the backing
of those imams and elders, students and teachers were
given e-readers and allowed to download books that
would previously have been considered haram, or
sinful, such as works of philosophy and novels. She
then organized workshops where she trained dozens
of educators in how to teach the new material. While
that is a narrow programme designed for a specific set
of circumstances, Zineb's story nevertheless illustrates
several key lessons about how to build efforts to counter
violent extremism among young people.

First, education is of course essential to developing
the critical thinking skills that can empower youth
to challenge Violent extremist ideologies. We have
seen similar efforts undertaken on a broader scale by
the Government of Morocco and others. Morocco is
working to replace teachers and imams who promote
violent extremist ideologies with ones who uphold the
values of respect and dignity and who preach more
moderate interpretations of Islam.

Secondly, the trust and support of local actors is
critically important. That includes not only Government
officials but religious and civil-society leaders and
even families. As the first and most important line
of defence in protecting youth, communities need the
tools to do their part. The Safe Spaces Initiative, a
guide created by the Muslim Public Affairs Council
to help communities implement a multi-tiered strategy
of prevention, intervention and the ejection of violent
extremist elements, is just one example of a resource
that informs communities about how to be more active
partners.

Thirdly, as others here have stressed today, we
need to enlist youth themselves in leading this effort.
Research shows that young people are more likely to
listen to, and be influenced by, their peers. Yet too
often we approach youth as the passive recipients of
campaigns to counter violent extremism, rather than
as active participants in shaping their strategy and
spearheading their implementation.

We have seen how powerful youth-led initiatives
can be, including those that use satire. That was the
approach Karim Farok adopted. An amateur Egyptian
musician, Karim took an ISIL chant and remixed it into
a pop song, posting his version on social media sites.
While his action may at first glance look like a way
of amplifying ISIL's message, in reality Karim's remix
was a form of protest because ISIL's fundamentalist
interpretation of Islam forbids music with instruments.
By transgressing the groups rules, Karim's song
encouraged others to express criticism as well, rather
than be silenced by fear. Not only did his remix go viral,
garnering hundreds of thousands of Views, but it also
spawned countless other musical and dancing spoofs
of ISIL chants, a potent form of counter-extremist
messaging that kids can relate to.

Of course, we must pursue other lines of effort in
countering violent extremism in youth as well, such
as strengthening laws and international coordination
to stop the flow of young foreign terrorist fighters to
battlefields, as we committed to do under resolution
2178 (2014), and enlisting the private sector in
amplifying our message, as Google Ideas has done
through the launch of its Against Violent Extremism
Network, which has given a platform to more than 500
rehabilitated former extremists. We need to do more on
all of these fronts.

At the beginning, I spoke about the six young men
from Minneapolis who were detained earlier this week.
One of the main reasons that they were stopped from
joining ISIL was that a young man who had originally
planned to join with them experienced a change in
conscience. He took a step back; he saw the group's
Violent intentions for what they were and he decided
to report the group to law enforcement. Without his
action, those young men may well have made it to
ISIL-controlled territory, where they could have taken
part in the group's horrific atrocities. That young
man's choice shows how a single changed mind - just
one person who starts to think differently and more
compassionately - can disrupt and ultimately stop a
dangerous action by many people. That is a valuable
lesson in countering violent extremism and, ultimately,
it is what our efforts are all about.

