Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and
Mr. Serge Brammertz, the Prosecutor ofthe Mechanism,
for their valuable briefings on the progress achieved so
far. Since this may be the last briefing by Mr. Meron as
President of the Mechanism, I would like to express my
profound gratitude for his tireless efforts throughout
his mandate. I wish his successor, Judge Carmel Agius,
every success.

Only 12 months ago, we witnessed the end of the
mandate of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, with the work of the two International
Tribunals coming to a close. Thus, the judicial
jurisdiction on the residual cases was fully transferred
to the International Residual Mechanism to continue the
same approach adopted by the Security Council with a
view to upholding the rule of law, achieving justice and
fighting impunity in order to attain international peace
and security.

Peace does not simply mean ending armed
conflicts; rather, it is the delivery of justice for the
victims of war crimes, genocide and ethnic cleansing
through the prosecution of the persons proved to have
perpetrated such crimes according to due process, as
per the relevant international laws. In the same vein,
we must study and document in depth the experience
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to
cultivate the lessons learned and to assess the strengths
and weaknesses thereof. That would serve as a robust
basis for the future, whenever necessary. Today I would
like, therefore, to highlight the following points.

First, we welcome the efforts of the President and
the Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals aimed at improving the
performance of the Mechanism through the adoption
ofa Code of Professional Conduct for Defence Counsel

Appearing before the Mechanism and the development
of an effective modus operandi that would help to
facilitate legal research and analysis and the drafting
of the decisions and sentences handed down, without
prejudice to the mandate provided for in resolution
1966 (2010), and this notwithstanding the following
challenges: the surge in judicial activities concerning
applications for the review of sentences and access to
confidential information; litigation related to contempt
of the Tribunals due to the discontinuation of the
support provided to the two Tribunals in response to
their closure; and the non-approval by the General
Assembly of the Mechanism's proposed budget for the
period 2018-2019. The Mechanism therefore devised
a reduced budget by laying off staff, which might not
only adversely affect the delivery of its mandate, but
also lead to low staff morale.

Secondly, we commend the expeditious measures
taken by the Mechanism's judges, Prosecutor and
Registry regarding the cases reviewed thereby, as they
will lead to the speedy indictment of the accused. That
is evidenced by the final sentences passed in certain
cases ahead of the deadline, in spite of the delay in the
Prosecutor v. Radovan KaradZie case.

Thirdly, we acknowledge the Mechanism's efforts
as a small, temporary and efficient structure whose
tasks and size will diminish over time, as per its
establishing resolution and as stressed by the evaluation
and progress report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services (S/2018/206).

Fourthly, the responsibility to identify the location
of and arrest the eight fugitives does not rest exclusively
with the Mechanism; rather, it should cooperate with
the relevant States and international organizations to
help bolster its efforts, which were carried out on the
basis of significant information regarding the location
of the fugitives.

Fifthly, we value the measures taken by the
Mechanism in response to the concerns of Member
States with respect to resolution 2422 (2018) regarding
early release. Meanwhile, the Mechanism should
take into consideration the Views of Member States
regarding its efforts to attain the desired goal.

In conclusion, I would like to express my deep
gratitude to Peru, Chair of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals, as well as to the Office of
Legal Affairs and the Office of Internal Oversight
Services for their efforts towards the implementation of
resolution 1966 (2010).

