The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

I should like to start by thanking today's four
briefers for their thought-provoking contributions.

Lithuania aligns itselfwith the statement to be made
later today by the observer of the European Union.

In 1999 the Security Council took a unanimous
decision to address systematically the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Fifteen years later, the gap
between the normative framework and implementation
remains considerable, as civilians continue to suffer
from conflict-related Violence, which is increasingly
intentional and brutal.

In some cases, as in the Central African Republic or
South Sudan, State institutions do not have the capacity
to carry out their responsibility to protect. In others,
such as Syria, the State itselfis a perpetrator. Wherever
they operate, peacekeepers can assist the host State, but
they cannot substitute for it. The primary responsibility
to protect civilians rests with national Governments.

We welcome the approach taken by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations in its operational concept
on the protection of civilians, which encompasses three
tiers of protection: support for political processes,
protecting from physical Violence and establishing a
protective environment.

We believe that protection mandates should involve
a broad range of activities, including, but not limited
to, ensuring respect for international human rights and
humanitarian law, facilitating humanitarian access, the
return of refugees and displaced persons, human rights
monitoring, the protection of women and children, and
addressing sexual violence in conflict.

Furthermore, implementing protection mandates
and preparing protection strategies require improved
situational awareness and analysis. Relevant data and
recommendations on the protection of civilians need to
be systematically included in country-specific reports
by the Secretariat.

Interaction and the better flow of information
among missions, humanitarian actors and local
populations are crucial. In particular, humanitarian
and human right actors can contribute effectively to
a realistic assessment of the threats and risks to the
population on the ground.

Furthermore, the implementation of protection
mandates requires adequate resources, structures and
training. Military, police and civilian personnel should
receive the relevant pre-deployment guidance and
training. Having a pool of experts available on short
notice through standing capacities or rosters is helpful
for early planning or filling critical gaps.

We welcome the drafting by the Office of Military
Affairs of baseline guidance on the protection of
civilians for the military component; the development
of a mobile training teams project; and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations core pre-deployment
training on child protection.

Mission leadership, in our view, is crucial, as it
must ensure that protection is considered a priority
across the whole mission. We would also like to stress
the importance of the sharing among the missions of
effective protection practices. The United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, for example, established an
early-warning system that enabled the better protection
of rural populations. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan keeps a civilian-casualty-
tracking system which, combined with tactical
directives focused on civilian protection, is helping
to reduce civilian casualty rates. Unmanned aerial
systems observing Kivu and border zones contribute
to enhancing the capacity of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to respond.

Adequate resources, training and mandate
definition are just one side of the story in the context
of the protection of civilians. Peacekeepers cannot
ensure the protection of civilians in an environment
where lawlessness and impunity prevail. Strengthening
the rule of law and building local justice mechanisms
and judicial capacities to tackle impunity constitute
an important part of protection efforts. Ensuring
accountability is an important deterrent in itself and
thus a contributing factor to success in protecting
civilians.

Internationaljustice mechanisms such as mixed and
special tribunals, as well as the International Criminal
Court, have an important role to play in that regard.
The Council must place special emphasis on ending
impunity for war crimes, crimes against humanity and
gross violations of human rights. The perpetrators of
such crimes, as well as all those who attack and kill
humanitarian and medical workers, journalists and
peacekeepers, must know that there is no escaping
justice.

This year marks the sixty-fifth anniversary of the
adoption of the Geneva Conventions, the foundation
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict. But
today we also mark the International Day against the
Use of Child Soldiers. Perpetrators against their will,
such children are also the tragic victims of conflict. It
is incumbent upon the Council to make sure that those
children, as well as all of the countless civilian victims
who continue to suffer conflict-related atrocities, are
guaranteed the protection they need.

My delegation supports the recommendations
contained in the reports of the Secretary-General and
welcomes the presidential statement adopted earlier
today (S/PRST/2014/3). The urgency of implementation
cannot be stressed enough. Bridging the gap between
the normative basis and concrete actions on the ground
is paramount to saving lives.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

In view of the fairly long list of speakers, I should
like to encourage everyone speaking to respect the
four-minute limit in order to enable the Council to
carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
longer statements are encouraged to circulate their
texts in writing and to deliver a shorter version when
speaking in the Chamber. I wish to inform all members
concerned that we shall be carrying on this debate right
through the lunch hour, so that we can all speak before
it is very late into the night.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Urmas
Paet, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia.

