Mr. Kelby (Norway): My delegation, too, is
grateful for the briefings that we heard this morning.

We note the consistency of the assessments made
by the Secretary-General in his report and by the recent
Security Council mission in its report. The Council
members' increasingly common analysis of and
approach to the Great Lakes region is indeed a good
basis for our deliberations this week on extending the
mandate of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

The progress made in the peace process during
the past few months is encouraging. At the same time,
the challenges at hand as we prepare for the third phase
of MONUC are enormous, as illustrated in the
Secretary-General's report. The risk requires a
carefully balanced approach which would allow us to
play our part in maintaining the momentum of the
peace process while minimizing, to the extent possible,
the scope for mission creep. It is important that the new
MONUC mandate be given, to the greatest extent
possible, in conformity with the relevant
recommendations in the Brahimi report.

Norway is supportive of the recommendation in
the Secretary-General's report to extend the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for 12 months, until
15 June 2002. We share his assessment that MONUC
and the United Nations will be engaged in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for a considerable
time. We believe that, by extending the mandate for
one year, the international community is showing its
commitment to supporting peace and security and to
helping alleviate the sufferings of the people of the
region.

We are supportive of the Secretary-General's
request for additional personnel for MONUC. We are
especially happy to see the proposed strengthening of
the civilian component and we see the necessity of
strengthening the operation's logistical capacity.
However, we would have preferred to see a more
detailed plan for the use of additional personnel.

Norway also shares the Secretary-General's
concern about reports of eastward movements of armed
groups and their incursion into Rwanda, Burundi and
Tanzania. This concern underlines the necessity of
establishing a viable programme of disarmament,
demobilization, resettlement, reintegration and
repatriation for armed groups, as identified in the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. I note, however, the
Secretary-General's assessment that the plans provided
to date by the parties are not a sufficient basis for
further United Nations action in this regard. Pressure
on the parties must thus be maintained in order to have
a proper plan for disarmament, demobilization,
resettlement, reintegration and repatriation devised.
Likewise, pressure must be applied vis-a-vis the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its allies to end any support for the negative forces
operating in the region. We also share the view
expressed by the Secretary-General that there can be no
lasting peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
without a comprehensive settlement of the situation in
Burundi.

The problem of assuring effective civilian
administration, including the security and safety of the
civilian population, remains a serious challenge to
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We agree with the notion that this is the
responsibility of the parties with de facto control and
we urge those in control to address this problem in a
serious manner. We share the view that human rights,
child protection and civil affairs officers will help to
protect the safety of the civilian population.

We remain deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation and the use of child soldiers
throughout the region. Special Representative Olara
Otunnu's statement today on the exploitation of
children provided an extremely grim picture. Concerted
and urgent efforts are called for by the government
forces, as well as the rebel groups. We look forward to
working with Olara Otunnu on his five-point plan. The
international community must relentlessly address the
aspects relating to the humanitarian situation.
Norway would like to reiterate its support for
regional initiatives to bring peace to the Great Lakes
region.

