I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, for her presentation and for the outstanding work the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) is doing under her leadership. She has the full support of France in her mission. France congratulates the new Prime Minister, Mr. Mustafa Al-Kadhimi, on his nomination and the formation of the Iraqi Government. We are confident that the remaining governmental positions will be filled promptly, and with the participation of women. As the Special Representative underlined, Iraq is facing many internal, regional and economic challenges, and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is adding to that already difficult situation. It is essential that we all provide our support to Iraq at this crucial moment to contain and mitigate the pandemic, which could have tragic consequences, especially for the most vulnerable, and to consolidate the national democratic project of the country. There are four main elements that I would like to underline in this regard. First, it is essential that the new Iraqi Government challenge the status quo in the country to live up to the expectations of the Iraqi people. Meaningful reforms are needed in fighting corruption, promoting sustainable economic growth and diversification, streamlining bureaucracy, improving public services and ensuring gender equality. Iraqi women have also courageously participated in the protests and the full diversity of their voices and demands must be taken into account in any political and decision-making processes. The first measures announced by Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi are encouraging, in particular the commission charged with identifying those responsible for the repression of protesters. Indeed, accountability is crucial to ensuring a stable and democratic Iraq in the long term. The inclusion of members of civil society in the commission is a positive sign, and we encourage the Iraqi Government to continue such engagement with civil society in all areas. Free, fair, inclusive and transparent elections will also be a major milestone in the path towards a sovereign and democratic Iraq. Secondly, it is crucial that Iraq stay away from regional tensions, in line with the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. This is essential for the stability of the country and to facilitate the fight against COVID-19. It is also indispensable for the ongoing fight against Da'esh, in which the international coalition plays a crucial role in support of the Iraqi Government. In this regard, it is also essential that all armed groups be effectively under the control of the State authorities. Thirdly, the humanitarian situation remains of great concern, in particular in the context of the pandemic. We are deeply concerned by the situation of the 1.4 million internally displaced persons, who are extremely vulnerable. Efforts to prevent and respond to COVID-19 must be scaled up, notably in camps for displaced persons and refugees. Swift, safe and unhindered humanitarian access, which has become more difficult over the past few months, is more necessary than ever. In this context, France will continue its assistance efforts, in particular in the fields of humanitarian assistance and health - long-standing priorities for us - including the rebuilding and development of the Faculty of Medicine in Mosul and the construction of a hospital in Sinjar. France will, in particular, support the survivors of sexual violence in Sinjar in the context of the work of the Global Survivors Fund. Fourthly, in this context, it is essential that UNAMI continue to be equipped with a robust mandate in support of the Iraqi people and Government. It plays an indispensable role in favour of inclusive political dialogue, reconciliation, electoral assistance, human rights and accountability. We also strongly encourage UNAMI to continue its engagement with civil society. Finally, I wish to make some remarks on the developments pertaining to missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. Progress is being made monthly on this important issue despite some inevitable delays due to the pandemic. It is important that the cooperation among all actors involved remain strong. Let me conclude by stressing our conviction that a sovereign, inclusive and prosperous Iraq is crucial for a stable and peaceful Middle East. My country is committed to standing firmly alongside the Iraqi people and their Government during these challenging times.
