Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by welcoming the presence of the
Angolan Minister among us today. I should like also to
associate myself with the previous speakers who have
thanked the Secretary-General for his report dated 12
July 2000 and Under-Secretary-General and Special
Adviser on Africa Ibrahim Gambari for his
supplementary statement.

The convening of this new open debate on the
situation in Angola is, in my delegation's opinion, a
welcome initiative, for which I thank the delegation of
Jamaica, and particularly you, Madam President.

Today's debate gives us an opportunity to note
the great concern of the international community over
the enduring conflict in Angola; the war in Angola has
lasted too long. The debate also allows us to emphasize
again that only a political solution can contribute to the
restoration of lasting peace and security in Angola and
the region, and that the United Nations has an essential
part to play in this regard.

As pointed out in the Secretary-General's report,
the ongoing conflict in Angola is a source of grave
concern for the international community, for at least
two reasons. The first is the dangerous humanitarian
situation resulting from it. This situation is described
poignantly in the Secretary-General's report. I recall it
only to emphasize the need, on the one hand, to find
lasting solutions to the problems of displaced persons,
estimated at 2.5 million or 20 per cent of Angola's total
population, and, on the other, to define policies to
improve the living conditions of populations touched
by the war.

In this connection, we welcome the improvement
in the access of humanitarian organizations to
populations at risk and the development by
representatives of Governments, United Nations bodies
and non-governmental organizations of a plan of action
with concrete measures concerning food security,
health and nutrition, resettlement and demining, water
supply and sewerage, security and education,
particularly of women and children. In this context, we
encourage the action taken by the United Nations
Development Programme to help Angola achieve the
fundamental objective of sustainable human
development. We also urge the international
community to respond generously to the United
Nations inter-agency appeal for Angola for 2000.
The prolongation of the conflict in Angola and
the risk of its spillover into the neighbouring countries
is the other reason for the international community's
concern. In this regard, we deplore the attacks against
Namibia and the deterioration of security along the
border with Zambia.

Faced with this situation, Mali believes that only
a political solution can contribute to the restoration of
lasting peace and security in Angola. In that context,
we welcome the fact that the Angolan authorities
continue to regard the Lusaka Protocol as a legitimate
basis for the peace process. We urge UNITA to show,
in a convincing manner, its willingness to fulfil the
obligations imposed on it by the Protocol and to work
towards genuine national reconciliation.

We also consider that the Security Council must
support and encourage efforts to promote dialogue
between all the parties, dialogue which will lead to the
lasting peace and national reconciliation that the
Angolan people wholeheartedly call for after so many
years of suffering. I wish to mention in particular the
initiatives of civil society and the Angolan Church,
which show the constructive commitment of these two
energetic forces within the process of a peaceful
settlement of the conflict in Angola.

Mali considers it to be of the greatest importance
that the international community lend its full support to
the democratization process and encourage respect for
human rights in Angola, which are the cornerstones of
normalization of the country's daily life, and pursuit of
an effective process of national reconciliation.

Mali also considers it essential to strengthen the
effectiveness of the measures imposed by the Security
Council against UNITA aimed at promoting a peaceful
settlement of the conflict in Angola, particularly by
reducing UNITA's capacity to pursue its goals
militarily.

Finally, Mali attaches great importance to the
United Nations presence in Angola. This presence can
greatly contribute to promoting peace, national
reconciliation, respect for human rights and security in
the region. We therefore welcome the appointment of
the head of the United Nations Office in Angola and
we assure Ambassador Gambari of our complete
support.

In concluding, I wish to reaffirm the commitment
and solidarity of the people and Government of Mali
with the people and Government of Angola in order to
ensure that the peace process is worthy of Maitre
Alioune Blondin Beye, my master, friend and
compatriot, who gave his life for the restoration of
peace in Angola.

