Mr. Smejkal (Czech Republic): The Czech Republic
welcomes this open Security Council debate on children
in armed conflict, which, in our opinion, clearly shows
that the protection of children affected by war is now
very high on the agenda of the international community.

This is certainly most appropriate, in View of the
gravity of the problems involved. We are grateful to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ambassador Olara Otunnu,
for his thought-provoking statement. His ideas indeed
deserve most careful consideration. The Czech Republic
welcomed Ambassador Otunnu's appointment as Special
Representative and we gladly renew our pledge of support
for his admirable and efficient efforts in furthering the
cause of protecting children affected by armed conflict.
We note with satisfaction and appreciation that
Ambassador Otunnu's voice has already proven to be a
very audible and influential one and has contributed
greatly to ensuring that the plight of children exposed to
war is more vigorously addressed by the international
community.

The Czech Republic has aligned itself with the
European Union statement delivered this morning and it
therefore goes without saying that it fully subscribes to its
content. I would, however, like to elaborate a bit and

 

present additional views of my delegation on one specific
aspect of the issue of children in armed conflict.

The Convention on the Rights of the Child protects
children - by which it means persons below the age of
18 - in a wide variety of situations. But paradoxically, it
also contains a clause according to which the age limit for
entitlement to such protection is lowered to 15 years when
a child takes part in armed conflict, that is, in a situation
which typically endangers the child and leads to a violation
of its rights. Regrettably, the fact that the international
community has been so far unable to set a higher standard
is merely a reflection of the current state of affairs;
estimates indicate that 250,000 children below the age of 18
are taking part in more than 30 armed conflicts around the
world. According to information provided by the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), children represent 40
per cent of all victims of armed conflicts.

The Commission on Human Rights working group on
a draft optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflicts
has so far, after four sessions, failed to reach consensus on
the text or, more importantly, on crucial issues such as the
age limit for participation in armed conflicts.

We are convinced that potential decisions to set this
age limit anywhere below 18 years would discredit the just
intentions and efforts of the United Nations to protect
effectively the rights of the child. We believe that those few
Governments which have difficulties with the text of the
draft protocol will review their position so that the protocol
can be finalized as soon as possible.

The Czech Republic is now experiencing far-reaching
legislative changes, and we therefore fully understand how
difficult it is to overhaul domestic legislation and introduce
new rules and put them into practice. However, we cannot
accept the tendency to adjust international standards
according to the domestic law of any State. On the
contrary, international standards must be taken as a model
for the adjustment of both domestic law and practice.

The Czech Republic will actively promote the creation
of an international standard which will become the
springboard for changing international practice. To this end,
we will support the efforts of the newly created coalition of
the major international non-governmental organizations
against the use of child soldiers. The implementation of the
new standard will require a comprehensive long-term effort.
However, we wish to reaffirm Economic and Social
Council decision 1997/281, and hope that the text of the
protocol will be approved next year.

