The continued Israeli occupation of the occupied Arab territories is a clear indication of the politicization, manipulation and blatant double standards that face the principles of international law and the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. The Palestinian question has accompanied the United Nations since the early days of its establishment, and the Security Council and other United Nations bodies have adopted hundreds of resolutions that affirm the need to end the Israeli occupation of Arab lands, including the occupied Syrian Golan. The Security Council has also held hundreds of meetings on this issue since the adoption of the item "The situation in the Middle East", on a monthly basis, several decades ago. However, those efforts went unheeded owing to Israel's disdain for the United Nations and the resolutions of the Council, foremost among which are resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981). Israel refuses to commit to those resolutions because of the support it receives from some Member States, especially the United States, which contributes to prolonging the occupation, increasing the number of grave violations of international law, augmenting acts of aggression and threatening regional and international peace and security. The inability of the United Nations to implement its resolutions has encouraged some to shirk their legal commitments and the agreed terms of reference, seek to twist the facts and entrench the occupation. That has been seen over the past few months through the unilateral, unlawful and provocative actions taken, including the United States Administration considering occupied Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, its declaration of what it referred to as recognition of Israeli sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan and the occupation authorities' attempt to annex territories of the West Bank. The Syrian Arab Republic, along with the overwhelming majority of Member States, affirms its strong condemnation of those decisions and considers them as a merely unilateral act issued by a party that does not possess either the status or the political, legal or moral capacity to decide the fate of the peoples of the world or to dispose of lands that are an integral part of the territories of the Syrian Arab Republic and occupied Palestine. Israel, the occupying Power, continues, through its systematic and dangerous practices, to try to consolidate its control and impose its will on the occupied Syrian Golan, including, but not limited to: seeking to organize illegal local elections in the occupied Syrian Golan, concluding contracts and granting licenses to usurp its natural resources, looting the property of Syrian citizens and displacing them in order to set up a project to generate power by wind turbines and forcing our people in the Golan to register the lands that they inherited from their ancestors with the Israel Land Authority under penalty of confiscating the lands of protesters. Furthermore, Israel continues settlement activities and has announced the establishment of a new settlement called Trump Heights. This new settlement was a present from the Prime Minister of the Israeli occupation to American President Trump for his flagrant violation of United Nations resolutions and international law in unilaterally recognizing what he termed Israeli sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan. All these practices are flagrant violations of international law and international humanitarian law, with which some deal with double standards and unlimited hypocrisy. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic reaffirms that the policy of arbitrary detention and mock trials pursued by the Israeli occupation forces are part of a series of crimes and human rights violations committed by Israel against Syrian citizens in the occupied Syrian Golan over the more than five decades of its occupation of the Syrian Golan. In that context, Syria rejects the arbitrary and unjust ruling issued by the Israeli occupation forces on 10 June of three years' imprisonment for the patriotic activist Nihal Suleiman Al-Mudt, sister of the released prisoner Sidqi Al-Muqt, who is from the town of Majdal Shams, in the occupied Syrian Golan. That ruling is unlawful and invalid because it was issued by an illegal occupation force, and it complements the oppressive and arbitrary practices against the people of the occupied Golan and punishes them for their national positions, adherence to their homeland and Syrian identity. Finally, my Government affirms that the occupied Syrian Golan is an integral part of the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic and that its restoration to the line of 4 June 1967 by all means guaranteed by international law will remain a priority for Syrian policy and the compass from which it will not deviate.. Syria reiterates its support for the right of the Palestinian people to self- determination and the establishment of an independent State over all of its national territory and its capital, Jerusalem, while ensuring the right of refugees to return to their homes in accordance with resolution 194 (IID), of 1948. It renews its call to grant the State of Palestine full membership in the United Nations.
