The President: I thank Mr. Prendergast for
his statement.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.

I thank Secretary-General Guterres for being here
today and shining a light on the link between corruption
and international peace and security.

I also thank John Prendergast for telling us about
the important work his team does to uncover the ways
that corruption fuels conflict and for giving us clear
recommendations on what we can do to stop it.

I thank everyone for being here for this, the first
Security Council meeting on the relationship between
corruption and conflict. This is an issue that has for
too long gone unaddressed. For all the time we spend
here discussing conflict, we hardly ever talk about how
corruption fuels the instability, violence and criminal
activity that put countries on our agenda. We pour
billions and billions of dollars into trying to fix these
problems. We deploy Blue Helmets. We set up massive
assistance missions. We send experts to all corners
of the globe. But we fail to recognize the issue that is
staring us in the face - corruption.

At its core, corruption is the transfer of wealth
from the powerless to the powerful. Bribes, insider
deals, the skimming of public funds and the diversion
of humanitarian aid - these are all forms of the
involuntary tribute the poorest pay to the powerful
and corrupt regimes. When the weight of this burden
becomes too much for the people to endure, they
inevitably react. Corruption also allows transnational
crime and drug trafficking to flourish, threatening the
health and safety of all of us. The resulting instability
and outflows of desperate people demonstrate that
corruption is not just an internal matter; it is a regional
and global concern for all of us.

On 17 December 2010, a humble Tunisian fruit
seller sat down in front of the local governor's office,
dowsed himself in paint thinner and set himself on
fire. Mohamed Bouazizi's desperate act set off the
Arab Spring and made him the face of protest against
authoritarian Governments. What is often lost in his
story is that Mohamed was driven to publicly and
painfully kill himself by corruption. Like other poor
street vendors in Tunisia, Mohamed was routinely
harassed by officials seeking bribes. Hours before his
suicide, he had experienced yet another humiliating
Shakedown by a local police officer. Perhaps hoping
that others would understand his plight, Mohamed
committed one final act of protest against the system
that was robbing him not only of his livelihood but of
his dignity.

Mohamed's action sparked a wave of anti-corruption
uprising across the Arab world. Governments that
had appeared stable for decades fell within weeks. In
Yemen, Syria and Libya, protest quickly spiraled into
conflicts as corrupt leaders and their cronies tried to
hang on to power. All of this unrest eventually found
its way to the Security Council's agenda. In fact, nine
out of the ten countries that Transparency International
considers to be the most corrupt in the world are on the
Security Council agenda - nine out of ten. But instead
of reflecting on why this is the case, the United Nations
is too often willing to ignore corruption. We fear that
addressing it will put off Governments and shut off
cooperation, or we regard corruption as just the cost of
doing business in some countries.

But this head-in-the-sand approach is backwards.
In the most troubled countries in the world, corruption
is not simply part of the system; corruption is the
system. Governments in places like Venezuela and Iran
do not exist to serve their people and happen to do a
little corruption on the side; they exist to serve their
own interests and corruption is the means by which
they do so.

The fact is that corrupt regimes cannot be ignored,
wished away or dealt with quietly or with whispers. If the
Security Council is going to deliver on its commitment
to peace and security, corruption must be addressed.
Examples of corruption leading to conflict are all around
us. The estimates of how much the corrupt Government
of Viktor Yanukovych stole from the Ukrainian people
run as high as $100 billion over the course of less than
four years. His lavish lifestyle was legendary and
greatly resented by the Ukrainian people. And when
Yanukovych was eventually ousted for his crimes, the
ripple effects were global. Russia occupied Crimea and
began the most serious confrontation between Moscow
and the West since the Cold War.

Corruption also fuels terrorist movements. Citizens
who watch Government insiders get rich by stealing
resources or demanding brides are ripe for recruitment
by terrorists. Boko Haram gained power and support in
Nigeria largely in opposition to Government corruption
and oppression. The first targets of its violent
attacks were the police stations that housed Nigeria's
notoriously corrupt and abusive police force. And as
Boko Haram carried out barbaric attacks that killed
thousands, Nigeria's leaders stole countless amounts
of money to defeat terrorism. Since then, Nigeria has
taken real steps towards reform, and we commend the
Government for recognizing the need for change.

Corruption sustains and prolongs conflict. The
ethnic divisions in South Sudan are real, but the driving
source of the conflict is a fight over who will control
South Sudan's oil revenues, as we heard earlier today.
Until there is a way to transparently distribute natural
resources in a way that is seen as fair by the South
Sudanese people, the civil war will go on. Elsewhere
in Africa, groups exploit natural resources, even
trafficking in wildlife to pay for war.

Corruption is also an international problem
because looted funds are laundered through the global
financial system. More than any other country, the
United States has taken action to stop this. Through
the Kleptocracy Initiative, the Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act, and the Global Magnitsky Human Rights
Accountability Act, we have shut down corrupt actors
involved in drug trafficking, arms trafficking, and
money-laundering.

In countries like the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Nicaragua and Venezuela, where corruption has
fuelled conflict or prevented its resolution, the United
States Treasury has levelled significant sanctions. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Treasury used the
Global Magnitsky authority to sanction businessman
Dan Gertler, one associated individual and 33 entities
for corruption related to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

In Venezuela, the United States Treasury has
imposed targeted sanctions on Government officials
to stop them from moving their stolen assets in the
international financial system. And we have gone
the extra mile to ensure that our sanctions are aimed
directly at the Maduro regime and not at the Venezuelan
people. Later today, the United States will host an Arria
Formula meeting that will focus specifically on the toll
that corruption in Venezuela has taken on its people and
how it threatens international security. We welcome all
Member States to join us at the meeting.

Last year during the United States presidency, we
demonstrated that human rights is an issue of peace and
security. This year, we make the same argument for the
Council's time and attention on the issue of corruption.
By the time a person like Mohamed Bouazizi is moved
to lash out against his oppressors, it is too late to
prevent corruption from becoming a full-fledged threat
to international peace and security.

To those of my colleagues who are serious about
fulfilling their duties as members of the Security
Council, I urge that we take a longer view. If we fail
to take seriously the issue of corruption now, we will
doom ourselves to deal with the violence it creates in
the future.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to Council members who wish
to make statements.

