Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (Spoke in Arabic): I
am grateful for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the latest developments in the pursuit for
peace in Yemen.

The past month has been tragic for Yemen. The
departure from Kuwait without an agreement has
betrayed the expectations of millions of Yemenis,
who had hoped that the talks would bring an end to
the conflict and open the way for Yemen's return to a
peaceful and orderly transition. The end of the Kuwait
talks was followed by a severe breakdown in the
cessation of hostilities and a dangerous escalation in
military activities. Extensive military confrontations
have been on-going in recent weeks in Sana'a, Taiz,
Al-Jawf, Shabwa and March governorates, as well as
along the border between Yemen and the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia. The clashes have involved the use
of artillery, airstrikes and ballistic missiles and have
resulted in dozens of casualties, extensive destruction
and renewed displacement.

As has been the case throughout the conflict,
numerous violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law have accompanied the fighting.
On 17 August, the Secretary-General noted with concern
the continued escalation of hostilities in Yemen and
along the border area, including airstrikes and ground
fighting. He also condemned in the strongest terms the
attack on a rural hospital in Haj jah.

According to human rights organizations, at
least 60 members of the Baha'i community in Sana'a
have been detained without charge, including six
children. Further arrests were reportedly carried out on
16 August. That shows a worrying disrespect for the
human rights of minority groups, and I echo the call
from human rights groups for the immediate release
of those still in detention. I also call on all the parties
to fulfil their obligations and release all prisoners and
detainees. I furthermore call upon all groups to uphold
their obligations under international humanitarian
law and human rights law to protect civilian lives
and infrastructure.

The military escalation will continue to provide
opportunities for the spread of terrorist groups.
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State continue to wreak havoc
in significant parts of Yemen. For example, a suicide
attack in Aden killed or injured dozens of Yemenis
on 29 August. That attack was strongly condemned.
The Yemeni army's increasing ability to confront
extremist groups, as evidenced by the recent detention
of suspected militants from Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula and the carrying out of military operations
in Zinjibar and Hadramout, is encouraging. However,
the absence of the State in many parts of Yemen, in
addition to the chaos created by war, will continue to
facilitate the expansion of those terrorist groups, which
represents a real threat to the region.

The Kuwait talks concluded after more than
three months of difficult negotiations. I would like to
reiterate my gratitude to the Amir of Kuwait for hosting
the talks and for his efforts to encourage the Yemeni
parties to conclude an agreement. The talks in Kuwait
did not yield an agreement, but they were not without
important results. During the talks, the architecture of
a road map emerged, which we will expand upon in the
coming weeks. Before departing Kuwait, I agreed with
both parties to continue consultations separately and to
reconvene direct talks at a later stage.

Delaying progress towards an agreement
is particularly dangerous considering the grave
deterioration in the economic situation. Of particular
concern are delays in the payment of salaries in many
parts of the country. Without external support, the lack
of revenue and the shortage of liquidity could make it
impossible for salaries to be paid in the coming months.
There are reports of civil servants unable to collect
their wages in Aden and other parts of the south. The
stoppage of salary payments risks driving many more
Yemenis into destitution and vastly exacerbating the
humanitarian situation. It will be necessary to find
practical solutions that will allow Yemen to overcome
the liquidity crisis and ensure continued payments
of salaries without discrimination everywhere in
the country.

From a humanitarian perspective, the escalation
in fighting has led to tragic and unnecessary civilian
deaths, casualties and a worsening of humanitarian
suffering. The number of internally displaced persons
has risen to over 3 million. Food prices are on average
at least 60 per cent above pre-crisis levels, while income
levels have dropped dramatically. Despite the growing
levels of need, it has become increasingly difficult
for humanitarian agencies to access many areas. The
health-care system and other basic social services are
struggling to cope with an increased workload and
fewer resources. The cessation of Yemenia flights to
and from Sana'a has blocked access to Yemenis seeking
urgent medical treatment abroad, thereby removing a
much needed humanitarian lifeline. In that context,
I welcome United States Secretary of State Kerry's
announcement of an additional $189 million to the
Yemen humanitarian response plan, which remains
funded at only 28 per cent.

Over the past two weeks, I have conducted intensive
meetings in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Sultanate
of Oman, the United Arab Emirates and Qatar. In
Riyadh, I met with President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour and Prime Minister Ahmed Obaid Mubarek
Bin-Dagher, who reaffirmed their willingness to
continue consultations on the basis of the principles
agreed upon in Kuwait. During those Visits, I also held
extensive discussions with the Foreign Ministers and
senior officials of Yemen, the Sultanate of Oman, the
State of Qatar, the Russian Federation, the United Arab
Emirates, the United Kingdom and the United States.
The discussions reaffirmed the strong international
and regional support for a settlement of the conflict
in Yemen and a commitment to help overcome the
desperate economic and humanitarian challenges
facing the country.

During my latest visit to the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, I briefed a joint meeting of Saudi Arabia,
the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom and
the United States that had been called specifically to
discuss how to overcome obstacles in the peace process.
That meeting was followed by a discussion with the
Foreign Ministers of the member States of the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC), who emphasized their
full support of the United Nations efforts in Yemen. In
both encounters, there was strong support for a return
to the cessation of hostilities, which began on 10 April.
There was also consensus on the need for a full and
comprehensive political solution involving clearly
sequenced political and security measures and firmly
grounded in the GCC initiative and its implementation
mechanism, resolution 2216 (2015) and the National
Dialogue Conference outcomes.

That proposed agreement would define a path for
the rapid formation of a Government of national unity
to be formed immediately following the withdrawal
and handover of heavy weapons in Sana'a and some
other vital areas. Implementation would be overseen
by military and security committees made up of senior
military professionals acceptable to both parties, who
would assume responsibility for the security of the
population, critical infrastructure and State institutions.
The agreement would also provide for the immediate
restoration of the functioning of State institutions, free
from interference by revolutionary committees or other
bodies created during the conflict.

The effective resumption of talks will be possible
only if all parties maintain their commitment to a
negotiated settlement and refrain from unilateral actions.
I am extremely concerned by the announcement by
Ansar Allah and former President, Ali Abdullah Saleh,
of the formation of a supreme political council with
broad administrative, security, economic and legislative
powers. Those actions breach the commitments
provided by both Ansar Allah and the General People's
Congress to engage constructively in the peace process,
as requested by the Security Council, and creates a
new potential impediment to make progress towards
an agreement. Unilateral actions of that sort will only
complicate Yemen's path to peace and delay the end of
military violence. We cannot effectively negotiate new
political arrangements while unilateral steps are being
taken that are inconsistent with a future comprehensive
agreement. I therefore urge both parties to refrain
from taking any additional unilateral steps that could
undermine attempts to reach a peaceful settlement.

On the basis of international and regional support,
I will resume consultations with the Government of
Yemen, Ansar Allah and the General People's Congress
in order to take advantage of this new initiative to and
build on the progress made in Kuwait.

In order to accelerate progress along the path
to renewed talks, the resumption of the cessation of
hostilities will be critical. Further military violence
will not ease the way to a negotiated settlement. As
we resume consultations, my priority will be to gain
a recommitment from all sides to the cessation of
hostilities. That should start with the full deployment
of the De-escalation and Coordination Committee
in Dharan Al-Janub. As specified in the terms and
conditions agreed upon before the start of the Kuwait
consultations, the cessation of hostilities should include
a full end to all military activities by land, sea or air,
using any kind of weapon. It should also include a
complete de-escalation along Yemen's border with
Saudi Arabia.

The recommitment to the cessation of hostilities
will spare Yemen further loss of life, allow for an
increase in the flow of humanitarian assistance and
generate much-needed confidence for the negotiation
of a comprehensive and peaceful solution. Only a
negotiated political settlement can put an end to
the devastation and injustice brought about by this
horrific war. The Yemeni people have suffered for far
too long, and understandably demand that Yemen's
leaders demonstrate their commitment to the well-
being of Yemen and the Yemeni people, and that they
restore peace and security to their country without
further delay.

Peace in Yemen is a priority, and the safety and
security of all Yemenis should not be taken for granted.
The United Nations has dedicated all of its political and
administrative expertise to help Yemenis, but that will
not be sufficient if the decision makers do not uphold
their responsibilities and prioritize the interest of the
population. The United Nations has not, and will not,
fail Yemen. Yemen's leaders must not fail the Yemeni
people - all the Yemeni people - in the south and in
the morth.

