Mr. Dlamini (Swaziland): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of September, and
especially on your convening of this debate on the situation
in Africa.

Two years ago, we welcomed with relief the efforts
undertaken by the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa, contained in document S/1998/318.
For this reason, we in Africa became optimistic that the
world community, including the United Nations, would by
now have fully devised appropriate structures to assist
Africa in dealing effectively with the turbulent situations
Africa continues to face.

To our dismay, however, efforts towards this end have
not been easily forthcoming. Africa continues to be afflicted
by a number of problems, such as wars, disease and
poverty. Some of the problems facing Africa are inherent
in colonial historical perspectives. It is for this reason that
the people of Africa have been deprived continuously of
their right to enjoy peace and security in their mother continent.
As a follow-up to the Secretary-General's initiative,
we are pleased to note that concrete proposals for action, as
outlined in his recent report (S/l999/1008), have been
identified, particularly on support for regional and
subregional initiatives in the areas of conflict prevention
and the maintenance of peace. However, I must hasten to
sound a word of caution here. These should not only
remain on paper but should be implemented as and when
necessity demands, for the continued hostilities in Africa
dictate that the international community should come up
with a new approach in order to ward off future civil
strife. This is notwithstanding Africa's primary
responsibility to resolve its own problems. Africa
continues to count on a strong and genuine partnership
with the international community towards the eradication
of all root causes of conflicts and economic problems in
Africa. Furthermore, we continue to count on the
assistance of the United Nations and all our friends in
tackling all of the humanitarian problems which linger
and thus threaten Africa's survival.

We recently welcomed with open arms the ceasefire
reached in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to end
the conflict that has ravaged that country. We hail all the
parties that have brought about the signing of the
ceasefire agreement in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, particularly President Chiluba of Zambia, whose
wisdom and diplomatic skills resulted in the signing of
the ceasefire agreement. It is our fervent hope that all
parties to the conflict will abide by the ceasefire
agreement and be able to sit together and discuss ways
and means to move forward in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The implementation process of the
agreement remains crucial to the Congolese people and
indeed to the entire African continent. In this regard, I
wish to reiterate the call made by President Chiluba when
he addressed the Council last week on the urgent need to
send a peacekeeping force to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo with a mandate to tackle the complex and
unique problems in that country.

Furthermore, I wish to draw the attention of the
Council to the fact that hundreds of thousands of
Congolese people are today living as refugees in
neighbouring countries. Within the country itself, a good
number has been displaced. That situation alone demands
that the international community should as a matter of
priority make available adequate resources to enable the
safe return of the Congolese people in their country.

While we share the joy of the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo over the ceasefire, a
peaceful situation in Angola has not been forthcoming.
Reports of renewed fighting in some parts of the country
are discouraging indeed. This is despite the joint efforts
by the United Nations, the Organization of African Unity
and the Southern African Development Community to

 

help peacefully resolve the conflict. The people of Angola
have suffered enough. The time has come for the
international community to condemn unreservedly the acts
of destabilization by the rebels led by Jonas Savimbi and
his failure to respect the Lusaka Protocol, which was meant
to put an end to the hostilities and to start the peace process
in that country.

The strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations and Africa's regional organizations for the
enhancement of Africa's peacekeeping capacity is a step in
the right direction, save for the lack of resources to help
carry out this exercise. In this regard we join the Secretary-
General in appealing to Member States to generously make
contributions to the trust fund set up in this connection so
as to make effective the efforts of the Secretariat in
building Africa's capacity in peacemaking. The opening of
regional peacekeeping training centres in Africa will go a
long way towards preparing military personnel in the
continent to deal with the conflict situations which continue
to engulf our continent.

I wish to end by emphasizing the shared responsibility
the international community has with respect to the
problems of Africa. Neglecting the continent, as it were,
will not help but will continue to hinder the United Nations
efforts in its quest to achieve peace and security throughout
the world. Transforming Africa into a peaceful region is a
commitment and a responsibility the international
community cannot afford to easily abdicate.

We the people of Africa are concerned, as we continue
to make statements here in the Council, as to whether the
seed we are sowing here is falling on fertile ground. We
have made many statements and appeals, both personally
and through our representatives in the Security Council, but
to our dismay the Council is moving at a tortoise's pace
towards taking seriously what the plight of Africa is all
about.

We know our problems in Africa, and we also know
from where they emanated. And even though those
countries have complicated our problems in Africa, Africa
has never produced any weapons of war. But these wars
which are fought today are fought by means of guns
produced elsewhere, hence Africa is regarded by the rich
nations as a market where all sorts of wars can be fought
using arms from those countries.

I therefore appeal to the Council, as we end today's
debate, to come up with a resolution stating what will be
done to those members of the Council that continue to
traffic in and sell the arms of war that have maimed the
African population.

We never knew that after obtaining independence we
would still continue to suffer.

We had hoped that we, like the people of any other
region of the world, would be allowed to enjoy the fruits
of our freedom. This Council - indeed, the United
Nations - must search for answers to the question why
Africa has even until today never known peace and has
never enjoyed the fruits of independence. The answer lies
with this Council, and we in Africa are waiting longingly
to hear what steps this Council will take, and take soon.

I do have a question: if the Council were to vote
today, at the end of this meeting, how many of the
members of the Security Council would endorse forming
and deploying a large, multinational force to control the
conflicts in Africa, as they have done for other regions of
the world? We do not hate being African: God made no
mistake in making us African, but we want people to
appreciate our being African, and help us because our
development really was delayed by the accidents of
colonial history, which is why, today, we are suffering
these setbacks.

I hope that you will pardon me, Mr. President, for
being emotional here. I am sending a strong message,
which should be followed by a strong resolution to
respond to the conflicts in Africa.

