Mr. Marani (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Twenty years after the incorporation of this agenda
item into our programme of work, it is crucial that the
Security Council remain committed to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict by promoting international
law, particularly humanitarian law, human rights law
and refugee law, as well as the fight against impunity.

In the context of the seventieth anniversary of the
four Geneva Conventions of 1949, it is imperative to
recall the obligations arising from those instruments,
including the Protocols Additional of 1977, the
Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 and customary
international law.

Argentina believes it essential that the protection
of civilians during peacekeeping operations take
place within a framework of respect for the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
It is necessary to strengthen protection activities
in the mandates of peacekeeping operations and to
ensure that they have the resources necessary for
their implementation. The use of force in response to
threats of physical violence against civilians must also
be authorized in accordance with the applicable legal
obligations, the mandate established by the Council
and the specific rules of confrontation and engagement
of each mission. We believe that unarmed strategies
to protect civilians in peacekeeping operations are
valuable instruments that can help promote the pursuit
of peaceful solutions.

The Republic of Argentina also supports the
Vision centred on prevention and early warning for the
mandates promoted by the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians, as well as the connection with
the second pillar of the responsibility to protect - a
concept that we have helped to consolidate. We believe
that the protection of civilians in peace missions
requires the cooperation of their military, police and
civilian components. For that reason, the peacekeeping
forces deployed by Argentina receive training on
human rights, gender and humanitarian issues. We also
have an active policy of international cooperation on
prevention, and we believe it is essential to advance the
mainstreaming of the women and peace and security
agenda across the entire United Nations system.

With regard to humanitarian assistance, the parties
to a conflict must make every effort to guarantee
effective and timely access to humanitarian assistance,
including shipments and materials, which enjoys special
protection under international humanitarian law.

In 2018, Argentina signed the Santiago de Chile
communique supporting the process designed to lead
to the negotiation and adoption of an international
political declaration on the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas, which results in deaths, injuries and
trauma to civilians, destroys essential infrastructure,
creates involuntary displacement and leaves behind
explosive remnants that represent a long-term threat.
Argentina therefore welcomes the Secretary-General's
approach to tackling this threat in his Agenda
for Disarmament.

In recognizing that young people constitute a large
proportion of the civilians affected by armed conflicts
and that the interruption of access to education and
economic opportunities has decisive consequences
for peace, Argentina reiterates its call to States that
have not yet done so to endorse the Safe Schools
Declaration. In that regard, next week in Palma de
Mallorca we wish Spain a successful third International
Conference on Safe Schools, in which we will be proud
to participate. The Council must continue to consider
specific situations, as it has done in the case of women,
children, journalists and medical personnel. We want
to emphasize the importance of the role of the system
for the protection of children in armed conflicts,
which must receive the support it needs to fulfil its
mandate. We also support the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers.

Argentina reaffirms the effective and preventive
effect of accountability mechanisms. In that regard, I
would like to highlight the work of the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission and the
central role of the International Criminal Court. We
want to point out that in accordance with its Rome
Statute, the Court has jurisdiction over many attacks
on civilian populations. Lastly, it is worrying that some
measures in the fight against terrorism continue to
affect humanitarian activities. We reiterate the General
Assembly's call to States to ensure that legislation
and measures against terrorism do not impede
such activities.

The existing normative framework on the protection
of civilians must be translated into concrete results on
the ground. We hope that the Council will redouble its
efforts to find the best ways to make that happen.

