Mr. Wittig (Germany): As President of the
Security Council for the month of July 2011, Germany
was responsible for the preparation of the introduction
of the draft annual report of the Security Council to the
General Assembly.

The draft report contains a comprehensive
account of all meetings and activities of the Council, as
well as of the wide range of thematic areas covered
during the reporting period. It is our hope that the draft
report also reflects the fact that the Council exercises
its mandate with diligence and responsibility in the
face of the many challenging issues it had before it
during the reporting period.

During the drafting process, we relied mainly on
the monthly assessments and the views expressed by
all Council members. In order to ensure that it
accurately and adequately reflected the Council's work,
activities and outcomes, the draft report was revised
2

several times following comments and proposals made
by Council members. Throughout this process, States
that were members of the Security Council during the
reporting period had the opportunity to review and
reach agreement on the draft report prior to this
meeting. I would therefore like to express my
appreciation and gratitude to all present and former
Council members for their cooperation and input, as
well as for the cordial and cooperative atmosphere that
prevailed throughout the drafting phase.

In preparing for the compilation of the draft
report, we built on the good practice - established by
Viet Nam in 2008 and continued by Uganda in 2009
and by your own delegation, Madame, in 2010 - of
holding an informal meeting with the wider United
Nations membership with a view to exchanging views
on the upcoming draft report. That meeting, which was
held on 29 June and co-chaired by Nigeria, Portugal
and Germany, was extremely useful both for the input
received and for fostering the working relationship
between the Council and non-Council members. We
therefore join our predecessors in expressing our hope
for the continuation of this practice in the future.
Non-Council members increasingly express a keen
interest in being informed in a substantial manner
about the work of the Security Council. We should all
work to satisfy that legitimate interest in order to
enhance the transparency and accessibility of the
Security Council and its work.

Finally, I would like to express our sincere thanks
to the Secretariat for its invaluable support and
assistance in compiling the draft report.

