Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura and Deputy High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, Thomas Markram, for their
briefings. We express our gratitude to Council members
for initiating this emergency meeting, which we hope
will lead to the launching of a timely and objective
investigation of the incident in Douma.

We firmly believe that the Security Council remains
the main and sole body authorized to counter threats
to international peace and security. Unfortunately, the
situation within the Council is becoming increasingly
strained. In order to achieve an appropriate solution to
these critical issues, it is of utmost importance that the
Council act unanimously, in a balanced and pragmatic
manner. To that end, we must demonstrate greater
flexibility and negotiability, rising above our national
interests in order to achieve peace and stability. Any
controversy that involves prejudices and mutual
accusations and lacks conclusive results and irrefutable
evidence will have only a destructive effect and will not
lead to the results that the world community expects
from us.

With regard to the chemical attacks in Syria, we
mourn together with the families of those killed and
express our solidarity with them in the face of such
atrocities, by which innocent civilians become victims
of the relentless confrontation of the opposing parties.
Kazakhstan has always taken a firm and resolute stand,
uncompromisingly condemning any use of chemical
weapons as the most heinous action and an unacceptable
war crime.

With regard to the situation in Douma, we call for
an investigation into this alleged incident to be carried
out and for all the circumstances to be clarified as soon
as possible. The Council has the great responsibility
to act on verifiable facts, not only before the world
community, but before ourselves. Furthermore, history
itself will ultimately be the judge of our decisions.
Therefore, we need to verify all the details of the
incident. In that regard, we would like to draw attention
to the following aspects.

First, are there any other reliable sources, in
addition to White Helmets' claims, and who can verify
the veracity of the assessments and testimonies of those
sources? Some claim that the number of victims is 70,
while others report that there were more than 150 victims
and still others believe there were only 25 victims. Even
one victim is too many. However, today, the Russian
Federation denied the attack altogether. There are many
allegations and assumptions regarding the very facts
concerning the use of a toxic chemical substance.

Secondly, we consider it important to take into
account the fact that the Government of Syria has
repeatedly notified us and requested that we check its
reports that a number of terrorist groups on the side
of the opposition were making attempts to transfer
chemical weapons and prepare chemical attacks on the
territory of eastern Ghouta. Actually, these allegations
have not been given due attention and we have had no
opportunity to verify all the facts. We are not advocating
for any side in this conflict, but rather demanding a full
and objective investigation on the basis of which we can
make a thoughtful decision.

Thirdly, we believe that it is imperative to conduct
an independent investigation. We again recall the urgent
need for an investigative mechanism, the establishment
of which depends on the permanent members of the
Council. They must make every possible effort to
find common ground on the issue. We urgently need
objective and verifiable information, as well as an
immediate, independent, transparent and unbiased
investigation before any decision or action, unilateral
or otherwise, is taken.

We fully support the proposal that the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Fact-
finding Mission be sent at the earliest. We are certain
that the Syrian people are very interested in an objective
investigation. Therefore, Damascus and opposing
parties should provide all assistance and secure access
for the speedy visit of the OPCW inspectors to the
incident sites to collect facts on the ground.

Finally, we again call for the preservation and
strengthening of the unity of the Council to reach
a consensus-based decision to preserve peace and
stability in the world.

