Mr. Adorn (Cote d'Ivoire): My delegation thanks
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their
informative briefings on the latest developments in the
political and humanitarian situations in Yemen.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the signing of the
agreement reached on 5 November in Riyadh between
the Yemeni Government and the separatists of the
Southern Transitional Council. The agreement provides
for power-sharing within a new Government formation
and the return of institutions to Aden, the provisional
capital. That is very good news for the Yemeni people
and for the peace process. Negotiations made possible

by the involvement of regional actors send a strong
message of unity to all stakeholders. All stakeholders,
without exception, should be encouraged to see that
advance as a window of opportunity to overcome
their differences through negotiated political solutions
that would consolidate the de-escalation and further
boost the peace process. It would also be wise to fully
involve women and young people in the quest for that
long-awaited peace. Above all, Cote d'Ivoire would
like the Riyadh agreement to serve as an anchor point
for building an environment of trust between the
parties concerned. It also supports ongoing diplomatic
initiatives, in particular those under the auspices of the
Sultanate of Oman, to facilitate talks between regional
actors and the Houthis.

Cote d'Ivoire shares the international community's
concerns about the particularly worrisome
humanitarian situation in Yemen. Indeed, after several
years of conflict, Yemen is a depleted country where,
according to United Nations agencies, 80 per cent ofthe
population is experiencing a humanitarian emergency,
10 million people are food insecure and 3.3 million are
internally displaced. It is therefore important to invite
all the protagonists of the current crisis to respect
human rights and international humanitarian law. In
that regard, my country welcomes the adoption by the
Human Rights Council on 26 September of resolution
42/2, condemning breaches of those international
legal standards.

Cote d'Ivoire believes that it is urgent to ensure the
full implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, signed
in December 2018. Compliance with the provisions of
the Al-Hudaydah Agreement on the redeployment of
military forces from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa remains an urgent necessity in that regard.
Control of the ports is undoubtedly the main issue and
obstruction to the process of the full redeployment
of military forces from those port facilities. The
establishment of local security forces in those ports
should therefore allow for a revitalization of the
political process. That is why my country welcomed
this morning's announcement by Mr. Griffiths of an
oil tanker entering the port of Al-Hudaydah to supply
the country with oil. C6te d'Ivoire urges the Yemeni
parties to pursue the redeployment of military forces
from the ports under the auspices of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee and to cooperate fully
with the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hodeidah Agreement.

The relative ceasefire observed by the Houthis
since 21 September and the releasing of 290 prisoners
should constitute the basis of a peace agreement.
We welcome that as a very positive step forward.
Those humanitarian gestures, consistent with the
Stockholm Agreement, should serve to create an
environment conducive to the continuing exchange of
prisoners and the implementation of the statement of
understanding on the city of Taiz. Moreover, it is of
the utmost importance to Yemen that any momentum
that generates hope for peace, stability and security be
supported and encouraged.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire wishes to renew its
encouragement for the Special Envoy in his steadfast
efforts to promote dialogue among the parties, which the
Council hopes will be fruitful in realizing a definitive
settlement of the conflict in Yemen.

