Mr. Fachir (Indonesia): I wish to thank Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for the comprehensive
briefing. Let me also thank the Secretariat for the second
written report (S/2019/251) on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016). The report demonstrates
yet another sad reality - not a single element of the
resolution has been implemented by the occupying
Power, nor is there is any sign of future implementation.
On the contrary, the occupying Power has blatantly
dismissed the Council's resolution.

Another bleak condition has been reported by the
independent international commission of inquiry on the
brutality of the occupying Power, including the use of
live ammunition at close range against civilians, even
against children, medical personnel and persons with
disabilities. That is a blatant violation ofhuman decency,
international humanitarian law and human rights.

Both reports present three main concerns to which
we must be alert.
First, there is a clear and worrying tendency towards
the effective annexation of Palestine by the occupying
Power. We have a long list of violations that have been
consistently and blatantly committed by the occupying
Power. They include the continued construction of
illegal settlements, the closure of the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron, the non-payment of
Palestinian revenues, incidents at Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
as well as violence committed by the authorities, the
security forces and settlers, to name just a few. That
goes against everything the United Nations has been
striving for since 1947. Let me reiterate in the strongest
terms Indonesia's rejection and condemnation of any
such attempts.

Secondly, we must all step up our efforts to improve
the humanitarian and economic conditions of the
Palestinian people. That is even more pressing in view
of the diminishing commitments of some others with
regard to multilateralism and humanitarian assistance.
We are deeply concerned about the non-payment
of $139 million in Palestinian tax revenues by the
occupying Power. This constitutes the illegitimate
confiscation of other's property and violates the Paris
Protocol on Economic Relations - a treaty that Israel
signed with the Palestinian Authority. It is unjust,
unfair, grossly unacceptable and definitely illegal.

We applaud the Palestinian people for their resilience
and determination to withstand such pressure in spite of
their dire economic, political and humanitarian crises.
We also fully respect the Palestinian Authority's policy
of full transfer or nothing at all.

On the positive side, we applaud the effort of the
United Nations country team and other donors, through
its various initiatives and projects, among others the
Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism. Just last month,
Indonesia also committed to increasing its financial
support to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and building a
desalination project in Gaza.

My third point is that any future peace plan must
respect the agreed parameters based on relevant
United Nations resolutions. The two-State solution
is the only realistic way to achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace between the parties.

Indonesia also continues to encourage Palestine
in attaining national unity. We commend the
efforts of Egypt and Russia in support of national
reconciliation initiatives.

Upholding the status quo at the holy sites in
Jerusalem is important. The sealing by the occupying
Power this month of all gates to the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
as well as the Old City of Jerusalem, is a dangerous
measure that has further inflamed the tensions and was
probably designed with that aim. Those measures are
capable of further destabilizing the already complex
and fragile situation and triggering violence.

Instability in Palestine, particularly in Jerusalem,
will have a significant ripple effect in the region and
beyond. We therefore call upon the Security Council
to monitor those developments very closely so as to
avoid a potential escalation of conflict that could be too
costly if handled too late.

Allow me to clearly state Indonesia's position on the
recent situation in the Golan Heights. Indonesia strongly
rejects the United States illegal move in recognizing
Israel's sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan
Heights, as it is an escalatory and grave violation of
international law, the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 497 (1981).
This action will provoke and disrupt ongoing efforts to
create peace and stability in the region. It is therefore
entirely unacceptable by any standard. As stated in
resolution 497 (1981), Israel's decision to impose its
laws, jurisdiction and administration in the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights is null and void and without
international legal effect. I consequently would like to
reaffirm Indonesia's principled position in recognizing
the Golan Heights as an integral part ofthe Syrian Arab
Republic that was occupied by Israel in 1967.

In conclusion, Indonesia would like to reiterate
that peace in the Middle East can be achieved only if
the international community, especially the Security
Council, is united along all fronts. We must never forget
that our mandate is to save human lives and humankind.

