Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we welcome the presence of the Secretary of
State ofthe United States ofAmerica, Mr. Mike Pompeo.
We are grateful for the convening of this meeting
and the important briefings by Under-Secretary-
General Rosemary DiCarlo and Ambassador Karel van
Oosterom, to whom we express our special thanks for
his work this year as Facilitator on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). We are also grateful for the
briefing by the observer of the European Union.

As a country committed to multilateralism,
international law and the non-proliferation regimes
for weapons of mass destruction, Peru gives high
priority to compliance with and the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015), through which the Security
Council endorsed the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA), on the Iranian nuclear programme.
We believe that that agreement and the subsequent
follow-up and monitoring regime reflect the value of
multilateralism and diplomacy in peacefully resolving
international disputes and maintaining international
peace and security, and that it must be preserved for
that reason.

With regard to the sixth report (S/2018/1089)
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), we welcome the progress made
in the implementation of the JCPOA and commend the
monitoring activities carried out by the International
Atomic Energy Agency. It has been verified once again
that Iran is complying with all the provisions of the
agreement, including the Additional Protocol to its
Safeguards Agreement. We must nevertheless express
our concern about allegations of an alleged violation of
paragraph 2 of annex B ofresolution 2231 (2015), which
refers to activities involving the supply, sale, transfer
or export of dual-use items, materials, equipment,
goods and technology. We stress the need for strict
compliance with all restrictive measures contained in
annex B, which include transfers related to nuclear
energy, ballistic missiles and weapons to or from Iran,
as well as provisions on asset freezes and travel bans.

In relation to that and to the arms embargo imposed
by the Council in connection with the conflict in Yemen,
we must also express our concern about reports of the
alleged transfer of Iranian-made ballistic missiles,
their parts and related technology to the Houthi rebels
in Yemen. We encourage the Iranian authorities to
carefully consider and address those concerns with a
view to fostering greater confidence in their readiness
to comply with their international commitments
and obligations, thereby generating new dynamics
conducive to the promotion of sustainable peace in the
Middle East.

In that regard, we share the Secretary-General's
view of the need to address issues not directly
related to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
without prejudice to preserving the agreement and its
accomplishments. Specifically, in accordance with
paragraph 3 of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015), we
urge the Iranian authorities not to engage in any activity
related to ballistic missiles designed to be capable of
launching nuclear weapons, including launches using
such ballistic-missile technology. We believe that it is
of the utmost importance that the Iranian authorities
act prudently and with self-restraint, given that the
development of their ballistic missile programme is
perceived as provocative and/or an armed escalation
capable of increasing tensions in a particularly unstable
region.
In conclusion, I underscore the importance of
the Council remaining united in shouldering its
responsibility to ensure the full enforcement and
implementation of the JCPOA and resolution 2231
(2015) with a view to ensuring the validity of the
non-proliferation regime and maintaining international
peace and security.

