Mr. Malki (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to begin by expressing Palestine's deep appreciation to
the Kingdom of Spain for convening this debate, for the
seriousness it has accorded to the critical matter before
us, and for its able and responsible leadership of the
Security Council this month.

I also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
for his briefing. We also express our appreciation and
thanks to the Secretary-General and his entire team
for their efforts to contribute to a de-escalation of
the current dangerous situation and to restore focus
to the core issues and the imperative for a credible
political horizon that will bring an end to Israel's
occupation of Palestinian land and denial of Palestinian
rights - an unjust and grave situation that continues
to threaten regional and international peace and
security. Undoubtedly, the rapid escalation of Violence
on the ground is the direct result of the international
community's failure to intervent and assume its
responsibilities.

The hopes and national aspirations of the
Palestinian people for a future of freedom, security and
peace, free from occupation, colonialism, humiliation
and injustice, are continuously under assault. The
Palestinian people - in particular our children - are
being targeted and killed by the Israeli occupation
forces. They are denied their fundamental right to life
because of their national and religious identity. Their
legitimate rejection of illegitimate occupation is being
met with killing and destruction.

As we meet today there is a grave escalation
on the ground, in particular in occupied Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, where incitement and provocation continues
in Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
including attacks and incitement by Israeli extremists
and officials against Palestinian civilians. We see this
day after day. Occupying forces and extremist settlers
and their militias have unleashed a wave of violence
and hatred against Palestinian civilians, in particular
young people.

Since the begging of this month, more than 50
Palestinians have been martyred, many killed by
extrajudicial execution, including at least 10 children.
More than 1,850 Palestinians have been injured, with
Israel, the occupying Power, using live ammunition
against unarmed children. Approximately 1,000
Palestinians have been detained by the Israeli occupying
forces, with homes demolished as part of collective
punishment.

Open, racist and irresponsible calls by Israeli
Ministers and senior officials concerning the need
to use lethal force against Palestinians, in particular
against children and young people, have served to
entrench a culture of hatred and impunity. Israeli
occupation forces, settlers and other Israelis know full
well that they will not be brought to account for killing
innocent, unarmed Palestinians.

Yet even in the face of grave threats to their human
security, dignity and very existence, the Palestinian
people remain determined to continue their just
struggle for freedom. They are unrelenting in their
demand for the realization of their inalienable right
to self-determination in their independent, sovereign
State, as all other free peoples around the world. That
objective is recognized and supported unanimously in
the international community.

For years - decades, in fact - we have come here
to the Council to warn against the illegal actions and
aggression by Israel, the occupying Power, against the
Palestinian people in the occupied State of Palestine,
including East Jerusalem. Despite the constant
deterioration of the situation and repeated setbacks
in the political process, we have maintained that the
Security Council must uphold its responsibilities under
the Charter of the United Nations and that it must
compel Israel to halt its Violations. That is a fundamental
requirement for progress in the peace process aimed at
resolving the core issues and achieving a just, lasting
solution based on international law.

Unfortunately, the Council has shown that it is not
prepared to shoulder its responsibility to achieve peace
and security. Repeated calls by the League of Arab
States, the Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and Member States concerned,
including Council members, that the Council address
the explosive situation on the ground and end Israel's
impunity in order to open the path for peace have
been to no avail. Instead, the Council has remained
paralysed. That will be to the grave detriment of the
Palestinian people, if not the entire region. This will
exacerbate the crisis. Peace and security remain further
distant with each passing day.

Our debate today must focus on the main source
of the current Violence and the root causes of every
other round of Violence, which is the continued Israeli
foreign occupation of Palestine, its illegitimate war
machine, its ongoing settlement activity, its blockade
and its oppression that denies Palestinians every right
enshrined in the Charter. We must also not underestimate
the living conditions under a barbaric, military, racist
occupation, which leads only to suffering, despair and
anger. Nevertheless, President Mahmoud Abbas and the
Palestinian leadership have been firmly committed to
peace. In return, Netanyahu shows only commitment to
colonialism and settler colonialism.

The events we are witnessing today prove once more
that achieving ajust peace on the basis of the two-State
solution, along the pre-l967 borders, requires urgent
and effective intervention by the Security Council,
not just fine words and statements. We would remind
permanent and non-permanent States on the Council of
their duty to promote the cause of peace and security in
the world. All ofus know what is required to put an end
to this insufferable situation. We know the measures
required. Rhetoric and temporary solutions are not
enough. The Security Council must emphasize the
world's unanimity that peace can be achieved only by
ending Israeli occupation and the independence long-
yearned for by the Palestinian people - independence
in a State along the pre-1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital. It also cannot be achieved
without a just solution to the issue of Palestine refugees,
in line with United Nations resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative. Permanent occupation, temporary
solutions and merely managing the conflict will never
lead to peace and security.

Moreover, the Security Council has a legal
and moral responsibility to provide the defenceless
Palestinian people with protection for as long as the
occupation continues. And that includes the provisions
in the report of the Secretary-General on the matter.
There can be no justification for those who call for
security for the occupying Power while at the same
time they fail to call for or provide security for people
under occupation: the Palestinian people.

Israel, the occupying Power, is not only in
Violation of its Fourth Geneva Convention obligations
to ensure the safety and well-being of the civilians
under its occupation; it is actually the source of
their insecurity and suffering. In such a situation, in
accordance with article 1 of the Convention and in line
with the responsibility to protect, the international
community must act to protect the civilian population
from the occupation's aggression and war crimes.
Therefore, individually and collectively, States have
a responsibility to uphold and maintain respect for
international law - which places responsibility on
third parties to assist, directly or indirectly, in whatever
manner, to stop any illegal measures.

We urge all States to break any ties with
Governments that cooperate with the Israeli occupation.
Furthermore, there are measures that have led to a grave
deterioration in the situation on the ground, including
the burning of the Dawabshe family. We do not know
about the fate of others. Have they been detained or not?
Have they disappeared or not? We simply do not know.

There is an urgent need to label such groups - the
settler terrorist groups operating outside the law - as
terrorists.Thathasbothlegalandfinancialrepercussions.
We recall that the Israeli Government has continued to
support, aid and give succour to such terrorist groups.
They have protected and embraced them and, indeed,
urged and incited such crimes. We must therefore work
collectively to bring the perpetrators of those crimes
and those who abet them to justice. There can be no real
protection without accountability.

The Security Council must immediately address the
grave situation in occupied East Al-Quds, including the
Old City. Israel, the occupying Power, must abide by its
obligations to maintain the historic status of Al-Quds,
particularly in Al-Haram Al-Sharif, including the
holy Al-Aqsa Mosque. It is clear that Israel wishes to
maintain the status quo of the occupation and not the
status quo ante. That is unacceptable. It is unbearable,
will only cause the situation to deteriorate and will
have incalculable consequences. Preventing the Muslim
faithful from entering Al-Aqsa is indeed a breach of the
historic status quo. Setting time slots for Muslims to
enter the Mosque, in the morning or in the afternoon, is
a violation ofthe historic status quo. Setting a minimum
age for entry is also a Violation. For the Israeli military
police to enter the mosque is a violation. To allow settler
groups to enter every morning is a provocation and a
violation. Prayer by such groups entering the Al-Aqsa
Mosque is a Violation of the historic status quo.

Those are some of the many measures that have
been initiated and implemented by Israel. Israel states
that it does not wish to change the status quo, but it
has, indeed, already done so. The ongoing colonial
occupation status quo is completely different from that
which prevailed between 1967, when Israel occupied
East Jerusalem, until 2000, when Ariel Sharon visited

the Al-Aqsa Mosque. It was after his visit that changes
began to take place, one after the other. Now, Israel is
making changes even as it claims that it does not wish
to change the status quo. It has changed the status quo.
We want Israel to explain to us what it means when
it refers to the Al-Aqsa status quo. What does historic
status quo ante mean? We call on States, in particular
Jordan, which has a special interest in East Jerusalem,
to look closely into the issue.

For months now, the Israeli Government has
been fuelling the fires of religious racism and hatred
by allowing provocations and entry into Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. We have warned Israel and the international
community that such acts, in addition to the punishment
meted out against the Muslim and Palestinian Christian
faithful, will, indeed, lead to religious strife. Such
warnings, nonetheless, have led to no improvement.
Israel continues to take the same measures. As I
mentioned, this morning, such settler extremist groups
were allowed to enter the Al-Aqsa Mosque, which is
protected by Israeli security forces, at a time when
Muslims are not even allowed to be present - from 7.30
am. until 11 am. and from noon to 1.30 pm. Muslim
faithful are now banned from entering the Mosque at
those times. They cannot enter the site; only Jews are
allowed to enter during those two time slots.

The placing of cement barriers in East Jerusalem
shows the ugly face of the occupation in that area. The
Security Council can, in no way, justify the fact that it
is standing on the sidelines, as we face this escalating
struggle that is outside our control. It is resulting in
religious strife, which is being fed by the current
extremist Israeli Government and its Prime Minister. At
any rate, no progress can be made towards peace on the
basis of the two-State solution, while Israel is, illegally
but effectively, changing the demographic facts on the
ground in occupied Palestinian land, including East
Jerusalem, by entrenching its occupation.

We urge the Security Council once again to
respond to the current crisis in order to save innocent
lives and to allow for the possibility ofajust and lasting
peace. We also warn that concentrating on short-term
formulas in an attempt to deal with the symptoms of
the problem instead of its root cause will only cause
the situation to escalate and worsen. We commend all
efforts being made to refocus our energy on ending the
conflict and finding a solution, particularly, those being
made by France. We commend the wide-ranging calls
made by the members of the Security Council for it to
take up its duties. We welcome and commend the clear
declarations of support and participation in creating a
credible, political horizon for peace and justice.

Palestine is prepared, as always, to cooperate and
contribute to such efforts. Any attempt to abort such
efforts will fail and can only take us further away from a
just and lasting solution. On our side, we stress anew our
firm commitment to pursuingh the peaceful, political,
diplomatic and legal path towards the realization of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to reach a
just, comprehensive peace that achieves the legitimate,
national aspirations of our people, namely, to live in
security, peace and justice in our State, Palestine, with
East Al-Quds as its capital. We support efforts to find
a just solution to the issue of Palestinian refugees, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194
(1948). The inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including the right to self-determination, are not open
to negotiation. They cannot in any way, shape or form
be subject to the mere goodwill of the occupying Power.
Furthermore, States cannot shirk their responsibility
to protect under international law under the pretext of
supporting dialogue between the parties.

The Security Council cannot, under any
circumstances, set aside its mandate as the fundamental
body responsible for maintaining international peace
and security. I would like to call on members of the
Security Council to visit the area as soon as possible,
in order to underline their role and identify the steps
that the Security Council should take in the coming
months. The continuing Israeli military occupation is
the source of the violence and of this historic injustice
being perpetrated against the Palestinian people. The
time has come for the international community to bring
about the only way to achieve peace by putting an end
to Israeli occupation and ushering in freedom and
independence for Palestinians.

The struggle of the Palestinian people for freedom,
justice and the right of return has been a permanent
item on the agenda of the United Nations since its
inception. It is the litmus test of the importance of the
very principles that underpin the Organization and the
entire international system. It is a test the international
community cannot fail.

