Ms. Rice (United States of America): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Fernandez for his briefing.

As Council members saw on our recent trip, and
as the report (S/2012/128) of the Secretary-General
makes clear, Haiti's stands at a moment of decision. In
the two years since the earthquake, Haiti has made
progress. Haitians have strengthened their democracy,
maintained security and begun rebuilding their
shattered country. But serious problems remain, most
notably a lack of Haitian political consensus and
resolve. The achievements that have been made are
fragile at best. The United States stands in solidarity
with the Haitian people as they tackle the many
challenges that face them. We will continue to be
firmly committed to helping Haiti build a better future.

Over the past two years, we have seen a peaceful
electoral process and transfer of power, followed by
the filling of key executive and judicial positions.
Today, however, the political stalemate threatens those
hard-won gains. Haiti's politicians need to temper their
partisan interests, put aside winner-take-all politics and
work together in a spirit of compromise. We urge the
authorities in Haiti to confirm a new Prime Minister as
soon as possible. Otherwise, they risk undermining the
gains made in the areas of security and reconstruction.
5
Haiti cannot afford further gridlock. Effective
Haitian leadership is critical. The economic and
security programmes supported by the United Nations
and other external partners do not run themselves.
They require policy guidance from a fully functioning
Haitian Government. Towards that end, the
Government needs to hold the next round of elections
for local Government positions and one third of the
Senate as soon as possible.

While the security situation has been largely
stable, significant threats remain. The United States
believes that any determination of the future size of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) forces must be based on security
conditions on the ground, including the ability of the
Haitian National Police (HNP) to take on greater
responsibilities.

That said, MINUSTAH cannot be a permanent
solution to Haiti's security needs. The Government of
Haiti's next budget proposal to Parliament provides a
critical opportunity to commit the resources and
demonstrate the political determination needed to
strengthen the Haitian National Police so that it has the
right quality and quantity of personnel to assume full
responsibility for Haiti's security. That is what Haitians
have told us they want. We urge the Parliament and
executive branch to commit sufficient and lasting
budgetary resources to the HNP, in particular to
strengthen the administrative and logistical systems
that will enable the HNP to function on its own.

The international community, of course, is there
to help. The United States urges the United Nations
and the Haitian Government to maintain their focus on
strengthening the HNP. We hope that MINUSTAH and
the HNP will work jointly to implement a development
plan that bolsters the HNP's capacity to meet Haiti's
law enforcement needs and that enables the gradual
transfer of responsibility from United Nations forces to
the HNP.

United Nations training and police mentoring can
deliver important results, and United Nations technical
assistance can truly help the HNP to plan its future.
The Government of Haiti announced an ambitious goal
of training 2,000 new HNP officers this year. Close
collaboration between the HNP and MINUSTAH is
necessary to achieve this target.

Beyond the HNP, we encourage the Government
of Haiti and the United Nations to collaborate in

strengthening other rule of law institutions, including
courts and prisons. We urge the United Nations to work
collaboratively with the Haitian presidential
commission on the rule of law to present the updated
criminal code and criminal procedure codes to
Parliament. Those updated codes will help address the
issue of prolonged pre-trial detention and reduce
corruption in the legal system. As we saw ourselves,
prison overcrowding remains a grave problem - one
where MINUSTAH and Government of Haiti
collaboration can yield real benefits. Haiti and its
international partners have built a new prison at Croix
des Bouquets, but the prison is unutilized because the
Haitian Government has avoided making some key
decisions that would enable the prison to open.

Turning to economic development, we applaud
the Government's desire to shift Haiti away from
dependence on international assistance to reliance on
investment to create jobs and spark sustainable
economic growth. But for now, political friction and
weak rule of law institutions may in fact deter
investors from coming to Haiti. The executive branch
needs to fulfil its commitment to reducing the time it
takes to register a business and to easing the processes
for obtaining permits in the construction industry. Both
would help empower Haitian entrepreneurs. Getting
those reforms through Parliament would send a clear
signal that Haiti is indeed open for business and
determined to create jobs.

The Government of Haiti needs to set clear
reconstruction and development priorities and work
more actively with donors. When the mandate for the
Interim Haiti Recovery Commission ended, the Prime
Minister's office became the focal point for working
with international donors on post-earthquake
reconstruction and creating economic opportunities.
That office, of course, is now in the hands of a
caretaker and the reconstruction effort risks loosing
direction.

Let me close with a few words about
MINUSTAH. The United States greatly appreciates the
dedicated service of the men and women of
MINUSTAH. They perform important services under
difficult conditions. However, we are and remain
deeply concerned by serious accusations that some
MINUSTAH personnel have engaged in sexual
exploitation and abuse. Any occurrence of such
misconduct is absolutely unacceptable. It violates the
principles of the Organization and destroys the bonds
of trust between Haitians and the United Nations. The
United Nations must increase its efforts to prevent any
incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse. It must
ensure that all allegations are thoroughly investigated
and that those responsible are held fully and
transparently accountable.

When the Council visited Haiti, many Haitians
told us of their appreciation for all that MINUSTAH
has done over the years to improve the country's
security. The United States shares this gratitude and
will continue to support MINUSTAH, its troop- and
police-contributors and its Haitian partners in this
crucial work.

