Mr. Sergeev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Vieira de Mello, for his
briefing, which has given us a clear idea of the difficult
and large-scale work which is being carried out by the
mission he heads, and for the in-depth analysis he has
just given us of what has to be done in future.

The dynamics on the island are positive, although
the situation is not without problems. In his statement,
Mr. Vieira de Mello gave us a clear idea of the
challenges faced by the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).

We are pleased with reports that contacts between
UNTAET and Indonesia continue to be strengthened, as
this promotes the overall trend towards stabilization on
the island. Positive examples of cooperation in various
areas include Indonesia's agreement to grant 162
scholarships to East Timorese students and also to
enable students who earlier had been forced to interrupt
their studies in Indonesian educational institutions to
complete their education.

Also important is the agreement with the Office
of the Indonesian Attorney-General to go forward with
inquiries on the five most infamous crimes committed
in East Timor in the fall of 1999, presumably by the
Indonesian military.

All of these are positive indicators. However, we
remain concerned at the fact that the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees was
forced to take a decision to put an end to its activities
in the three largest refugee camps in West Timor in
response to hostile actions committed by opponents of
East Timorese independence. We believe that the local
authorities should take all of the necessary measures to
prevent a repetition of such incidents in future. This
would help to resolve the refugee problem, which in
turn would be in keeping with the interests of both
Indonesia and East Timor.

Needless to say, one of UNTAET's major areas of
activity remains the promotion of national
reconciliation in East Timor. We believe that the steps
taken to that end, including the establishment of a
dialogue with integrationist political figures and the
agreement on a new structure for the National
Consultative Council, should be commended and
supported by the Security Council. Naturally, we
believe this to be to the credit of the head of UNTAET,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Vieira de Mello.

