Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council.

The tragic terrorist attacks on 11 September fully
illustrate that terrorism is a serious global threat and
that all of us are vulnerable to the barbarism and
inhumanity that usually are associated with terrorist
attacks. Terrorism has no religion, nationality or ethnic
background. It is, indeed, the negation of everything
religions stand for. Intolerance, extremism and violence
have no place in Islam or among its adherents. We must
not purport to accord any legitimacy to these acts by
associating them even with a misguided reading of
Islam, which categorically condemns the killing of a
single innocent human being as the equivalent of
genocide against all of humankind.

The Iranian Government condemns terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations and by whomever and
wherever it is committed. At the same time, Iran has
always stressed the need for effective measures to be
taken by the international community in a bid to
eradicate terrorism.

Here, my Government believes that combating
terrorism requires a great deal of collective reflection
and wisdom if there is to be a rational and far-sighted
response, a response that will focus both on terrorism
as a crime and on its root causes, injustice and
exclusion, which can be exploited by demagogues to
inflict so much harm on innocent human beings.

As a global menace, terrorism needs a global
response founded on inclusion, fairness and
international legitimacy. We must eradicate terrorism
by changing the prevailing mentality that has provided
fertile ground for the growth of this menace. Everyone
who is serious about fighting terrorism, especially
those in a position of global power, would be well
advised not to resort to statements and policies
emanating from emotions intertwined with the
arrogance of power; these can only further entrench the
mentality that produced terrorism.

The United Nations provides a unique mechanism
for mobilizing the international community to address
terrorism at its roots. It provides the forum necessary
for building a universal coalition and can ensure global
legitimacy for the long-term response to terrorism. It is
indeed an effective mechanism that can draw upon the
resources and capabilities of each and every Member
State within a rule-based and non-discriminatory
framework, thus forging an international consensus in
the fight against terrorism.

In the meantime, it is important that in fighting
terrorism we articulate objective criteria that will
enable the international community to identify and
combat terrorism regardless of the identity of its
victims or of its culprits. The legitimacy and
sustainability of the global struggle against terrorism
rest on applying a single set of standards to all. It is not
acceptable that patterns of alliance rather than actual
engagement in terrorist activities should become the
determining factor. Thus, the credibility of the
campaign against terrorism is seriously undermined
when policies and practices designed to instil terror and
fear among the entire Palestinian people are met with
acquiescent silence while resistance to foreign
occupation and State terrorism is conveniently
demonized. There should be no doubt that acts such as
extrajudicial killings, bulldozing the homes of civilians
and suffocating people by imposing blockades on
residential areas, as perpetrated by the occupying
Israeli army against Palestinian civilians, constitute
acts of terrorism and should be dealt with accordingly
by the international community.

That leads me to stress the principle of the equal
rights and self-determination of peoples enshrined in
the United Nations Charter and reflected in many
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly. Those
who fight against foreign occupation in exercise of
their legitimate rights should be distinguished from
terrorists.

On 27 December 2001, in compliance with
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), we submitted
the Iranian national report to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, and we stand ready to fully cooperate with
the Committee. My Government is also in the process
of completing and updating, where necessary, its
national instruments with respect to combating
terrorism. Here I should like to commend Ambassador
Greenstock for the commitment and skill with which he
is steering the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. I assure him of our readiness to engage in
continued cooperation on the path the Committee is
embarked on.

In combating terrorism at the regional level, last
September we closed the Iran-Afghan common border
and are closely monitoring the border areas with a view
to preventing the movement of Al Qaeda elements.
Moreover, we reinstated visa requirements with a
number of neighbouring countries, with the aim of
preventing unwanted elements from using Iranian
territory for crossing over, to or from Afghanistan. Al
Qaeda elements have never been able to use Iranian
territory, and we are determined to deny them any
access to it in the future.

Iran has an enormously high stake in making sure
that peace and stability return to Afghanistan and that
terrorism is uprooted in that country. Our efforts
towards helping the Afghans establish a broad-based
and multi-ethnic Government date back many years.
My Government was among the very few that provided
all possible assistance to the United Front from the
time of its establishment, thereby enabling it to
successfully resist the Taliban and their terrorist guests
and finally to become instrumental in defeating the
Taliban and the terrorists and in establishing the broad-
based interim Government.

Iranian officials, consistent in their policy, did
their best to help the Afghans reach agreement at the
Bonn Conference, and since then have spared no effort
in assisting the Afghan interim Government to gain
control over the country. The Iranian Foreign Minister
attended and addressed the inauguration of the interim
Government, and the Afghan Prime Minister has been
invited to Iran and is scheduled to visit shortly. In our
View, the success of the interim Government is a
precondition for the return of stability to Afghanistan
and for the uprooting of terrorism there.

