Mr. Mwakawago: Two years ago today, the
Secretary-General, with the Council's endorsement,
appointed me as his Special Representative for Sierra
Leone. Today brings a close to the final chapter in a
country's gradual rise from the ruins of a devastating,
decade-long conflict and its remarkable turnaround that
now leads towards a future filled with hope and the
promise of a better life for its population. On behalf of
my predecessors and on my own behalf, I would like to
take this final and auspicious occasion to express my
profound gratitude to the Council for its guidance and
support over the past six years in directing the effort
that succeeded in hauling Sierra Leone back from the
brink of collapse. The Secretary-General's trust and
confidence was absolutely invaluable, and I am
extremely grateful for it.

When the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) was established in 1999, pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1270 (1999), the odds were
heavily stacked against its success, and very few
people gave it any chance of achieving its objective.
That perception was further strengthened by the early
setbacks that the Mission suffered, which included the
capture of some peacekeepers and blatant disregard for
the ceasefire agreement by the Revolutionary United
Front rebels. However, as we bid farewell to the people
of Sierra Leone, there is on the horizon no serious
threat to the internal security of the country. The only
aberrations that we have observed are a few isolated
and localized incidents of public disorder, which,
hopefully, were effectively brought under control by
the national police.

The establishment of a comprehensive security
network, known as the Office of National Security, has,
over the past few years, created a framework for
coordination among the security agencies at the
national level and right down to the local level.
However, the country's security structure, including the
Office of National Security and the provincial and
district security committees, still require additional
assistance in capacity-building. International support
will continue to be critical to that process.

No major threats have been discerned in the area
of external security, while the situation in neighbouring
Liberia continues to stabilize. Nonetheless, border
security patrols have continued in order to guard
against any unforeseen mishaps that might occur.
Ongoing discussions regarding the settlement of the
Yenga border issue with Guinea are expected to yield
the desired resolution, which should eliminate a
potential catalyst for future friction. UNAMSIL has
invested substantial resources to ensure the success of
that initiative. The simmering situation in Guinea will
also need to be monitored closely to ensure readiness
to mitigate the security and humanitarian consequences
that could ensue.

The Council may be pleased to learn that the
Secretary-General's initiative aimed at mobilizing
support to strengthen the capacity of the Republic of
Sierra Leone Armed Forces elicited positive responses
from Switzerland, the United Kingdom, India and the
Netherlands. For our part, we have supported the
International Military Advisory and Training Team in
providing training in limited areas of specialization;
joined forces with the United Nations Development
Programme in improving the welfare and living
conditions of the armed forces; and donated properties
and equipment that were left behind by UNAMSIL
military units, as per the relevant General Assembly
resolution.

That generosity notwithstanding, large funding
gaps still exist with respect to meeting security sector
running costs and the acquisition of transport assets,
especially support services, communications equipment
and the provision of adequate accommodation. The
restructuring of the armed forces to reduce their troop
strength has continued.

One of our most satisfying achievements has
been the realization of the benchmark to strengthen the
manpower capacity of the Sierra Leone police to reach
its pre-war target level of 9,500 personnel, under the
supervision of the United Nations police. Similarly,
training has also been conducted to impart a diverse
range of skills to serving police personnel. It is
encouraging to note that the rivalry that had existed in
the past between the Sierra Leone police and the
Republic of Sierra Leone Armed Forces has continued
to dissipate.

UNAMSIL's troop withdrawal is on course and
will be completed today, while the present 33 United
Nations police details are to be scaled down to 10 by
the end of December. A smaller team chosen from that
group of officers will be temporarily retained in
Freetown to facilitate a seamless transition to the
United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIOSIL).

On the civilian side, local staff have been
deployed elsewhere, while others have been given their
terminal packages and offered the opportunity to
receive training to start self-help schemes and small
businesses. The majority of the international civilian
staff are in the process of being reassigned to other
missions, while some are being absorbed by UNIOSIL.

The United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
has now assumed command of the Nigerian company
military unit that is currently providing security
protection at the premises of the Special Court, until
15 January 2006. UNMIL is already finalizing plans to
provide permanent support to the military guard force
at the Special Court.

Following the local government elections in
2004, after a 30-year hiatus, the Government has begun
implementing the devolution of some public services to
local councils. Generally, the process is on track;
however, challenges remain pertaining to limited
capacity and the paucity of resources.

I wish to bring to the attention of the Council the
fact that, in the past two years, revenue collection from
diamonds has increased dramatically as a result of
reforms and the overhaul of the sector. Diamond
exports increased from $10 million in 2000 to
$130 million in 2004. By November 2005,
$131 million worth of diamonds had already been
exported. The remedies that are needed include:
tightening security; reviewing the licensing system;
combating illegal sales; tackling the issue of child
labour; the equitable distribution of benefits from the
mining of diamonds; and resolving the persistent
boundary disputes among local communities.

The main political parties, the ruling Sierra Leone
People's Party (SLPP) and the opposition All People's
Congress (APC), have already begun gearing up for the
elections in 2007 by appointing their respective
candidates for the presidential poll. However, both
camps are experiencing internal fissures that are likely
to have an impact on the conduct of the elections. As
the 2007 elections draw nearer, it is very likely that
both inter- and intra-party rivalry will intensify.
However, the mere fact that there is vibrant political
interaction among Sierra Leoneans is a welcome
change.

I should also indicate that organizational
preparations for the 2007 elections, including the
restructuring of the National Electoral Commission and
the delimitation of constituencies, are ongoing. It is
also encouraging that both Government and
international support for the electoral process have
been forthcoming. It is therefore my conviction that the
holding of a free and credible poll in 2007 will
constitute a key benchmark in the achievement of long-
term stability in Sierra Leone. Meanwhile, the long-
awaited formalization of the Political Parties
Registration Commission has been completed.
However, the preceding delays developed into a critical
test of the Government's commitment to levelling the
political playing field.

Against that background, UNAMSIL has initiated
a series of programmes designed to promote inter-party
dialogue as well as reconciliation and tolerance among
the political parties. A different but related conflict-
resolution task that UNAMSIL has taken up is the
provision of assistance to the Government of Sierra
Leone in resolving issues that have created tensions in
communities, such as disputes over chiefdom
boundaries.

With respect to access to justice, I wish to report
that efforts are being made to ease the backlog in court
trials and to support training and capacity-building for
court personnel, and steps are being taken towards the
rehabilitation of prisons. Further efforts, however, are
required to address existing challenges in those areas.
The Mission has also joined forces with other local and
external stakeholders in efforts intended to strengthen
the Anti-Corruption Commission, which has
experienced structural and operational problems in the
recent past.

At the subregional level, it is also encouraging to
note that inter-Mission cooperation has improved.
Indeed, the heads of Mission of UNAMSIL, UNMIL
and the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI) have continued to share information and to
coordinate their peace efforts through regular meetings.
To achieve similar goals, United Nations country teams
in the Mano River Basin and Cote d'Ivoire have drawn
up a regional plan of action for cooperation among
them.

The establishment of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Sierra Leone owes a great deal of
its success to the implementation of the preceding joint
UNAMSIL-United Nations country team transition
plan for 2005. That has facilitated the seamless
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and
enabled the follow-on mission to become operational
by 1 January 2006. The appointment of Mr. Victor da
Silva Angelo, the current Deputy Special
Representative at UNAMSIL, as the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General for UNIOSIL
has enhanced the handover process between the two
operations.

Considerable progress has been achieved on the
economic front in the past few years, but it needs to be
consolidated. This will be particularly significant with
regard to job creation and the tackling of poverty.
Poverty remains the main threat to the stability of the
country. With an unemployment rate of 70 per cent,
especially among young people, the challenges to
security are quite evident. Therefore, more local
savings, private-sector development and foreign direct
investment will be needed in order to offset the major
decline in donor funding that is anticipated in the light
of the competing demand for resources worldwide. The
pledges made at the meeting of the Consultative Group
in London represent the first step forward in
implementing the country's social and economic
programmes, which will serve as one of the pillars of
UNIOSIL's peace-consolidation strategy.

In the area of human rights, I should stress that
UNAMSIL leaves behind improved human rights
conditions in terms of fundamental freedoms,
especially in the area of civil and political rights.
Preparations for the establishment of a national human
rights commission are now at an advanced stage.
Regrettably, progress in building a reformed and
effective judiciary system has been slow, and
improvements in prison conditions are outstanding as
the Mission departs. This has retarded efforts for the
effective delivery of justice.

The report of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission is now out and has been widely exhibited.
UNAMSIL, assisted by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in
Geneva, worked very well in promoting the outreach
campaign. To this end, the Mission encouraged civil
society participation and local ownership of the
national reconciliation process.

We have also endeavoured to ensure scrupulous
adherence to and implementation of the zero tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse and the United
Nations code of conduct. This has been complemented
by extensive training for military and civilian
personnel. As a consequence, there have been very few
cases that the Mission was called upon to deal with. It
is my hope that the existing mechanisms to prevent and
investigate cases of sexual exploitation and abuse will
continue under UNIOSIL.

It is a great source of satisfaction and pride for
me, and all at UNAMSIL, that I am able to report that
the Mission has completed most of the tasks this
Council had assigned it. Prominent among these
achievements are the disarming, demobilization and
reintegration of over 72,000 combatants, the return of
over half a million refugees and close to two million
internally displaced persons, the restoration of
Government authority throughout the country, the
organization of national and local elections and the
retraining and restructuring of the country's security
apparatus.

Concrete support for this assertion was provided
by a public opinion survey designed by Jean Krasno of
Yale University in early 2005, which revealed that a
huge number of Sierra Leoneans had a very positive
perception of the work done by UNAMSIL since it
commenced its operations. The success of UNAMSIL
has demonstrated how through collaboration the
international community can respond to the needs and
demands of countries in conflict in a rapidly changing
global environment.

I am convinced that the Mission has also
provided a model for successful peacekeeping missions
in the future. The various innovative approaches and
strategies put into practice by the Mission, including
the well-calibrated plan for troop withdrawal and the
integrated mission concept, are workable undertakings
to be emulated. The regional approach to
peacekeeping, which has gained currency in the West
African subregion, must be encouraged and sustained.

Sierra Leone is certainly on an immutable course
towards peace and development. While UNAMSIL has
done much, Sierra Leone is still fragile. Sustained
stability will also depend on the ability of the
Government to successfully carry through the security
sector reform programme and reinforce good
governance, in particular the reform of the judicial
sector. Such efforts are beyond the capacity of Sierra
Leone on its own. Continued donor support is required
for the completion of critical reform programmes.
Needless to say, the funds pledged at the Consultative
Group meeting recently held in London should provide
reasonable support to the Government in its effort to
create an enabling environment for the consolidation of
peace.

Last but not least, my final remarks are directed
to all the military and civilian personnel in UNAMSIL
at both the local and international levels. To the troops
who formed the backbone of our operations, I salute
you all and wish to pay a special tribute to those who
lost their lives or were injured in the line of duty. I also
wish to thank the troop-contributing Governments for
making such a vital investment in the search for global
peace and security. To all the civilian staff, I commend
your efforts for enduring tough conditions, and
sometimes hardships, and wish you well in future
endeavours, wherever you go.

It would be remiss of me to end this report
without mentioning the pioneering Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
UNAMSIL, Ambassador Oluyemi Adeniji, currently
the Foreign Minister of Nigeria. His diplomatic skills
carried the day in presiding over a feeble peace process
that included monitoring a shaky ceasefire. It laid the
foundations for transition to democratic governance.

Whatever success was attained depended very
much on the cooperation of the Government of Sierra
Leone, the United Nations country team, the
diplomatic corps - especially those representatives
most involved in the efforts to resolve the crisis - the
non-governmental organizations and, above all, the
people of Sierra Leone. I thank them all. I would like
to single out the indispensable role the United
Kingdom has played and is playing in the success of
UNAMSIL in particular and peace operations in Sierra
Leone in general.

I also wish to thank all our partners in the local
and international communities, without whom this
Mission could have faltered or failed. As the owners of
this process, the Security Council deserves due
recognition, but then, as its servant, I may not be the
appropriate source. However, I am convinced that the
Council, as the servants of the people of the world, has
already started to be showered with accolades on its
success in Sierra Leone. We at UNAMSIL are
convinced that we will bequeath to the people of the

world the legacy of a mission that has been a great
success.

At a personal level, this has been a journey full of
new and exciting experiences that have provided
invaluable and fascinating insight into the intricacies of
multilateral diplomacy. I will retain the fulfilling
aspect of my tenure, which enabled me to meet and
develop a mutually beneficial relationship with
members of the Security Council in our professional or
individual capacities.

Finally, I thank the Secretariat, under the very
able leadership of the Secretary-General, for constant
guidance and support.

