Sir Jeremy Greenstock: Just a few comments to
pick up on the two points that came out of some
interesting presentations this afternoon focusing
particularly on those issues that are of direct relevance
to the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).

Several delegations - I think Yemen was the
first this afternoon - have mentioned the importance
of the 12 international conventions against terrorism.
That is something that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee has repeatedly referred to. It is also
becoming increasingly relevant to each Member State
with regard to the adoption of the right legislation and
ensuring that it meets the standards of resolution 1373
(2001). I am very pleased to notice that some
delegations have picked up the importance of that
reference, but I think every Member State needs to
realize that the 12 anti-terrorist conventions have a
very clear and broad relevance to what we are trying to
do under resolution 1373 (2001). We need to keep on
reminding people and get the regional and international
organizations to take this up with greater momentum,
because that is the quickest and clearest legislative
route to meeting most of the standards of resolution
1373 (2001).

I should also like, in passing, to thank again those
members of the wider United Nations community that
are being particularly proactive in helping their regions
or offering assistance and in generating the spirit that
we need in cooperation between States. I mentioned
one or two in my address this morning, but I would like
to thank in particular Australia, which is doing an
enormous job in the Asian and Pacific regions, and
Algeria, which, in the African Union and in the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, has taken a
lead in trying to bring people together in regional and
wider groups. There are many others. I noticed that
Algeria is not speaking in this debate, but it deserves
some credit for recent initiatives.

I notice that one or two statements -
Liechtenstein and the European Union are two that
come to mind - focused on minimum requirements
and the weakest link, something that Norway referred
to this morning. Again, people should be aware that a
weak link breaks the whole chain and this is a global
effort. That is why the CTC has focused above all on
capacity-building. I am going to come back to it in a
second, but recalling the importance of the weakest
link as a vulnerability in the counter-terrorist effort and
as a huge factor in what we are trying to do in the CTC
is very important.
That is why it is also important that we should be
mainstreaming counter-terrorism. I think that during
our next period we will look more deeply into the
interconnection between counter-terrorism and
countering other forms of international organized
crime, and, indeed, preserving security in all sorts of
ways across the broad spectrum of United Nations
business. But getting counter-terrorism into the
standard work that we do in security, development and
combating crime is very important.

The last area is one raised by India, which I think
is quite important. We are going to come to it in the
CTC. It is enforcement and enforceability. I think that
Member States are right to raise that. We have not
gotten to it yet in the CTC, because we have to start
with capacity-building and we have to focus in the
early period on creating political momentum; in those
two areas we create an objectivity in what we are
doing. India, I think, said neither fear nor favour in
these matters - and objectivity, which will make it
more possible, if we succeed in those first two areas, to
deal with the hard cases. When we have established -
we are half way to it, but we have not done it yet -
that objectivity and the Committee feels able to move
on in unanimity to some of the questions of
enforcement, then I think that we can consider how we
approach failures to meet the necessary standard. But I
would also add that enforcement is a matter for the
Security Council as a whole, and not for the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. We would need to bring those
failures to the Security Council, and not try to deal
with them ourselves. We have to do the analysis and
the groundwork on particular cases. I hope that before I
finish my job as Chairman of the Committee, we will
begin to focus on those areas that really need attention.

I look forward to further interventions when you
recall this debate, Mr. President, and I am grateful to
you for presiding today over a very interesting set of
exchanges.

