Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to welcome you very warmly,
Mr. President. We are honoured that you, as Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh, should be presiding
over this important meeting of the Security Council
today. Your presence lends even greater distinction to
the magnificent work that has been carried out by
Bangladesh this month during its presidency of the
Council. We are also grateful to the Deputy Secretary-
General for her presentation of the Secretary-General's
report now under consideration, which contains various
recommendations on conflict prevention. We hope that
this debate will contribute, as we all aspire, to the
crafting of a culture of conflict prevention within the
United Nations system and in particular among the
Member States of the Organization.

Conflict prevention covers many human
activities. It involves many actors and institutions
working with diverse mandates. The proposals made by
the Secretary-General place this topic at the core of our
concerns and strengthen the original mission of the
United Nations, which is to promote peace in the
world. From that perspective, conflict prevention
entails an ethical, political and social commitment on
the part of our leaders.

In a number of its Articles, the Charter is
eloquent on collective measures to prevent threats to
peace, in particular in Chapter 6, to which the Deputy
Secretary-General has referred. I believe that we
should also take into consideration, for our future
discussions, a recent document prepared by the
Secretariat concerning mechanisms established by the
General Assembly in the context of the prevention and
settlement of disputes, which was presented to the
Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization last year.

Allow me to put forward my delegation's
considerations on some of the recommendations made
by the Secretary-General in his report, in particular
those that relate directly to the Security Council.

My first point has to do with the relationship
among the principal organs of the United Nations. A
distinction is usually drawn between short- and long-
term measures in conflict prevention. In our opinion,
the organs of the United Nations should keep both
types of measures in their sights. We believe, however,
that long-term measures are more suitable for effective
interaction among the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, and
that they should serve as the starting point for
collective consideration. I am thinking in particular of
the post-conflict reconstruction of societies, where
robust disarmament demobilization and reintegration
programmes and the inclusion of a civilian component
in peacekeeping missions could serve to expand the
area of interaction of these United Nations organs. We
are gratified to see that the General Assembly has
scheduled for July a debate on conflict prevention. As
for the Economic and Social Council, we support the
Secretary-General's proposal that it should devote a
high-level segment of its regular session to this topic.
Such debates will contribute to increasing the degree of
responsibility of each of the Members of the United
Nations vis-a-Vis preventive measures.

Our second point relates to the role played by the
Secretary-General. Short-term measures such as
preventive diplomacy, fact-finding missions and
reports on regional situations all provide fertile ground
for the relationship between the Security Council and
the Secretariat. We would like to highlight the
Secretary-General's intention to provide the Council
with periodic regional reports on conflict situations.
We believe these reports can be useful if they
correspond to strategies for prevention in particularly
vulnerable regions. We would like to highlight, in
particular, the inter-agency mission that was sent in
March to West Africa. In our opinion, that mission
could serve as a model for a regional or subregional
approach to prevention in order to tackle other
situations on that continent in collaboration with the
Organization of African Unity and other, subregional
organizations.

My delegation considers that the mission's report
was not widely examined by the Security Council; it
should be studied in greater depth with a View to
promoting and reinforcing the dialogue that the
Security Council has been holding for some time with
the members of the Economic Community of West
African States.

My third point concerns Security Council peace
missions for the prevention of conflicts. The Security
Council has been using such missions to provide
orientation for efforts to bring about peace in conflict
situations or to contribute to the restoration of peace in
post-conflict situations. Their use in conflict
prevention, as proposed by the Secretary-General,
would necessitate a clarification of this objective in the
terms of reference of a mission, and perhaps new
financial arrangements supporting such missions. Some
United Nations agencies have established what seems
like a suitable system for funding the costs of missions
that hinges on the income level of the participating
countries.

Finally, our fourth point concerns arrangements
within the Security Council to consider situations
where conflict prevention is at issue. The Secretary-
General proposes to the Council the creation of a
subsidiary organ, an informal working group or some
other mechanism to consider preventive measures in
specific situations. In order to be informed about these
matters, the Security Council today relies on
presentations made by the Secretary-General or his
representatives or on the discretionary power of
Members of the Organization to bring to the attention
of the Security Council possible threats to peace. We
should explore more carefully the feasibility of taking
to the expert level the discussion of a topic that is
essentially a political one.

One of the main purposes of this discussion, as
we have said, is to encourage a culture of prevention.
Just as different human communities respond to natural
risks by adopting disaster prevention strategies, they
should be keenly aware of the underlying tensions that
threaten peace and should establish mechanisms to
prevent conflict. The roots of each nation's reality
could enable the United Nations to successfully
promote the collective interest of a culture of
prevention. This is why we have taken note with great
interest of the 10 principles enshrined in paragraph
169, which in the opinion of the Secretary-General
should guide the United Nations in this era. We agree
with him that perhaps the time has come to adopt a
solid declaration of principles to guide the United
Nations and its Member States in consolidating a
culture of prevention.

