Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): Allow me, in my turn,
to thank you most sincerely, Mr. President, for your
initiative on this debate. The presence of the Foreign
Minister of the Republic of Korea at this debate was a
clear manifestation of your Government' commitment to
the work of the Security Council. An open debate on the
question of refugees, displaced persons, returnees and
others in similar situations requiring international
humanitarian assistance is important for the international
community. Today there is no country that can sit
comfortably in the hope that it will not face or be affected
by similar situations.

The importance of this debate should therefore be
seen as a proactive attempt to appreciate fully the
complexity and dimensions of emergencies in their short-
term and long-term implications for international peace

 

and stability. Many times, the demands of responding to
unfolding emergencies and the frustrations of unmet
logistical and security needs tend to override the
considerations of other equally-important instruments of
international humanitarian law, including those relating to
the crime of genocide.

The exodus of Rwandan refugees to eastern Zaire in
1994 was not an ordinary flight of people. It was organized
under the leadership of those who were responsible for
genocide in Rwanda.
Some of the conventions to which most countries are
signatories include the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide of 9 December 1948,
which states that

"Persons charged with genocide or any other acts
enumerated in article III shall be tried by a competent
tribunal of the State in the territory of which the act
was committed, or by such international penal tribunal
as may have jurisdiction with respect to those
Contracting Parties which shall have accepted its
jurisdiction". (resolution 260 A (III), annex, article VI)

In the case of Rwanda, after the genocide had been
committed, we had a situation whereby the architects of
genocide, together with a fifty-thousand-strong army and
40,000 members of militias, were escorted with their
military hardware to refugee camps in the now-called
Democratic Republic of Congo. Within a short time, their
camps were identified by several independent non-
governmental organizations, as well as by the International
Commission of Inquiry set up by the United Nations
Security Council, as breeding grounds for military activities
in the camps.

For two and a half years the international community
and humanitarian agencies continued to spend billions of
dollars on bona fide refugees, amongst whom there were
well-known killers. On many occasions humanitarian aid
staff were threatened and harassed in the camps. The reason
that was given for not disarming the perpetrators was that
humanitarian agencies could not separate bona fide refugees
from soldiers. Meanwhile, reports continued to emerge and
to reach Governments and humanitarian agencies.
Humanitarian food was being sold and was also subjected
to a "war tax" by the perpetrators of genocide, who were
preparing a war in order to conclude the extermination of
the survivors of genocide in Rwanda. The Commission of
Inquiry, which was established by the Security Council, had
concluded that they were being rearmed and supported.

Timely action to disarm these soldiers would have
averted the present humanitarian crisis of Rwandan
refugees in the former eastern Zaire. The multinational
force that was approved last year by the Security Council
in its resolution 1080 (1996) would have been relevant if
it had been mandated to disarm these criminals. It was
encouraging to note that the Council called it off soon
after realizing its irrelevance.

The question has been asked: How can the
international community hold accountable those who
violate international humanitarian law when we do not
take timely measures to use international instruments to
counter the violation of that law? We waited for two and
a half years to see whether humanitarian agencies or those
who hold the custody of international humanitarian law
would invoke the provisions of article 5 of the Geneva
Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War. That Convention states:

"Where, in the territory of a Party to the
conflict, the latter is satisfied that an individual
protected person is definitely suspected of or
engaged in activities hostile to the security of the
State, such individual person shall not be entitled to
claim such rights and privileges under the present
Convention as would, if exercised in the favour of
such individual person, be prejudicial to the security
of such State."

The representative of Pakistan referred to other very
relevant aspects of this Convention. This goes to
underscore the need for adherence to its provisions in
humanitarian and other related matters.

As the war intensified in and around the then eastern
Zaire, former Rwandan soldiers and the militia continued
to enjoy refugee status, notwithstanding the fact that they
are the ones who are responsible for having wiped out
over 1 million Rwandans between April and July 1994.
These were later joined by yet another group of criminal
mercenaries. Serb mercenaries and others were recruited
from well-known countries in Western Europe. The
atrocities they committed in eastern Zaire have not yet
been condemned. They were funded and underwritten.
There is no mystery about it.

What is surprising, however, is that, to date, no
alarm has been raised, nor has there been a call for an
international commission of inquiry into the recruitment
and financing of criminals who are wanted by the
International Criminal Tribunal in order to answer for war

 

crimes. The commission of inquiry that we are calling for
as to who recruited, financed or otherwise helped in their
recruitment and transportation is necessary in order to put
to an end the question of impunity that most have referred
tO.

As Rwandan genocidal soldiers and militia continue to
move to the west of the Democratic Republic of Congo and
farther afield, inadvertent appeals are being made again for
their humanitarian assistance. I hope that such assistance
will not come at the expense of helping genuine refugees.
There are more deserving refugees who are being
repatriated to Rwanda to join the millions who returned in
1996 and who require support.
The question which has been asked is relevant: How
can the international community hold accountable those
who violate international humanitarian law when we do not
take measures to use international instruments to counter
further violations of international humanitarian law? I repeat
this question for the sake of emphasis.

Perhaps Rwanda's experience would be useful in
terms of answering the other important question that this
body has been addressing: What could the Security Council
do politically to support international humanitarian
operations in conflict situations? It is not possible to evolve
standard responses to each humanitarian crisis, as their root
causes and nature vary from situation to situation. However,
there are certain basic questions to be asked in each case
before launching a humanitarian operation.

Some such aspects as the refugee crisis in relation to
the peace and stability of neighbouring countries and the
impact it has on international peace and stability must be
addressed. How does the refugee crisis impact on the socio-
economic and political situation of the receiving countries,
especially the poorer ones? How does a refugee crisis relate
to the internal political dynamics of their countries of origin
or the geopolitical interests of third countries? How do you
ensure the neutrality of humanitarian intervention? The staff
of humanitarian and non-governmental organization
communities must be and should be seen to be impartial,
for a failure to be so would jeopardize their own security.
Another question: How can the international community
ensure that the drive for funding humanitarian assistance
matches its actual delivery?

The need to ensure the neutrality of external
involvement in the provision of humanitarian assistance
and/or military interventions is a critical matter which the
Security Council must always address, as failure to do so
could have devastating effects. At times, it could even
contribute to the compounding of the humanitarian crisis
instead of resolving it.

Another aspect which must be addressed before or
during the delivery of a humanitarian operation relates to
its duration. The longer the operation, the more difficult
it becomes to resolve. It is always easy to shovel snow
before it hardens.

The Rwanda case is a clear illustration. The history
of Rwandan refugees is one of the oldest in Africa. The
first Rwandan refugees fled in 1959 following an
externally manipulated process accompanied by the
connivance of political opportunists. At the time,
thousands were killed and millions condemned to exile
for 35 years, between 1959 and 1994.
During all this period, the then Rwanda Government
sustained a campaign to keep its refugees outside. The
international community did not pay attention to the plight
of close to 900,000 refugees who languished in refugee
camps and in many rural areas in the neighbouring
countries. It was not until 1990, after 34 years, that the
refugees reorganized themselves and mobilized internal
political forces in Rwanda in order to fight their way back
to Rwanda. Some called it an invasion when it was in
fact the only alternative left to end their 30 years of
statelessness and humiliation in exile.

What lessons can we draw from this experience? As
for us, we believe and continue to hold the View that it
was not necessary for the refugees to wait more than 30
years to return to their country. Even more recently, it
would have been helpful if the international community
had acted more decisively in favour of the quick and
timely repatriation of Rwandan refugees from eastern
Zaire.

Since the Government of National Unity of Rwanda
came to power in July 1994, it has consistently called on
all Rwandan refugees to return. International appeals have
been made since 1994 for assistance in the repatriation
exercise. By September 1996, and before the massive
return from October to December 1996, 1.3 million
refugees from Zaire, Tanzania and Burundi, as well as
another 800,000 old-case refugees who had fled between
1959 and 1973, had already returned to the country and
were being resettled. Given this massive return of 2.3
million refugees to Rwanda, it is important to redirect
humanitarian resources from relief to the resettlement,
rehabilitation and reconstruction of Rwanda.

 

Finally, let me thank you again, Mr. President, for
bringing this matter forward for debate. Member States
would be most grateful if similar open debates were held in
the future before launching humanitarian operations. We
would also appreciate an evaluation of the humanitarian
operations in Rwanda and in other places in order to learn
important lessons for the future.

Before concluding, I would like to pay special tribute
to Governments and humanitarian organizations and their
staff for their positive involvement in humanitarian
assistance.

