Ms. Honore: I would like to express my gratitude
to the Russian Federation, in its capacity as President
of the Security Council, for convening today's meeting
on Haiti and the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

(spoke in French)

I take this opportunity also to welcome the presence
of the Permanent Representative of the Republic
of Haiti.

(Spoke in English)
We are in solidarity, together with the people and
the Government of Haiti, as the country again faces
loss of life and destruction caused by natural disaster.
I am deeply saddened by the deaths and the suffering
among Haitian families and the overall physical toll on
the country inflicted by Hurricane Matthew.

(spoke in French)

Before briefing the Council on the impact of
Hurricane Matthew and the immediate measures
already taken by the United Nations in Haiti, I should
like to convey my deepest condolences to the people
and the Government of Haiti.

(spoke in English)

The category 4 hurricane made landfall on 4 October
in south-western Haiti, causing death, widespread
damage, flooding and displacement, resulting in the
largest humanitarian crisis in Haiti since the 2010
earthquake. The Government of Haiti estimates that
more than 2.1 million persons have been affected, with
more than 1 4 million in need of urgent humanitarian
assistance. The Ministry of the Interior has confirmed
372 deaths - a figure that is likely to rise - while
more than 60,000 people have been evacuated and
remain in temporary shelters.

Hurricane Matthew impacted the entire south of the
country, with the departments of Grande Arise, Nippes,
Sud and Sud-Est bearing the brunt of the destruction.
In the affected area, where small-scale farming is the
main source of income, the livelihoods of hundreds
of thousands of people have been lost as up to 80 per
cent of crops and livestock vanished. The hurricane
inflicted major damage on Haiti's public infrastructure,
washing away roads and bridges, blowing away tin
roofs, flooding schools - many identified to serve as
voting centres - and leaving whole towns submerged
and inaccessible for several days. A critical bridge
connecting the southern peninsula to the capital, Port-
au-Prince, collapsed, cutting off essential supply lines
and disrupting commercial food supply chains, which
has further impeded access to the affected areas, which
also lost telephone communication.

Although the Government is still assessing the full
extent of the physical damage, as access to the affected
areas is gradually expanded, there can be no doubt that
this is a humanitarian tragedy and an acute emergency
situation, with 1.4 million persons in need of immediate
assistance from the Haitian Government, with support
from its international partners. During two visits to the
southern peninsula, I myselfwitnessed how desperately
that assistance is needed. And it is needed quickly, as
health conditions deteriorate and basic supplies are
running out.

The health impact of this disaster cannot be
overestimated. Water and sanitation infrastructure,
already fragile, have been severely damaged. The
absence of drinking water and the contamination by
sewage of other water sources is causing a very high
level of infections from diarrhoeal disease, including,
but not exclusively, cholera. In response, we are
providing water-purification systems and medicine to
hard-to-reach areas. There are hundreds of suspected
cholera cases, and we are already seeing the first
deaths. Protecting vulnerable populations from cholera
and ensuring that the restoration and, in some cases, the
installation of water and sanitation systems has to be
one of the priorities for humanitarian action.

To address those needs and to provide other
life-saving assistance to 750,000 persons for the next
three months, the United Nations and humanitarian
agencies yesterday launched a flash appeal for
$120 million. I express my sincere thanks to all
countries for the prompt support they have provided
and continue to provide, and I call on all Member States
to contribute urgently to the appeal, in support of the
response being led by the Government of Haiti. In that
context, I wish to commend the Government for the
leadership that it has so far demonstrated in setting the
priorities and coordinating the immediate response. I
encourage all partners to align with that leadership and
further strengthen the capacities of the Civil Protection
Directorate and the ministries concerned. Dealing with
recovery and reconstruction in the aftermath of the
hurricane will require, more than ever, a coordinated
approach behind an agenda defined by the Government.

The United Nations, along with other governmental
and non-governmental and international and local
partners, started supporting the Haitian authorities
in addressing the immediate needs of the affected
population in shelter, water, sanitation and food
assistance during this emergency response phase, and
even before, by pre-positioning stocks of life-saving
food and non-food items. MINUSTAH civilian and
uniformed personnel and capacities are being put to full
use in support of the humanitarian efforts - by opening
up access to roads, providing airlift and supporting the
Haitian National Police (HNP) in securing humanitarian
workers and stocks, among other tasks.
Not only did Hurricane Matthew bring destruction
to Haiti, it has also affected the country's political
outlook, rendering impossible the holding on 9 October
of the presidential elections, repeated from last year, as
well as the partial senatorial elections and legislative
re-runs. That is despite the resolve shown by the Haitian
Government, the Provisional Electoral Council and the
Haitian National Police in preparing for the elections
and working to create a conducive environment.

In the light of the considerable humanitarian
challenges and the damage to critical infrastructure
caused by the hurricane, the Provisional Electoral
Council postponed the elections pending the completion
of an assessment of the impact of the hurricane on the
electoral process, including of the Provisional Electoral
Council's capacities in the departments. Preliminary
reports by the Council indicate that at least 70 per
cent of voting centres may have been affected in Sud
department, and even more in Grand'Anse, where many
areas are still inaccessible.

Prior to the disruption caused by the hurricane,
technical preparations had largely been on track for
the holding of the elections. Most political actors were
committed to renewing the country's key democratic
institutions through elections as a crucial first step
towards Haiti's return to constitutional order following
the extended period of transitional governance. N0
political party boycotted the process, and the large
number of registered candidates and parties reflected
broad participation by actors across the political
spectrum, setting the stage for an inclusive electoral
process.

(spoke in French)

The commitment shown by the Haitian authorities
with regard to ownership of all aspects of the electoral
process, including financial and operational aspects,
is promising, especially in the context of the eventual
drawdown of MINUSTAH. While the Provisional
Electoral Council is preparing to announce a new
electoral calendar, it is important to find the right
balance to maintain the momentum generated for
elections and to take into account the technical and
political considerations, while facing the largest
humanitarian crisis that Haiti has known since 2010.
(spoke in English)

In the light of the simultaneous challenges of
addressing the impact of the hurricane and preparing
for the holding of the much-anticipated elections, the
Provisional Electoral Council and the Haitian National
Police will need vigorous support from the Government
and its international partners to build on the
pre-hurricane preparations and to ensure the credibility
and the integrity of the process. Furthermore, now more
than ever, all the necessary measures must be taken to
ensure that the political process is managed in a manner
that generates the consensus needed among the national
actors to overcome the political and humanitarian
challenges facing the country. I therefore call on all
national actors to place the needs of the Haitian people
above all and unite behind this goal, including with a
View to preserving the relative stability that marked
the security situation prior to the passing of Hurricane
Matthew and throughout the electoral campaign. In
that context, I condemn the random attacks on vehicles
transporting food and other life-saving supplies, and
I urge the country's authorities to take the necessary
measures to prevent such attacks from happening.

Despite the imperative need for all actors,
including MINUSTAH, to focus on the emergency
response, we cannot lose sight of the longer-term
challenges and priorities. In addition to facilitating and
supporting a coordinated Government-led recovery
and reconstruction agenda, no effort can be spared to
continue strengthening the rule-of-law institutions,
most notably the Haitian National Police. Despite
progress in both strength and performance since my
previous briefing, the Haitian National Police is yet
to become operationally independent and continues
to require support from both the Government of Haiti
and international partners to fully provide for security
throughout the country.

Less than three months before the end of the
2012-2016 HNP development plan, work on the HNP
strategic plan for the period 2017-2021 is reaching
its final stages, including determining objectives
with respect to the required police-to-population
ratio and identifying areas in which continuous
specialized support is needed for further institutional
and operational improvement of the Haitian National
Police. The new five-year strategy will also provide
an additional impetus for MINUSTAH's security
transitioning planning, thereby informing the strategic
assessment that is expected to be conducted prior to the
expiration of the Mission's mandate.

The impact of Hurricane Matthew on the political
process and on stability in the country can only serve
to reconfirm the recommendation of the Secretary-
General for a six-month extension, at the current force
and police strength, until 15 April 2017. That will
allow MINUSTAH to support the Haitian authorities
in their efforts to return to full constitutional order
in the wake of the humanitarian crisis created by
Hurricane Matthew.

I thank all my colleagues in MINUSTAH and the
United Nations country team for their dedication and
commitment during this challenging period for Haiti,
and express my sincere respect to all the humanitarian
and civil protection workers, who are making tireless
efforts under severe conditions. I call on all of Haiti's
international partners to continue to lend their support
to the country in order to rapidly overcome the new
challenges occasioned by the hurricane so that everyone
can refocus on strengthening the country's economic,
physical and institutional infrastructure.

