Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Security sector reform (SSR) is crucial in many
African countries that are continuing to strengthen a
fragile peace. In welcoming its Minister for Foreign
Affairs, I would also like to thank the delegation of
Nigeria for having organized this debate. We also
commend Nigeria's efforts in presiding over our
debate. And we would like to thank Mr. Herve'
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his briefing.

Given the convergence of views around the table,
Gabon would like in advance to welcome the draft
presidential statement to be adopted briefly.

Peacebuilding through security sector reform
should help countries emerging from conflict avoid a
relapse into conflict. In order to better address SSR
challenges, we believe there is a need both to adopt a
comprehensive approach and to better integrate the role
of host countries in such efforts. Such an approach
must of course be based on existing links between
conflict prevention, peacebuilding and peacekeeping,
and the socio-economic development of a country
emerging from conflict.

In order to ensure lasting peace and stability,
security sector reform must include strengthening the
capacities of a country's security institutions. Security
sector reform efforts could help to restore confidence
among belligerent parties, rectify negative linkages
between armies and political actors and avert a security
vacuum that could expose people to violence and abuse
by remnants of armed groups.

Security sector reform often raises the issue of
the role of peacekeeping operations. We are well aware
that such operations cannot go on indefinitely in a
country in crisis or emerging from one. However,
stability cannot be ensured following the end of a
peacekeeping operation unless the host country is able
to ensure the security of its people. We therefore think
that the issue of SSR should be addressed quite soon
after the deployment of a mission. Efforts at
establishing and strengthening peace could be
undermined if this matter is not well taken into account
from the beginning, and if SSR implementation is not
effectively supported.

The hasty withdrawal of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad and
the ensuring security situation in Central Africa
corroborates that View. The Central African Republic is
today facing the resurgence of violence on the part of
armed groups, such as the Convention of Patriots for
Justice and Peace and the Lord's Resistance Army.
Central African security forces have little capacity to
protect populations from the violence perpetrated by
such groups.

We welcome the establishment of the Security
Institutions Unit within the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic.
Our hope is that the Unit will focus on reforming the
country's security institutions.

A coherent approach to SSR also means that the
various stakeholders active on security sector reform in
Africa should work in concert cooperatively. In that
regard, we commend the existing cooperation between
the United Nations, the African Union and the
subregional organizations on the continent. We of
course hope that the support provided to the African
Union to develop its approach to SSR will continue.

An effective approach also involves synergy with
other stakeholders, such as the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Fund and
major international donors. It will be difficult for
security sector reform efforts to achieve their goals if
programmes are not supported with sufficient financial
resources. The role played by the Peacebuilding
Support Fund, whether with regard to countries on the
Commission's agenda or those not yet under its
consideration, deserves to be commended.

The host country has a crucial role in security
sector reform, over which it should have ownership.
Against that backdrop, reform is above all a political
issue. It is through political agreement that a country
should set reform priorities and set out a new vision for
its security forces. Such a vision should be the outcome
of the broadest possible national political dialogue as
part of the peacebuilding process. The international
community should act solely in support of the efforts
of the host Government.

In that regard, we would like to commend the
exemplary efforts of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo aimed at strengthening strategic coherence
in the security sector reform with the Congolese
Government and its international partners.

In order to be sustainable, SSR must also make it
possible to transform relations between political
stakeholders, security institutions, civil society and the
general population in a manner that a new security
culture replaces the one that prevailed during the crisis.
This is therefore a question of nurturing a new civilian-
military relationship that can help to restore confidence
throughout the entire society. It is also important to
ensure the participation of all members of society,
including women. They should be better represented in
security institutions and their rights should be properly
respected.

In that connection, the efforts by the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau to integrate women into that country's police
and military institutions should be continued and
supported. The same is the case with human rights and
gender training provided to military staff.

Lastly, it is important the we pay attention to
potential problems, especially the thorny issue of
impunity and meting out justice to security forces
responsible for violence and abuse against civilians.

In conclusion, Gabon continues to be convinced
that strengthening the effectiveness of security sector
reform is crucial to ensuring a lasting impact by the
international community with regard to peacebuilding
in a country emerging from conflict.
