Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I would like to express our
appreciation to Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his most useful
and comprehensive briefing on the latest developments
concerning the Middle East and Palestine.

It is clear that provocative actions continue to fuel
tensions on the ground. That inevitably pushed the
parties to another cycle of confrontation and violence.
While we condemn all attacks and deeply regret the
loss of any innocent civilian lives, we would call upon
the parties to exercise maximum restraint. The region
is already on the edge. Every effort must be made to
avoid further escalation. We support any and all efforts
to diffuse tension. In that context, we appreciate what
the United Nations and Egypt are doing to help to
restore calm and facilitate a return to the 2014 ceasefire
arrangements.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza continues
to be of serious concern and the growing sense of
frustration and despair among the Palestinians is
completely understandable. Meeting the critical needs
of the Palestinians living in Gaza remains a daunting
challenge and addressing the huge funding gap must
continue to be a matter of the utmost priority. That
needs much greater attention and mobilization by the
international community, even though it was a matter
of discussion at a number of meetings held on the
margins of the General Assembly last month. These
included the meetings of the Middle East Quartet and
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee. We share the concerns
expressed by the Middle East Quartet and note its
support for the efforts of the United Nations to prevent
further escalation, empower the legitimate Palestinian
authorities in Gaza and address all humanitarian needs.

We also note the outcome of the meeting of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee and the priority areas it
identified to address the critical situation affecting the
Palestinian economy and the humanitarian situation
in Gaza. We would strongly agree with the support
expressed for the Palestinian Authority to reinstate its
governance in Gaza, in order to reunite Palestine under
one authority. We believe that progress in the Egyptian-
led reconciliation is indeed the key, and the Palestinian
parties should be urged to cooperate for the sake oftheir
own people, who have been suffering for far too long.

Ethiopia's position on the Israeli-Palestinian
dispute has always been consistent and clear. As much
as we support the right of Israel to exist in peace and
security, we also support the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people to self-determination and the right
of Palestine to exist as a free and independent State.

Accordingly, we fully support the goal of two
States living side by side in peace and security. Indeed,
this is the only viable option to resolve the Israeli-
Palestinian dispute. We believe that this is not only in
the best interest of both Israel and Palestine but that it
will also significantly advance peace and security in
the Middle East.

Peace in the Middle East and Palestine, however,
continues to elude us. It is very clear that we need to
reinvigorate efforts aimed at achieving a comprehensive,
lasting and just solution to the longstanding Israeli-
Palestinian dispute on the basis of the two-State
formula. In other words, facilitating the resumption of
direct negotiations between the parties is vital. It is, we
believe, incumbent upon the Council to fully support
such efforts for the sake of peace between the Israelis
and the Palestinians and peace in the broader Middle
Eastern region.

