Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Let me start
by referring to the selection of the next Secretary-
General. We appreciate that the current process was
formally started by a joint letter from the President
of the General Assembly and the President of the
Security Council inviting Member States to submit
proposed candidates. The unprecedented hearings are
important steps forward towards the democratization
of the selection process. Brazil believes that the role
of the General Assembly is not simply to rubber-stamp
decisions taken previously by the Security Council.
We agree with Assembly President Lykketoft - and
with the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
(ACT) Group, for that matter - as stated in his letter
dated 7 July, that the result of the informal straw polls
should be made available to the general membership.

The review of the Peacebuilding Architecture
empowered the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in its
advisory capacity to the Security Council. The Council
and the PBC can expand their synergies and draw
upon the expertise of the Commission in assisting with
the longer-term perspective required for sustaining
peace. We believe that there is value added in inviting
the Chairs of the PBC configurations to informally
meet Council members before a situation that they
follow closely is up for review. In the same vein, the
Council should consider inviting the Chairs of PBC
configurations to join official missions.

There is room for improvement in the Council's
working methods with regard to the implementation
of the Council's decisions authorizing the use of force
and the follow-up to communications submitted under
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations. As
highlighted by the Secretary-General in the report on
the responsibilty to protect (S/2015/500), it is important
to further strengthen the reporting and reviewing
procedures for the implementation of Security Council
resolutions authorizing the use of force by third parties,
so as to ensure that the mandates given by the United
Nations are being properly implemented. Brazil recalls
its proposal containing two practical steps, both
of which are based on existing mechanisms in the
Security Council.

First, we should import from the peacekeeping
system the practice of sunset clauses, reporting and
briefings to delegations. Secondly, we should create
monitoring mechanisms by establishing panels of
experts modelled after the United Nations sanctions
committees. In addition to proper authorization, it is
essential that the Security Council be kept informed
about the military actions carried out on its behalf as
part of its role in legitimizing the use of force. That role
includes not only deciding to initiate military action,
but also ensuring, for instance, its proportionality and
conformity with international humanitarian law, as
well as determining the appropriate time to conclude
the intervention.

Brazil has also taken note of the increase in
the number of letters to the Security Council under
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations that
seek to justify military actions, most of the time
ex post facto, in the context of countering terrorism.
Without prejudice to the necessary debate on the actual
content of such communications, it is also important to
reflect on whether they fulfil the obligation to "report
immediately" as stipulated in the Charter, which applies
to all actions undertaken under that provision. Such
communications do not release the Security Council
from its primary responsibilities. A proper follow-up to
such communications by the Council seems necessary.

It is desirable that the troop- and police- contributing
countries be included in the decision-making process
leading to the deployment of peacekeeping operations.
We need to balance the perspectives of those crafting
mandates and those implementing them. In addition,
penholderships must be more equitably shared. The fact
that elected members have reduced opportunities to take
initiatives is linked, of course, with another unresolved
problem, that is, the comprehensive reform of the
Security Council. No change in the working methods
alone will be able to tackle some of the main challenges
currently faced by the Council. As many have pointed
out during the current session of intergovernmental
negotiations, the longer the reform of the Security
Council takes, the more the United Nations puts its
credibility and long-term legitimacy at risk. Improving
the working methods of the Security Council depends,
to a great extent, on a comprehensive reform capable
of leading to more effective, transparent and legitimate
decision-making processes.

