Mr. Bonne (France) (spoke in French): I too wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
meeting, which has become a regular feature, as it
provides a rare but valuable opportunity to exchange
with the force commanders and to hear the views from
the field.

I thank the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Force Commanders of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the
United Nations-African Union Hybrid Mission in
Darfur (UNAMID), the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL) for their briefings.

First, I would like to recall France's commitment
to peacekeeping, which is one of the most important
and certainly most symbolic activities of the United
Nations. Here I would like first of all to commend the
exceptional work carried out by the Blue Helmets on
the ground in often difficult and dangerous conditions,
where no one else goes, in order to implement
mandates whose complexity directly reflects that of the
crises that our Organization seeks to tackle.

France wishes to continue participating in efforts
to improve the functioning of peacekeeping operations.
Since their inception, these operations have been the
privileged instrument through which the Council
exercises its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Improving the
effectiveness of such operations is thus a matter of
strategic importance.

In following up the 2009 initiative by France and
the United Kingdom, our goal remains to improve the
political and military monitoring of operations by the
Security Council, to ensure greater effectiveness in the
logistical and financial management of operations, to
clarify doctrine with regard to a number of complex
issues such as the protection of civilians, and to clarify,
and rationalize as far as possible, mandates, as
necessary. That is the purpose of the regular
consultations that the Council now holds on cross-
cutting issues concerning peacekeeping. We believe
that they should continue.

With regard to all of the issues I just raised, we
believe that we have made progress. We welcome in
particular the implementation of the global field
support strategy. We would also like to welcome the
Senior Advisory Group's report on strengthening
civilian capacity in post-conflict situations
(S/20ll/85). We believe that it will make it possible to
amend the way that peacekeeping operations function
in terms of such important issues as the economic
impact of operations on national development and the
role of women in peacekeeping.

We will therefore continue our work, especially
in the area of strengthening the chain of command in
peacekeeping operations, improving cooperation with
troop contributors and providing for more rigorous
financial follow-up in support of peacekeeping. I note
that the budget for peacekeeping operations has soared
in recent years. It is true that the needs played a big
role in this, but it is also true that in a tight budgetary
climate for financial contributors, it is essential that we
have the means to manage the budget in a responsible
and controlled manner.

I, too, have some questions to ask the Force
Commanders present here today. First, I have a general
question. Are the reform efforts undertaken in New
York felt in the field? Do the practices on the ground
change as a result of decisions taken or
recommendations made in the Council? How can we in
the Council better take into account the views from the
field and the feedback from Force Commanders?

More specifically, I have questions for Major
General Asarta Cuevas on UNIFIL. We, too, firmly
condemn, of course, the attacks on UNIF IL troops. We
appreciate the solidarity expressed after yesterday's
attack, in which our soldiers were victims. Of course,
we will not tolerate the security and safety of military
and civilian staff deployed in Lebanon being furthered
threatened. We understand the difficulty of the task at
hand, but what can we do to ensure that the soldiers in
the field are better protected? Also, how can we
enhance cooperation with the Lebanese Armed Forces?
And how can we ensure that the tasks currently carried
out by UNIFIL are progressively handed over?

My question for the Force Commander of
MONUSCO concerns the adaptation of the civilian
protection strategy in the current context of preparing
for elections. In this pre-electoral climate, is there any
need to change the force's approach and its civilian
protection strategy, given the constraints that we have
been advised of?

