Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): Let me begin by
congratulating Ukraine once again on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. I also thank Tunisia for its very effective
presidency of the Council last month.

My delegation is grateful to you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate on the follow-up to the
Security Council summit held six months ago
alongside of the Millennium Summit. We are also
grateful to your delegation for the comprehensive
background paper you have circulated with the aim of
spurring meaningful discussion on this extremely
important topic.

We appreciate that for today's meeting you have
decided on the format introduced under Singapore's
presidency that allows the non-members of the Security
Council to speak first. This format enables the Security
Council members to have the benefit of the views of
the general membership of the United Nations and
enables us to react to those views to the extent possible
in an interactive process. This, we have no doubt, is
much appreciated by the general membership.

When the leaders of the countries serving on the
Security Council meet in a special summit, as it
happened six months ago, and, following their serious
deliberations, agree to a declaration that incorporates
their collective views on a subject as important as
"Ensuring an effective role for the Security Council in
the maintenance of international peace and security,
particularly in Africa", such a declaration not only
requires our serious attention but should be
implemented by all possible means as a priority. It is
unfortunate that this important declaration has
remained more or less dormant since its adoption at the
summit level on 7 September last year.

Indeed, the declaration sums up most of the
concerns the members of the United Nations have
regarding the effectiveness of the Security Council
today, as the apex world body for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It addresses the
serious challenges the Security Council faces in
carrying out its responsibilities today in changing
circumstances and makes important proposals for the
way forward. It reaffirms the need for reform, so that
representation in the Security Council can become
more equitable and its decisions more credible.

There is no doubt that the institution of the
Security Council as the instrument for the maintenance
of international peace and security is in urgent need of
rethinking if it is to continue to assume the role the
Charter has given it. The Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, speaking at the Security Council summit six
months ago, could not have better portrayed the present
state of affairs:

"Too many vulnerable communities in too many
regions of the world now hesitate to look to the
United Nations to assist them in their hour of
need. No amount of resolutions or statements can
change that reality; only action can: prompt,
united, effective action pursued with skill and
discipline to halt conflict and to restore the peace.
Only such determined action can restore the
reputation of the United Nations as a credible
force for peace and justice". (S/PV4194)

We know that this important statement of the
Secretary-General, which he reiterated this morning, is
fully shared by most United Nations Members and is
particularly relevant to the Security Council.

We all agree that the maintenance of international
peace and security has become a much more complex
proposition than was originally envisaged in the United
Nations Charter. Unfortunately, we have not adapted
our structures and methods to deal with the new
situation. The Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility in this regard, continues to function
within the parameters of a world order that has long
since changed, and does not reflect the realities of our
times. Its decision-making is, more often than not,
flawed and inconsistent as well as lacking in
credibility. We believe that the ongoing discussion in
the General Assembly on reform of the Security
Council needs to be concluded expeditiously in order
to enable the Council to function more efficiently in
fulfilling the responsibilities conferred upon it by the
United Nations Charter.

We would like to propose that we consider having
a group of wise men, including former statesmen,
discuss those issues of reform which continue to elude
solutions in our discussions and make proposals to us
for further consideration, because we need to move on
with reforms of the Security Council.

The manner in which conflicts are addressed
presently by the Security Council can at best be
described as "firefighting" with inadequate material,
financial and human resources. We send rumbling and
ill-equipped fire engines, often much too late, to
contain raging fires of conflicts, and then realize that
we have entrusted an impossible job to our firemen.
Somalia, Angola and Sierra Leone are examples in this
regard. At times our fire engines do not even start, as
we saw in the case of Rwanda, where millions were
being killed in a cruel genocide and were crying for
help from the international community, and also in the
case of Palestine last year. We know, furthermore, that
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has waited more
than 20 months for the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation.

Obviously, United Nations peacekeeping in
Africa has been lacking in even-handedness, to the
extent that there are allegations of double standards
when it comes to deployment on the African continent.
The Security Council summit declaration appropriately
called for particular attention to be given to
peacekeeping in Africa.

The Brahimi report addressed many of the
shortcomings of United Nations peacekeeping
operations and has made important recommendations,
some of which are being implemented gradually. One
very significant recommendation, which is also being
implemented, is that there should be regular
consultations, at every stage of peacekeeping
operations, between the Security Council and the
troop- contributing countries. We are hopeful that the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
established last month by the Security Council, under
the chairmanship of Ambassador Curtis Ward of
Jamaica, will deal with all relevant aspects for further
improvement of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

The imposition of mandatory sanctions is the only
other tool available to the Security Council for
enforcing its decisions. Unfortunately, the Security
Council itself does not have the capacity to ensure
compliance with its sanctions regimes. In such a
situation, the sanctions are violated with impunity and
often fail to serve their intended purpose. We then have
a situation in which everything remains at a standstill,
sometimes for years. We also have situations in which
sanctions bitterly affect the people rather than the
defaulting regimes for which they are intended, and the
sanctions become the subject of popular outcry because
of the humanitarian crisis to which they often lead. The
Security Council summit declaration referred to this
problem, and it is now for us collectively to address
this important issue in a comprehensive manner and
come up with an appropriate solution.

The maintenance of international peace and
security, as referred to in the United Nations Charter,
has larger connotations than just peacekeeping
operations. The Security Council summit declaration
rightly recognizes this and emphasizes that peace-
building and identifying the root causes of conflicts
should be given due attention by the Security Council
and the United Nations in general. In order to address
these issues, there is a need for cooperation between
the Security Council and the other organs of the United
Nations system, in particular the Economic and Social
Council. We believe that a special unit should be set up
in the United Nations Secretariat to facilitate
coordination between the Security Council and the
various United Nations bodies in the areas of post-
conflict peace-building.

The maintenance of international peace and
security also entails the prevention of conflicts. The
Security Council summit addressed this issue and
suggested that regional offices of the Security Council
be established, with the responsibility of preventing
conflicts. We strongly support that proposal. We
believe that such regional offices could also work
closely with the regional organizations, which, too,
have an important role in conflict prevention as well as
in the management of conflicts.

Finally, I would like to suggest that the Security
Council establish a working group with responsibility
to make recommendations to the Council on
implementation of the summit declaration.
Furthermore, consideration should be given to the
possibility of holding a ministerial meeting of the
Security Council during the next session of the General
Assembly for a review of the Security Council summit
declaration.

