Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I should like
to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, and, through
you, the delegation of Bangladesh, for having devoted an
open briefing to our consideration of the report of the
Secretary-General of 10 March 2000 on the
implementation of paragraphs 28 and 30 of resolution
1284 (1999) and paragraph 5 of resolution 1281 (1999).
Your initiative, which we fully support, will certainly
serve the objective of enhancing the transparency of the
work of the Security Council. I should also like to thank

 

the Secretary-General for his report and for his introductory
remarks, which have given the Council a clear picture of
the humanitarian situation in Iraq.

We have studied the report carefully, and my
delegation would like to make the following comments on
it. First, the report underscores the progressive deterioration
of Iraq's basic infrastructure, which is affecting the
humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people. The group of
experts set up by this Council has identified many problems
that have hampered the proper execution of the
humanitarian programme, whose implementation, I hardly
need recall, is governed by the provisions of resolution 986
(1995), subsequent relevant resolutions and the
Memorandum of Understanding concluded on 20 May 1996
by the Secretary-General and the Iraqi Government.

In this regard, the report indicates that, although in
resolution 1153 (1998) the Council authorized an increase
in the level of financing of the programme from $1.32
billion to $3.4 billion per phase, the time required to correct
the worsening humanitarian situation proved to be longer,
the revenue shortfall in phases IV and V - some $2.2
billion - was sizeable, and the results fell short of
expectations.
Similarly, the report stresses the negative effects of
holds on the humanitarian programme, in particular those
holds relating to electricity, water and sanitation, transport
and telecommunications, the notification mechanism for
contracts relating to food, medicines, agriculture and
education, and the approval of contracts for oil spare parts.

Mali is gravely concerned about this situation, even
though, as the report indicates, the humanitarian
programme, which is currently in phase VII, was not
designed as a means of meeting all the humanitarian needs
of the Iraqi people.

Secondly, the sanctions Committee, the Security
Council and Iraq should now study carefully those
recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-
General that relate to each of them.

Because it bears a share of the responsibility for the
situation in Iraq, in particular the humanitarian plight of its
people, the Iraqi Government must, in the view of my
delegation, take action to implement the recommendations
in paragraph 207 of the Secretary-General's report, as well
as those spelled out in his supplementary report of 1
February 1998 that have not yet been put into effect.

Similarly, we believe that the recommendations
addressed to the sanctions Committee, as set out in
paragraph 208 of the report of the Secretary-General,
should be implemented fairly quickly, as they are aimed
at breaking the current deadlock in that Committee.

With regard to the recommendations to the Security
Council in paragraph 209 and subsequent paragraphs of
the report, we believe that they should be put into effect
in order to remedy the shortcomings of the existing
humanitarian programme. In this regard, we should, as a
matter of priority, put an end to the excessive use of
holds.

