President Obasanjo: I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and to thank you for
the opportunity to address this gathering on an issue
that is of paramount importance to Africa and indeed,
as we have just heard from the Secretary-General of
our Organization, of paramount importance to the
world. May I also compliment the Russian Federation
on the able manner in which it conducted the affairs of
the Council last month.

The situation in Darfur poses serious challenges
to the African Union (AU) and to the international
community. It is therefore fitting that it has, in recent
months, engaged the attention of all those who desire
peace and stability in our continent and, indeed, in the
world. It is against that background that, at the recent
summit held in Addis Ababa last July, African leaders
resolved to confront the problem in all its
ramifications - military, political, economic and
social.

A major outcome of our deliberations on that
occasion was the constitution of the AU Observer
Protection Force in Darfur. Much earlier, in the face of
the unfolding grave humanitarian crisis in that region,
the AU had initiated a peace process which culminated
in the signing, in N'Djamena, in April 2004, of the
Humanitarian Ceasefire Agreement. That Agreement
provided for a Ceasefire Monitoring Committee, with
the mandate to report to a Joint Commission consisting
of the parties, Chadian mediators and the international
community.

It is with satisfaction that I observe that the
African Union received the cooperation of the
Government of Sudan, and quickly mobilized and
dispatched observers to the region. Subsequently, the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
coordinated yet another round of negotiations, in Addis
Ababa in July 2004. The subsequent Addis Ababa
agreement reinforced the N'Djamena accord by
enhancing security in Darfur and facilitating
humanitarian assistance to the victims.

I wish to stress that, in all these efforts of the
African Union, the preoccupation has been the
achievement of peace, security and development in
Darfur and in the Sudan as a whole. It is the conviction
of the leadership of the African Union that linkages
between peace, security and development should be
maintained if the objectives of the international
community are to be realized, as envisaged in the
Millennium Development Goals. This is consistent
with the ideals of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development.

Let me now address the most recent major
initiative that the African Union has taken on Darfur
under my chairmanship. I refer to the peace talks in
Abuja, coordinated by the Government of Nigeria,
between the Government of the Sudan, the Sudan
Liberation Army and the Justice and Equality
Movement - all under the auspices of the African
Union.

The negotiation was, as expected, not easy. After
agreeing to a four-point agenda on humanitarian issues,
security issues, political arrangements and economic
and social arrangements, the parties moved to consider

the first item - humanitarian issues. We were able to
persuade the parties to agree on a protocol that
guarantees unimpeded and unrestricted access for
humanitarian workers and assistance to all internally
displaced persons and refugees. Specifically, the
agreement would allow the United Nations and other
non-governmental humanitarian assistance
organizations to travel along routes proposed by the
United Nations, without restrictions or escorts, in order
to deliver assistance to areas controlled by any party as
well as facilitate all activities undertaken.
On the issue of the protection of civilians, the
protocol reaffirmed the commitment of the parties to
take all necessary measures to prevent all attacks,
threats, intimidation and any other form of violence
against civilians, by any party or group, including the
Janjaweed and other militias. It also provided for the
protection of the property and livelihood of individuals
and communities, and ensures that the principle of
voluntary return is fully respected and complied with,
consistent with general United Nations return
principles. The parties further agreed to maintain the
civilian character of internally displaced persons; to
ensure the rights of internally displaced persons and
refugees to return to their areas of origin; to protect the
rights of internally displaced persons and refugees in
their areas of origin in order to enable them to return,
should they choose to do so; and to ensure that all
forces and individuals involved or reported to be
involved in violations of rights of internally displaced
persons, vulnerable groups and other civilians will be
transparently investigated and held accountable by the
appropriate authorities.

The proposal on security issues is on the table.
The resistance movement requested a recess to enable
them to brief their colleagues outside the venue of the
talks and a one-month recess was agreed to.

The African Union is conscious of the important
collaborative role that the international community, and
particularly the United Nations, through the Security
Council, has played and can continue to play in
enhancing our peace efforts in Darfur. That is why I
apprised the Council of developments on the Abuja
peace talks through my letter on the subject, which was
copied to the Council. We are determined to usher in
an era of peace in Darfur because we believe that the
peace and security of Sudan will have a positive impact
on the subregion, on the African continent, and,
indeed, on the world. It is essential, therefore, that our
efforts be complemented and that we do not work at
cross purposes. On behalf of the African Union, I wish
to place on record our appreciation of the humanitarian
assistance being provided to refugees and internally
displaced persons by donors and the international
community. An economically strong and viable Sudan
will definitely be at peace with itself and the
international community.

Against the background of the challenges that the
Darfur conflict poses for our region, there is a need to
go beyond the provision of humanitarian assistance.
The capacity of the AU should be enhanced and
strengthened through the provision of logistical
support, as well as the training and deployment of
personnel. In addition, there is the need to provide the
African Union with the wherewithal to effectively
carry out its current tasks, including the maintenance
of a force of about 3,000 troops. I therefore urge
donors and the international community to increase the
present level of assistance to the African Union.

I wish to acknowledge the collective wisdom of
the Security Council, which, by its resolution 1564
(2004) of 18 September 2004, not only underscored the
importance of such assistance but also welcomed the
leadership role and engagement of the African Union
in addressing the situation in Darfur, as well as
pledging support for the African Union in its resolve to
enhance its presence there. The expansion of the
African Union presence, called for in the resolution, is,
indeed, welcome; but it can only be realized through
sustained financial backing. We should avoid a
situation where African Union troops on the ground are
handicapped owing to a lack of requisite financial
resources and logistical support.

The African Union has been seized with other
issues that affect peace and security on our continent.
As the Council is no doubt aware, the African Union
has now established the Peace and Security Council, a
major organ which focuses on peace and security
issues in our region. That Council has become
operational. We are grateful to the Secretary-General
for the assistance that he provided our organization in
that regard and we look forward to a close working
relationship between that organ and the Security
Council.

Let me also convey Africa's appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his personal interest in and quick
response to the situation in Darfur. I believe that this
has helped not only to inform the Council of the
magnitude of the challenges involved in arresting the
deteriorating situation in that region of Sudan, but has
also helped to mobilize support of the international
community.

It is a matter of satisfaction for us in Africa that
the peace process in Liberia is now irreversible. In that
connection, we welcome the recent decision of the
Council, by its resolution 1561 (2004) of 17 September
2004, to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia. What is now required of the
international community is to stay the course so that
our collective investment in peace is not in vain and
our achievements are sustained.
We also acknowledge the recent decision of the
Council, in its resolution 1562 (2004), to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone. The positive developments in that country are
indicative of what can be achieved when the
international community works together, and
collaborates proactively with subregional and regional
actors in pursuit of common goals.

In a similar vein, the African Union appreciates
the efforts of the United Nations in the Great Lakes
region, including the Democratic Republic of Congo.
The enormity of the challenges confronting the
Government and people of that country cannot be
overemphasized. We welcome the Secretary-General's
recommendation to expand the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. An early and favourable decision of the
Council on that matter would ensure that our shared
goals for peace and security in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are attained.

We are in a new Africa. This is an Africa that
believes firmly in democracy, human rights, economic
reform, partnership and sustainable development. The
African Union has, of its own volition, fully embraced
the challenges of peace and security in our region.
Across the length and breadth of the continent, African
leaders have - with courage, and in the face of
overwhelming odds - initiated and implemented
policies to strengthen democratic governance and the
rule of law and to enhance the peace and security of the
peoples in our respective countries.

We urge the Security Council to continue its
current positive role in support of these efforts, and the
international community at large to increase their level

of assistance, especially in the areas of capacity-
building and infrastructure development, to ensure the
achievement of social and economic development in
Africa. That is the surest way for us to arrest crises and
instability on our continent. I wish to assure you that
Africa will continue to cooperate with the Council in
the pursuit of economic development, stability, peace
and security for Africa.

