Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): As this
is the first open debate of the Council under your
presidency, Madam, allow me to reaffirm my
delegation's conviction that the work of the Council
will be fruitful throughout this month.

I also congratulate Sir John Sawers, Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, on the
excellent work of the Council presidency during the
month of August.

I wish to begin by thanking Mrs. Michele
Duvivier Pierre-Louis, Prime Minister of Haiti, for her
presence in the Council. We listened to her statement
with great attention. My delegation also appreciates the
participation of former President Bill Clinton and
thanks him for his commendable work to mobilize
international efforts on behalf of Haiti, which have
wrought tangible changes in the lives of the Haitian
people. We also thank Mr. He'di Annabi for his briefing
and reiterate our support for the work of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
which he heads.

Today's debate is of special importance to
Mexico in that it reflects the clear commitment of the
Security Council to political stability, reconstruction
and development in Haiti. Mexico welcomes the fact
that this year the international community has
expressed its will to promote substantive action to help
Haiti, as demonstrated by the high-level visits there by
the Security Council (see S/2009/175) and the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group of the Economic and Social Council in
May (see E/2009/105), the open debate on the situation
chaired by my country in April (see S/PV.6101) and the
donor conference on Haiti convened by the
Inter-American Development Bank.

Haiti represents a shining example of the
comprehensive attention required by many crisis
situations on the Security Council agenda that
transcend the narrow requirements of the maintenance
of peace and stability. As the Council agreed in its
presidential statement of 22 July 2009
(S/PRST/2009/23), post-conflict peacebuilding is of
critical importance as the foundation for building
sustainable peace and development in the aftermath of
conflict.

Mexico welcomes the progress made in Haiti
with the support of MINUSTAH in such areas electoral
politics, institution-building, security, rule of law and
human rights. However, as noted in the report of the
Secretary-General, progress remains fragile and its
sustainability will depend largely on progress in the
socio-economic situation of the Haitian people. It is
therefore important to support the efforts now being
led by former President Clinton to promote democracy
and development in Haiti.

Mexico wants to see MINUSTAH continue to
work with the United Nations country team in support
of Haiti to strengthen development, humanitarian
assistance, the rule of law and security, and its capacity
to respond to natural disasters.

Mexico agrees with the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that MINUSTAH's mandate be
renewed until 15 October 2010. We must bear in mind
that its work is critical at a time when the Haitian
police capacity is not yet fully developed and the State
continues to face serious threats to its stability.
Furthermore, given the ongoing evolution of the
national and regional environment, we support the
Secretary-General's proposal to adjust the force
configuration of the Mission by increasing the police
component and reducing the military component.
Mexico acknowledges MINUSTAH's political,
logistical and security support to the Haitian
Government in the holding of elections in April and
June. We reaffirm how important it is that the mission
continue to lend its support to the Haitian Government
in the presidential and local elections planned for late
2010. The success of those elections undoubtedly
requires the political will of all actors and greater civil
society participation in order to guarantee that they are
transparent and inclusive and that there is wide
participation.

In the security sphere, we encourage MINUSTAH
to continue to build the capacity and professionalism of
the Haitian National Police as it confronts the
proliferation of gangs and other armed groups,
Violence associated with the trafficking of arms,
persons and drugs, and large-scale civil unrest.

Mexico supports the promotion of a regional
approach to illegal drug and arms trafficking in Haiti,
and we appeal to the countries of the region to continue
to support MINUSTAH and the National Police in
responding to these problems, given their implications
for cross-border and regional security. We think it is
vital to strengthen MINUSTAH's mandate and its role
in supporting the police and building its capacity in the
areas of land and maritime border security.

The human rights situation in Haiti is also a
matter of concern to us. We urge the Haitian authorities
and the Governments of the region to work together to
combat internal and cross-border child trafficking. We
support MINUSTAH's endeavours, with UNICEF
support, to continue to protect children's rights in
Haiti.

Turning to the question of international
cooperation, it is vital to work with the Government of
Haiti to identify ways to build a comprehensive
international strategy to meet the country's concrete
economic needs. As a community cooperating with
Haiti, we can work in two dimensions: first, in
emergencies we must meet the urgent needs of the
population in the areas of health care and food; and
secondly, in terms of medium- and long-term
cooperation, we must build the country's institutional
and administrative capacity, which is crucial for
restoring economic development.

The Government of Mexico has decided to give
the highest priority to Haiti in its cooperation policy,
and to make a contribution in keeping with our
capacity. My country has established the Mexican Fund
for Cooperation with Haiti to address requests from the
Haitian authorities in six fundamental areas:
agriculture, education, energy, health care, security and
tourism.

The Mexican Government has called a
hemispheric conference for coordinating cooperation
with Haiti, to take place on 4 and 5 November in
Mexico City. Its purpose is to effect an in-depth
analysis of cooperation with Haiti and to encourage the
coordination of efforts to ensure that international
cooperation works hand in hand with national efforts to
create better conditions for sustainable development
and to ensure a real impact on the Haitian people. This
event will be co-sponsored by the Governments of
Mexico and Haiti and the Organization of American
States.

Let me conclude by expressing my delegation's
support for the statement to be made later by the
representative of Uruguay on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.

