Mr. Chergui: At the outset, let me congratulate you,
Madam President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of December and
express my gratitude for the invitation extended to me,
which reflects the growing and excellent partnership
between our two organizations.

I also wish to commend the Council for
discussing for the first time the interlinkage between
intercommunal violence and terrorism in West Africa.
This issue is indeed a bitter reality that concerns us
all and that we should all responsibly and collectively
address. I want to thank my brother Mr. Chambas for
his briefing and the pertinent proposals that he made.

The situation is alarming. The resurgence ofviolent
armed attacks by terrorist and extremist groups in West
Africa and the Sahel, as demonstrated by the recent
attack in lnates, the Niger, and Mali, and the almost
daily attacks in Burkina Faso indicate a worsening
human security situation in the region. This is despite
efforts by States, indigenous civil-society organizations
and the international community to restore security.

The interlinkages between armed groups in the
region are becoming increasingly sophisticated in a
constantly changing environment. The armed groups
are involved in illicit activities to fund their operations,
including weapons trafficking, artisanal gold mining,
motorcycle and fuel sales, cattle rustling and poaching.
They are also involved in local conflicts, not only
fuelling them but also serving as mediators in some
cases or as an interposition force between warring
communities. The armed groups are also using the
neighbours of Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger as
transit zones for their illegal activities, such as the sale
or purchase of motorcycles, spare parts and fertilizers.
They also fund their activities by selling stolen livestock
for consumption in Nigeria, Benin, Togo, Ghana and
Cote d'Ivoire.

The security situation is further exactly
exacerbated by the region's vulnerability to climate
change, which worsens rapid- and slow-onset disasters,
food insecurity, water scarcity and transhumance
conflicts. The threat of food insecurity will challenge
the resilience of citizens in the region in the coming
years and has the potential to render vulnerable young
people susceptible to the narrative and propaganda of
criminal and extremist groups.

This devastating situation has further created
a grave humanitarian situation that requires our
attention. I have in mind the 2,850 schools that have
been shut down in Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger
due to the operations of violent extremist groups.
Hundreds of boys and girls have been conscripted,
abducted, raped and killed by extremist groups, with
a consequent psychosocial impact on their families
and communities. The State's limited presence in the
peripheries has also hampered its efforts to provide
protection to communities. Even in places where there
is a Government presence, Government authorities
remain perplexed and challenged. Trust and confidence
in traditional mechanisms of conflict management have
also eroded considerably. We must pool our efforts to
assist the Governments of the region to strengthen the
authority of the States in the peripheries.

We in the African Union (AU) have been seized of
this issue from the beginning by supporting the efforts of
the region to address the crisis. We recognize the gains
made through multilateral international partnerships,
including the activities and initiatives launched and
sustained through the Nouakchott Process, the Group
of Five for the Sahel and the Multinational Joint
Task Force.

I wish also to seize this opportunity to note
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali. The African Union Peace and Security Council,
concerned about this issue, requested the Commission,
during its 838th meeting, on 9 April, to develop a
credible framework for the effective prevention and
management, as well as the resolution, oflocal conflicts,
including intercommunal violence and transhumance
and land disputes, in collaboration with other relevant
organizations and mechanisms.

The African Union, in collaboration with the
Government of Mali and the support of the United
Nations, convened a ministerial conference on the
theme "Access to natural resources and conflict
between communities" on 28 and 29 November in
Bamako, at which the Bamako Declaration was adopted.
The Declaration consists of a set of recommendations
articulated around seven key objectives.

First, it encourages the member States to sign,
ratify and domesticate the relevant legal instruments
with a view to facilitating the implementation of the
actions agreed on in the Declaration.

Second, it urges the African Union Commission,
in cooperation with the appropriate regional economic
communities and regional mechanisms, to develop
a policy framework for local conflict prevention,
management and resolution, accompanied by a plan
of action.

Third, the Bamako Declaration calls for a plan
of action that should support local, national and
international efforts in the prevention and management
of conflicts between communities through adaptive
and innovative approaches.

Fourth, it also calls for the deployment, as
necessary, of African Union tools, in particular the
African Union Border Programme, to assist member
States in their efforts to strengthen social cohesion and
community safety. I am pleased to report that in this
regard, through the African Union Border Programme,
work has already begun in countries such as Mali, the
Niger, Burkina Faso, Benin, Zimbabwe and Botswana,
to name but a few.

Fifth, it urges the African Union Commission to
work with member States to mobilize financial resources
for investment in local community development and
security projects.

Sixth, it requires the identification, development
and standardization of good practices and policies as
well as their popularization.

Seventh, it recommends the initiation of a common
process of reflection with respect to ownership of all
data specific to this conflict and to promote an African
solution with respect for local traditions and values.

Lastly, it calls for the coordination of interventions
promoting social cohesion between communities,
in particular the restoration of trust between States
and peoples, and to ensure that judicial mechanisms,
traditional and State-led, are able to respond promptly
and equitably to the need for transparency and proximity
to win the confidence of the populations concerned.

More recently, on 13 December, the African Union
Peace and Security Council welcomed the Bamako
declaration, recognizing that it provides us with a road
map to curb those local conflicts, which are paralysing
our efforts to silence the guns by 2020. We look forward
to working with the United Nations and our regional

economic communities and mechanisms to implement
those recommendations.

The reality is that, despite all our efforts, we
are collectively failing to reverse this trend. On the
contrary, the situation is worsening. Beyond calling
on the Council to support the Bamako declaration,
I therefore want to say that we need to reset. Let me
repeat - we need a reset. Allow me to make four key
suggestions on the way forward.

First, we need to creatively rethink the military
support that we are providing to the countries of the
region. The challenges encountered are beyond the
capacity of the States concerned. Certainly, addressing
this issue will require a holistic approach that must
involve political and socioeconomic actions, such as
strengthening the presence of the State in the periphery
and ramp up States' capacities to deliver basic services,
including as it pertains to the rule of the law, education,
infrastructure and strong environmental policies to
address climate change.

Secondly, the African Union and the United
Nations, guided by the Bamako declaration, in an
integrated manner can work to develop mechanisms to
support our States members in various areas.

Thirdly, the African Union and the United Nations
should jointly co-chair a coordinating mechanism to
bring some coherence to the more than 16 strategies
concerning the Sahel.

Fourthly, we should all condemn the stigmatization
of certain groups in the region, as it creates a dangerous
attitude of "us versus them".

Let me conclude by stressing that we need to
redouble our efforts. The lack of solidarity with the
countries of the region at the regional and international
levels has been troubling. We are facing threats that do
not respect boundaries and have the potential of rapidly
spreading across the continent and beyond. The African
Union joint partnership has come a long way. Nowhere
is it needed more than ever than in the Sahel and the
region of West Africa. It is our hope that the spirit of
cooperation that we have developed over the years will
characterize our efforts to address the numerous and
complex issues that lie ahead for the region.

