Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): The draft resolution that we shall be adopting on
the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA)
marks an important stage in the pursuit of the process of
peace and national reconciliation begun in January 1997
with the conclusion of the Bangui Agreements.

MINURCA has made significant achievements since
the beginning of its deployment on 15 April 1998. The
gains of the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) have
been preserved, and the Central African Republic has
remained, as the Secretary-General states in his 18
December 1998 report, "an island of relative stability in
an otherwise war-torn region". (S/1998/1203, para. 38)

The successful holding of legislative elections on 22
November and 13 December 1998 was also an important
stage in the reestablishment of national institutions which
had been almost entirely destroyed by the successive
rebellions that battered the country in 1996. It would be
regrettable if the success of these elections were now
tarnished by sterile political quarrels.

The formation, during the holding of these elections,
of the first restructured unit of the Central African armed

 

forces and the continuation of the demobilization
programme supported by the United Nations Development
Programme were two encouraging signs of the will of the
Central African authorities to restructure their military
forces.

This satisfactory progress, however, should not
obscure the fact that serious difficulties remain. It would be
a grave mistake for Central African authorities and political
leaders of any stripe to believe that the simple presence of
MINURCA would make it possible to resolve all the
problems the country must deal with. First, this is because
MINURCA's mandate is time-limited; the draft resolution
specifies that the Mission must end on 15 November 1999
at the very latest. Second, this is because, obviously, the
responsibility for national reconciliation devolves, above all,
on the Central Africans themselves. Finally, this is because
it is essential to implement as soon as possible the
structural reforms on which the long-term recovery of the
Central African Republic depends.

The French delegation believes that the achievement
of the commitments made by the President of the Central
African Republic in the letter that he addressed to
Secretary-General on 23 January 1999 is essential. As was
most clearly stated in the statement made on 18 February
1999 on behalf of the Security Council by its President, the
success, the future mandate and the continued presence of
MINURCA in the Central African Republic are closely
linked to the implementation of these commitments.
Further, the observable progress in their implementation
will be reviewed every 45 days, as set forth in the draft
resolution that we will be adopting.

Among the most important points that the Security
Council will be taking into account during these evaluations
are the pursuit of constructive and consensual dialogue
among all the Central African political parties in order to
allow for the effective functioning of the new national
assembly and calm preparations for free and equitable
presidential elections; the continuation of the restructuring
of the Central African armed forces; the implementation of
economic and financial objectives defined in cooperation
with the international financial institutions; and respect for
the commitment that was solemnly made by the Central

African Government itself - and for which we
congratulate it - to avoid involvement in any external
conflict.

In this context we do not doubt for a moment that the
adoption of this resolution and the extension of the mandate
of MINURCA will provide an outstanding opportunity for
the authorities and the Central African political parties to
make progress in their dialogue and in national
reconciliation. Any other attitude would be damaging to
the pursuit of the United Nations Mission and to the
Central African Republic itself.

