Mr. Akram (Pakistan): This meeting had been
scheduled to hear the briefing by the representatives of
the United States and the United Kingdom, in
accordance with the provisions of resolution 1483
(2003). We thank them for the report they have
presented, which will be studied carefully by our
authorities.

Sadly, this meeting has coincided with one of the
most serious tragedies to affect the United Nations in
its history. In Baghdad the United Nations was an
innocent victim, a victim that was present in that
country to help the people of Iraq under a specific
mandate that was provided by the Security Council.
Pakistan has expressed its deep sorrow over these
tragic killings and injuries in Baghdad and has
conveyed its sympathy to the bereaved families and the
United Nations. The loss of Sergio Vieira de Mello and
other friends and colleagues in Baghdad is indeed a
deep blow to those of us who work at the United
Nations. Pakistan has welcomed the statement of the
Secretary-General that the United Nations will stay on
in Iraq and will fulfil the mandate that has been
entrusted to it.
We are deeply impressed at the examples of
heroism of international civil servants in the aftermath
of this attack. We must remember the decision of many
who have decided to stay on in Iraq despite this attack
and the danger they face. Those who have died and
those who have been injured must be honoured because
they reflect the greatest spirit of selflessness and
sacrifice which epitomizes the spirit of the United
Nations.

It is obvious that security for the United Nations,
its personnel and its programmes must be improved.
This is a requirement under resolutions 1472 (2003)
and 1483 (2003), which devolves at the moment on the
Coalition Provisional Authority. Without security, the
objectives with which the United Nations has been
entrusted to fulfil, as well as the other objectives of
promoting peace and stability in Iraq, cannot be
realized. We must, therefore, examine this tragedy and
see what steps are required and can be taken to provide
more effective security to the United Nations and its
operations. There are various options, and we must
explore them. Their acceptance will, in our view,
depend first and foremost on their acceptance by the
people of Iraq. It is their concurrence that we must also
seek.

Obviously, terrorism has come to Iraq and
terrorism must be condemned in all its manifestations
and must be combated in Iraq as in other parts of the
world. But we believe that to combat terrorism in Iraq
or elsewhere, it will be essential to win the hearts and
the minds of the Iraqi people. Winning the hearts and
the minds of the Iraqi people will require several
parallel steps by the international community.

First, we hope that the Coalition Provisional
Authority will continue the process, with the growing
support of the United Nations, to provide humanitarian
assistance to the Iraqi people, revive the Iraqi economy
and improve the social conditions in that war-
devastated country. We hope that Iraqi institutions will
be rebuilt in response to the needs and wishes of the
Iraqi people.

Secondly, we are convinced that the United
Nations will have to assume a larger and wider role in
Iraq, in order, inter alia, to enhance legitimacy and the
acceptability of the endeavours of the international
community to bring stability and progress to Iraq.
Paragraphs 98 to 99 of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2003/715) outlines the tasks that need to be
undertaken.
Thirdly, we need a clear, inclusive and indigenous
political process in Iraq, with a clear sequence leading
to a fully representative Iraqi Government that should
assume increasing responsibility for all aspects of
governance in Iraq.

Finally, let me reiterate a point that Pakistan has
made consistently in the Council. All international
endeavours in Iraq should be pursued within the
framework of the applicable international principles:
respect for the unity, territorial integrity and political
independence of Iraq; respect for the right of the Iraqi
people to choose their own political destiny and form
of government; respect for the right to control their
own resources; and respect for the religious and
cultural traditions of the Iraqi nation.

