Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): I join other speakers in
commending His Excellency Mr. Murray McCully,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of New Zealand, for
convening this important debate. I also wish to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing to the
Council this morning.

We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

For more than 50 years, the international community
has struggled to find a just and durable solution to the
situation in the Middle East. We are encouraged by
the international community's continuing diplomatic
engagement with the issue, including the recent United
Nations international meeting held in Moscow in July
in support of peace between Israel and Palestine.
The people of Palestine have suffered as a result of a
range of factors, in particular by being dispossessed of
much of their land. The international community has
repeatedly called for a freeze of settlement activity.
The ongoing settlement activities, which are illegal
under international law, must end as soon as possible
if sustainable peace is to be achieved in the region. In
recent years, the continued blockade of Gaza has added
to the pain and frustrations of Palestinians living there.
We encourage the parties to exercise restraint for the
sake of the larger goal of peace.

Another key challenge the Palestinian people are
now facing is reconstruction, following the destruction
wrought in Gaza last year. It is our fervent hope that,
with the help of the global community, the people of
Palestine will rise to the challenge of rebuilding their
lives and livelihoods. It is urgent that their living
conditions improve. In that regard, we also strongly
support the work of the various United Nations agencies
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

We join with the international community in
appealing to all parties to refrain from indiscriminate
and disproportionate attacks on civilians, which are
detrimental to the peace and security of both Israel
and Palestine and the stability of the entire region.
Indiscriminate attacks on civilians, in violation of
international humanitarian law, can only intensify
feelings of desperation and insecurity and widen the
gap between the parties. At the same time, the security
needs of the Israeli people must also be respected. A
climate conducive to peace will be encouraged by a
common humanitarian approach in which both sides
are sensitive to the other's concerns.

The Middle East conflict attracts a considerable
amount of international attention and resources. The
lingering question of Palestine is one of the main issues
driving the recruitment of terrorists in the region and
worldwide. Terrorism, including the recent phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters with origins in the region,
has the potential for posing a serious threat to the
security and stability of every nation, tearing apart the
established fabric of nation States and the international
legal order. In today's interconnected world, it is very
easy for agents of extremism to spread their ideologies
across national borders.

Sri Lanka supports Palestine's application for
admission to full membership of the United Nations.
We recognize that the viability of a two-State solution
will depend on the political unity and economic
advancement ofthe Palestinian people. We reiterate our
support for the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 242 (1967), of
22 November 1967, regarding the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people to statehood and the attainment
of a two-State solution, established on the basis of the
1967 borders. We must not give up on our hopes for a
lasting peace accord that can lead to the establishment
of a fully sovereign and secure State of Palestine. We
hope that the parties concerned will not fritter away
the opportunity that the current international climate
presents for achieving a sustainable peace when there is
so much international good will supporting the process.

