Mrs. Ni'ifiez de Odreman (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)(sp0ke in Spanish): First, we would like
to congratulate the Argentine Republic for the work it
has been doing in the presidency of the Security
Council in the month of March. We also welcome the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Rene Garcia Preval in
this Council meeting. We thank you, Sir, for giving us
this opportunity to take part in the consideration of the
situation in Haiti.
We would like to take advantage of this
opportunity to reiterate, on behalf of the Government
and people of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
our desire that the will of the Haitian people, expressed
through recent elections that led to the victory of
President Rene Garcia Preval, will be fully respected
so that within the limits imposed by legality and
legitimacy, the Government and people of Haiti will be
allowed to build, consolidate and perpetuate a
democratic system that guarantees inclusion and the
participation of society in government management,
the ultimate objective of which should be to ensure the
general well-being of the country. And for this it will
be necessary, among other things, to have the
unconditional synergistic and constructive aid,
cooperation and assistance of the other members of the
international community.

In this context, the President of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, Hugo Chavez Frias, made
public on 19 February the readiness expressed to
Mr. Preval, President-elect of Haiti, for Haiti to be
included in the mechanisms and processes for energy
cooperation that are carried out by the Venezuelan
Government within the framework of PetroCaribe. The
PetroCaribe agreement was signed by Venezuela in
June 2005 with 13 Caribbean nations. Other countries
were added to this number later. This agreement will
make it possible for Haiti to finance 50 per cent of its
oil purchases for 25 years, with a grace period of up to
two years.

Likewise, we reiterate that our country will
continue to offer steadfast cooperation with the people
of Haiti within the framework of bilateral relations,
and we welcome the decision of the Caribbean
Community to readmit Haiti, as well as to provide the
technical and material support that it requires.

The delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to the Organization of American States has
raised within that regional body the possibility of
reactivating the Group of Friends of Haiti, urging
countries of the American continent to support Haiti's
economic recovery process and, in this respect,
referred to the need to channel the financial support
that is now being held up in multilateral banks.

We hope that soon we will see the high-level
bilateral exchanges in order to strengthen further the
close, cordial and fraternal ties that have always
marked the relationship between the Haitian and
Venezuelan peoples.

