Mr. Raubenheimer (South Africa): Madam
President, my delegation wishes to thank you for
having convened this open debate on the role of the
United Nations in promoting national reconciliation in
post-conflict situations. While the Security Council has
in the past tended to focus narrowly on the resolution
of conflicts, experience has shown that the
maintenance of peace is sustainable over the long term
only if due attention is also given to the achievement of
national reconciliation in post-conflict situations. We
believe that this subject warrants greater discussion
throughout the various organs of the United Nations,
and we commend you for having brought this matter to
the attention of the Security Council.

In our own country's experience, steps were
adopted to create a bridge between the past - that of a
deeply divided society characterized by strife, conflict,
untold suffering and injustice - and a future built
upon the recognition of human rights, democracy and
peaceful coexistence for all South Africans. The
questions of reconciliation and the future, on the one
hand, and the necessity to establish the truth in relation
to past events and ensure reparation to the victims of
gross human rights abuses, on the other hand, had to be
carefully considered and balanced, both during and
after the historic transition from apartheid and
oppression to a constitutional democracy.

The Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC)
was established with the aim of: granting amnesty from
criminal and civil liability to people who made full
disclosures of acts committed with a political objective
during the course of conflicts of the past; affording
victims an opportunity to relate the violations they
suffered; taking measures aimed at the granting of
reparations to victims; restoring the human and civil
dignity of victims of violations of human rights; and
making recommendations aimed at preventing the
commission of gross human rights violations.

Many South Africans had the opportunity to
appear before the TRC in a series of public hearings
that it held, either as victims or as perpetrators of acts
that violated human rights. State institutions, political
parties and organizations and the business sector were
also required to elaborate on their respective roles in
the past. The compromises were sometimes painful, as
was confronting the truth of past oppression. However,
for us it was our way to reconcile decades-long
oppression and proceed with nation-building.

As Archbishop Desmond Tutu, who chaired the
TRC, has written,

"The establishment of South Africa's TRC
was a pioneering international experiment, with a
potentially far-reaching effect on the way we all
deal with conflict. Normally, when countries
move through the difficult transition from
oppression to democracy, they deal with the past
in one of two ways: either the leaders of the old
order are put on trial or dealt with summarily, or
previous events are swept under the carpet and
the suffering of those subjected to violence is
ignored. South Africa followed a third, unique,
way when it ended apartheid. To those who had
committed grave violations of human rights, it
offered amnesty in exchange for public disclosure
of the truth about their crimes, and to the victims,
it gave an unusual opportunity to be heard, as
well as hope for reparations."

National reconciliation, however, did not
automatically emerge at the closing of the work of the
Commission but is continuing to develop as we build a
nation based on shared values and a common destiny.
The disparities that existed among South Africans as a
result of the policy of apartheid required immediate
redress and continue to place a strain on our national
capacity to cope with the demand of ordinary citizens
that they be able to experience the fruits of liberation.
In order to avoid the risk that people's expectations
might lead to instability, the Government has embarked
on large-scale social and economic upliftment and
empowerment projects that address such basic needs as
water, sanitation, housing, education and the provision
of heath services. Post-conflict reconstruction is a
long-term project of sustainable development that
builds on the peace and relative stability of the
negotiated settlement.

While national reconciliation in post-conflict
situations can take many forms, it is ultimately driven
by a common will of the people affected by the
devastation of the past to realize a more positive future.
The parties have to be made aware of the benefits of
coming to terms with what has occurred, and must
proceed to rebuild their societies. Nevertheless, the
people look to the international community, and
particularly to the United Nations, for support during
such a traumatic time. As the United Nations is the
lead voice of the will of the international community,
its engagement bears heavily on all the parties, and its
active, sustained engagement is particularly
instrumental in seeking options that are acceptable to
the conflicting parties.

The engagement of the United Nations brings
legitimacy and moral authority to conflict resolution
based on the universally accepted norms and principles
of the Charter. Durable peace is not achieved simply
through the signing of peace agreements. In addition, it
also requires a comprehensive approach that involves
the active participation of the entire United Nations
system. The role of the United Nations is to create the
enabling environment in which this process can occur,
and the Organization should assist in creating the
mechanisms to bring about reconciliation. These could
include assistance with constitution drafting, the
devising of electoral systems and the creation of
judicial and human rights institutions.

One of the most important requirements of post-
conflict assistance is the immediate humanitarian needs
for basic necessities and health services. In that regard,
the United Nations has a coordinating role to play in
efforts to bring aid and donor assistance to an affected
country through consolidated appeals and donor
conferences. It is imperative that other United Nations
organs and multilateral institutions, such as the
Economic and Social Council and the Bretton Woods
institutions, become more deeply engaged in the
process.

In the past, the Security Council tended to regard
the end of conflict as the elimination of the threat to
international peace and security. Experience has,
however, shown that United Nations involvement is as
critical after the peace deal is signed as it is in ending
the violent conflict. The Security Council's mandate
therefore cannot end with the departure of
peacekeepers, although post-conflict reconstruction is
not a core function of the Security Council. The
Security Council should work closely with other
United Nations organs such as the Economic and
Social Council to ensure that international peace and
security are indeed maintained. The two Ad Hoc
Advisory Groups of the Economic and Social Council,
on Guinea-Bissau and on Burundi respectively, have
already proven to be very useful in this regard. Those
bodies have created bridges for closer cooperation
between the two Councils on those countries. More
important, they have also contributed to creating a
seamless continuum from peacekeeping to post-conflict
reconstruction and development.

Close cooperation with other United Nations
bodies and regional organizations strengthens the
implementation of Security Council decisions by
widening the collaborative effort of all interested
parties to achieve a desired outcome. As set out in
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter, regional
and subregional organizations, in collaboration with the
Security Council, have a critical role to play in
building a durable peace. On our own continent, the
African Union recognizes this important link in its own
efforts to seek durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa. The African Union established
its Peace and Security Council as

"an operational structure for the effective
implementation of the decisions taken in the areas
of conflict prevention, peacemaking, peace-
support operations and intervention, as well as
peace-building and post-conflict reconstruction".

The protocol that established the Peace and Security
Council also specifically stipulates that

"in the fulfilment of its mandate in the promotion
and maintenance of peace, security and stability
in Africa, the Peace and Security Council shall
cooperate and work closely with the United
Nations Security Council".

As in peacekeeping operations, different
situations require different responses to deal with post-
conflict reconstruction and reconciliation. The creation
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission was the
manner we chose to deal with our own past and future.
Countries emerging from conflict have to find their
own ways of bridging the past with new possibilities
for the future in the context of their own unique
circumstances. South Africa has assisted, and will
continue to assist, at their request, countries emerging
from conflict to devise their own mechanisms and
institutions of national reconciliation.

The role of the international community does not
end once the parties have ceased hostilities.
Reconciliation has to be coupled with a firm
commitment from the international community to assist
in post-conflict reconstruction and development.

The role of the United Nations in maintaining
peace and security continues to be redefined, requiring
a more extensive involvement not only in assisting in
bringing about peace and security but also in
maintaining that peace and security once the parties
have ceased hostilities. In order to prevent the risk of
sliding back into conflict, it is our common obligation
to assist communities in their endeavours to secure
development and to take their rightful place among
peaceful nations.

