Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We would like to
commend Ambassador Joanna Wronecka and her team
for an excellent presidency of the Security Council in
the month of May.

My statement relates to both draft resolutions.
First of all, we thank Kuwait for taking the initiative
to present a draft resolution that addresses the recent
crisis in Gaza (S/2018/516). We are thankful for the
transparent process and extensive efforts undertaken
by the delegation to accommodate the concerns of
Council members. We highly appreciate the continuous
engagement by Kuwait with Council members in
drawing up its draft resolution.

As we have said before, the Security Council
should be able to unite and formulate a joint response to
the developments of the past weeks. We regret that we
have failed to do so today. We witnessed the repeated
protests in Gaza and the heavy-handed Israeli response
that led to the death of 110 Palestinians and many more
injured. This was the highest number of casualties
recorded since the end ofthe 2014 hostilities. The firing
of rockets and mortars by Palestinian militant groups on
29 May and the following counterattacks were the most
serious escalation since 2014. As we also discussed in
the Security Council yesterday, this again shows that
the risk of escalation and the violence spiralling out of
control is very high.

Protection of civilians is crucial, as both
Palestinian and Israeli civilians should not have to
live in fear, Regrettably, the Kuwaiti draft resolution
that was put to a vote today did not fully reflect our
concerns with regard to addressing the needs of all
civilians nor the negative role of Palestinian militant
groups in Gaza specifically, nor remaining questions
on the international protection mechanism. We
welcome the fact that the draft resolution submitted
by the United States (S/2018/520) condemns the role
of Hamas, but it does not cover the broader context or
Israel's responsibilities and obligations. That is why we
abstained in the voting on both draft resolutions.

We repeat our call on all parties to exercise restraint
in order to avoid escalation and prevent incidents that
put the lives of both Palestinian and Israeli civilians
at risk. We confirm our firm support for the work
and proposals of Mr. Mladenov, It is of the utmost
importance that the efforts to address the crisis in Gaza
continue, in order to bring humanitarian relief to those
in need and to prevent further escalation. We call on all
parties to engage constructively.

In conclusion, we confirm our strong commitment
to the peace process - a process that must result in the
two-State solution, which is the only way to bring about
a sustainable solution to the crisis in Gaza. It is the only
way to fulfil the aspirations of both sides and to put an
end to the conflict. It is the only way to achieve the just
and lasting peace that Israelis and Palestinians long for
and deserve.

