Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): Like others, we
were deeply shocked, saddened and grieved by the
news of the passing of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin, a
great man, a great friend and a great professional.

(spoke in Russian)

We express our sincere condolences to Vitaly's family,
his wife, Irina, and his children, and to our colleagues
and friends at the Russian Mission. This is a great loss
for us all.

(spoke in English)
Vitaly was a man of wisdom; his wit and his
professionalism will be greatly missed. But his memory
will remain with us.

I thank the Secretary-General and the other
briefers for their contribution to this debate. We share
the concern reflected in the concept paper (S/2017/108)
for this debate that despite the high expectations that
Europe would become a strategically stable continent
following the end of the Cold War, new challenges and
threats have emerged on the continent in the 1990s.

However, apart from the broader geopolitical
processes and religious, ethnic and territorial disputes,
the causes of these challenges stem also from the
blatant and violent denial of peoples' right to pursue
their aspirations to freedom and self-determination.

The Nagorno Karabakh conflict is a case in
point. It is a conflict that in effect has been a struggle
of the people of Nagorno Karabakh for freedom and
self-determination, a struggle against the historical
injustice of the 19205 and persistent discrimination
throughout the 70 years of Azerbaijani rule over them.
It is a struggle that witnessed barbaric pogroms at
the end of the 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s
against Armenians in Baku, Sumgait, Kirovabad and
other parts ofAzerbaijan, as a reaction to the legitimate
aspirations of the people of Nagorno Karabakh to freely
determine their future. It is a struggle for self-defence
and the physical survival of the people of Nagorno
Karabakh as a result of the outright aggression, war and
ethnic cleansing unleashed against them by the newly
independent Azerbaijan at the beginning of the 1990s.

The Nagorno Karabakh conflict is about the
struggle of the people ofNagorno Karabakh against the
claim of sovereignty over them by a despotic regime in
Azerbaijan with a shocking human rights record that
suppresses and suffocates any dissent and any aspiration
to freedom and rights within its own jurisdiction. It is a
struggle against the barbarity of a regime that glorifies
Ramil Safarov, a ruthless murderer who in 2004 killed
a sleeping Armenian officer with an axe, during a
military training course. It is a struggle against a
claim ofjurisdiction by an authority in Azerbaijan that
persistently cultivates and inspires Armenophobia,
hatred and intolerance against Armenians. It is a
struggle for freedom and survival. It is a struggle by
the people of Nagorno Karabakh to freely determine
their political status and freely pursue their economic,
social and cultural development. It is, in other words, a
struggle for the right to self-determination.

The renewed attempt at aggression by Azerbaijan
against Nagorno Karabakh at the beginning of April
2016 and the ensuing perpetration of atrocities and
outright barbarity, about which this delegation has
consistently informed the Council, has been a stark
reminder ofthe urgency of supporting the peace process
under the auspices of the internationally agreed format
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Minsk Group co-chairmanship. There
is no alternative to a peaceful settlement ofthe conflict.
War is not an option. The international community
should forcefully reject the use of force and any pursuit
of a military solution to this conflict.

The 1994-1995 ceasefire agreements signed by
Nagorno Karabakh, Azerbaijan and Armenia constitute
the foundation of the cessation of hostilities. Armenia
urges Azerbaijan to take immediate and genuine steps
towards the implementation of the agreements reached
at the summits in Vienna and St. Petersburg in May and
June 2016, respectively, in order to create conditions
conducive to the advancement of the peace process.
Azerbaijan should bring to an end without delay its
persistent warmongering and cultivation of hatred
and intolerance against Armenians and instead invest
genuine efforts in promoting a culture of peace as well
as respect for human rights.

Armenia urges Azerbaijan to demonstrate genuine
political will and efforts in advancing the peace process
on the basis of all the principles and elements put forward
by France, Russia and the United States, the co-Chairs
of the OSCE Minsk Group, which have been reiterated
in their numerous statements at all levels, including
those by the Heads of State of the co-chairing States.

Finally, Armenia expresses its deep appreciation
to the international community, to the Council and to
the Secretary-General of the United Nations for their
continued and unwavering support for the efforts of the
OSCE Minsk Group co-Chairs, the only internationally
agreed format for negotiations for the peaceful
settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict, to reach
a lasting settlement as soon as possible.

