Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of Bolivia
takes note of what we have heard in the briefings by
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs; Ambassador Ertugrul Apakan,
Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine; and Mr. Stephen O'Brien, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.

We express our concern about the resurgence
of tension in Donbas. We deplore in particular the
non-compliance with the ban on the use of heavy
artillery, given the urgent need to maintain the ceasefire.
In that regard, we approve of the Council's press
statement SC/12700, of31 January, which condemns the
use of weapons banned by the Minsk agreements and
calls for full compliance with resolution 2202 (2015).
Bolivia calls upon the parties to respect the provisions
of the Minsk agreements, as endorsed by resolution
2202 (2015), which is essential to strengthen the efforts
the parties must make in the search for a peaceful and
political solution to the crisis.

We are particularly concerned about the impact
of the crisis on the civilian population. We therefore
urge the parties to strictly adhere to their obligations
in terms of protecting civilians, including the need to
guarantee access to humanitarian assistance and basic
medical services. With the support of the international
community, full compliance with the Minsk agreements
and the joint efforts of the Security Council it should be
possible in the short term to avoid a military escalation
and to reach a peaceful solution to this crisis with a
view to preventive diplomacy, which the Secretary-
General has called for. Every possible effort must be
made to achieve lasting peace, which in the long term
will be beneficial not only for the parties but also for
the region and the entire world. We also call for the
parties to not step up the rhetoric, for we do not think
it will contribute to a political solution to this very
difficult situation.

