Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to express our thanks to the Colombian presidency
for convening this very important open debate on the
situation in the Middle East. I also thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Robert Serry, for his briefing.
It has now become conventional for any
consideration of political dynamics in the Middle East
region to focus on the wave of changes that the region has
encountered in the aftermath of the Arab Spring. Never
before has the region experienced such a large-scale
transformation driven from within. In the shortest
time, the region has been caught in the limelight of the
international security agenda and generated intense
discussion over the causes of these transformational
processes, the courses of action and strategies to be
adopted by the international community, and the future
that these events presage for the entire region.

Our discussion today should undoubtedly be yet
another attempt to recollect, analyse and think through
the vital changes that Middle Eastern societies have
been exposed to and are still grappling with. The
peoples of the Middle East should be congratulated on
their determination and firmness towards achieving
greater freedom and wider political participation. At
the same time, many outstanding issues are pending,
and we have come to realize that there are no easy fixes
or magic solutions. While the prospects are promising,
the challenges of transition may look arduous and, to
some extent, intimidating. Against this background,
the international community should do its utmost and
direct its collective efforts towards helping the countries
of the region and make their transition successful,
sustainable and durable.

Having shed some light on the challenges of the
outstanding new transformational processes in the
Middle East, one cannot help but ponder the lasting
traditional security challenges, more specifically armed
conflicts, that are rife in the region. It is obvious that
their solution is imperative to achieving durable peace,
stability and security in the region, and that respect for
international law should be an absolute priority to this
effect. At the same time, political consistency represents
one of the major prerequisites if legitimate demands
are to be transformed into desirable outcome. It is clear
that, while seeking justice, one cannot simultaneously
advocate or encourage injustices in respect of others.

At a more specific level, we would like once again
to express our profound concern over the situation
with regard to the Middle East peace process, which
has been at a standstill with no substantive progress
towards resuming direct talks between the parties.
Against this background, the construction and
expansion of settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories, the confiscation of Palestinian lands,
the displacement of the civilian population, action
characterized as collective punishment of civilians, and
attempts to legitimize illegal activities are particularly
alarming. Such measures represent open disregard
for international law and contempt for human rights,
place a tremendous burden on civilians, cause serious
obstruction to the peace process and, more dangerously,
threaten the two-State solution and the emergence of a
viable Palestinian State.

It is clear that there is no alternative to peace
and negotiations. However, the lack of agreement on
political issues in situations of armed conflict and
military occupation cannot be used as a pretext for
disrespecting international law and human rights. We
proceed from the importance of reaffirming, with
respect to the occupied Palestinian territories and similar
situations in other parts of the world, the continuing
applicability of all relevant international legal norms,
achieving the invalidation of activities aimed at the
consolidation of military occupations, initiating urgent
measures towards removing the adverse effects of such
activities, and discouraging any further practices of
the same or a similar nature. Illegal activities in the
occupied territories cannot be recognized under any
circumstances.

In assuming its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council must react adequately in order to
put an end to illegal practices and policies and ensure
that international law, human rights and fundamental
freedoms are observed and respected. We support the
ongoing efforts to achieve the Palestinian reconciliation,
and express our hope that Palestinian unity will soon be
restored in the interest of the legitimate aspirations of
the Palestinian people.

The people of Palestine has been recognized as
having the right to self-determination and statehood.
That has been noted in a number of United Nations
resolutions and by the International Court of Justice
in its advisory opinion on the Legal consequences of
the construction ofa wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Azerbaijan supports the application of
Palestine for admission to membership in the United
Nations and looks forward to a solution on this issue
based on international law.

To sum up, let me express the hope that, with
the best efforts of the nations of the Middle East and
the international community, positive achievements
and momentum will be sustained, while the pending
issues related to security and democratic transition are
resolutely addressed by adopting swift policies and
approaches in view of changing realities in the region.

