I would like to thank Foreign Minister Miguel Vargas Maldonado for his statement. I also thank Director-General Qu Dongyu, Executive Director David Beasley and Mr. Jan Egeland for their briefings. War and armed conflicts result in catastrophes and grievances. They may threaten the survival of innocent civilians, destroy infrastructure, affect the development of the countries concerned and lead to humanitarian crises, including the worsening of food insecurity. It is recognizable that the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the World Food Programme (WFP) and other international organizations follow the situation very closely, maintain insights on conflict-induced hunger issues and provide focused observations and recommendations. We also appreciate the initiative of the Dominican Republic to convene the present meeting. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the breakdown of the global industrial chain have also impacted the economies and food security of Member States. Desert locust infestations are rampant in Africa and Asia, increasing global food-security risks. Against this backdrop, there is added value to engaging in discussions on this topic. I wish to share the following points. First, it is imperative to prevent and resolve conflicts, and promote dialogue and political settlement of hotspot issues. The Security Council should uphold its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, and promote the resolution of conflicts through political and diplomatic means so as to relieve civilians of the sufferings of war, including hunger. We urge all relevant parties to actively support and act on the appeal by the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire and cessation of hostilities. All actions should be taken by parties concerned to ensure unhindered humanitarian access, including with regard to food supply. The international community should pay greater attention to issues in Africa and support the good offices and mediation efforts of the African Union and other regional organizations. Secondly, it is essential to promote and place core emphasis on inclusive and balanced development. It is difficult to achieve development without peace and hard to realize sustainable peace without development. Development is fundamental to solving various global issues. It is especially important to support the efforts of Africa and other regions to eradicate poverty and advance the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Greater attention and input should be given to reconstructing conflict areas and to promoting political, economic, peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes in parallel, while increasing the fundamental development capacity of countries concerned to prevent food crises and other humanitarian disasters. Thirdly, it is critical to strengthen international cooperation and set favourable conditions to promote global food security. The international community should jointly take urgent actions to ensure an unobstructed global food-supply chain and maintain food supply and price stability. We must support FAO and WFP in playing their unique coordinating role in providing humanitarian assistance to countries concerned to prevent large-scale famine. Unilateral sanctions must be lifted as soon as possible. Member States should stabilize industrial supply chains, reduce tariff barriers, facilitate trade and ensure the uninterrupted global supply of food and agricultural products. Humanitarian operations should be conducted in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and relevant humanitarian guiding principles, while respecting the sovereignty of countries concerned. China, asa large agricultural nation, attaches great importance to food security. With a view to achieving food self-sufficiency, China is always actively engaged in international cooperation in agriculture and food. We have provided assistance to other developing countries within our capacity, among other means, by carrying out projects, together with FAO, in the framework of South-South cooperation, and sending experts and technicians to regions of Africa, Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean. Since the outbreak of COVID-19 and the Asian-African locust plague, China has provided active support to other countries in combating the epidemic. In active response to the FAO initiative and the requests of the relevant countries, China has sent locust control teams to share experience and help the affected countries. Positive results have been achieved. China is ready to strengthen cooperation with all parties to safeguard global food security and work together to create a world free from hunger and poverty. We are ready to provide solid support for all peoples in their quest for greater development, and to make greater contributions to building a world of lasting peace and common prosperity and a better future shared by all humankind.
