Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this meeting and also to thank Under-
Secretary-General Jan Egeland for his efforts and for
his briefing.

I should like to make a few comments in relation
to Darfur.

First, in terms of international humanitarian
efforts, we are facing the threat of the withdrawal of a
number of humanitarian organizations due to a lack of
resources. The cost of operations on the ground is
rising steadily, owing in particular to increased resort
to air transport for the delivery of assistance. As
Mr. Egeland noted, this is the largest humanitarian
operation in the world, and its requirements are
immense. We must therefore continue to support
humanitarian workers there so that they can continue
their work on the ground.

France would recall that it has already disbursed
€76 million in bilateral and multilateral assistance for
Darfur. Donors must continue their efforts, especially
given that the hoped-for return of displaced refugees
will also require targeted assistance for their
reintegration, following the shock of having been
displaced. In the early stages, they will have to be
offered the same services as they receive in the camps.

My second point relates to our concern at the
fresh deterioration of the situation in Darfur since
September, in particular in the north-west. The
situation, which was already tragic, is becoming
untenable. There are a number of reasons for this:
growing insecurity, continuing impediments to
assistance, and the ongoing administrative restrictions
on humanitarian assistance, which Mr. Egeland
mentioned earlier.

In that context, my delegation would like to
commend the work done in Darfur by the United
Nations and in particular by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

Thirdly, my delegation is pleased at the progress
made at the Addis Ababa meeting last week as well as
at the prospects for renewed dialogue on the question
of Darfur. That meeting made it possible to reaffirm the
common vision of the African Union and the United
Nations. The two organizations are prepared to
increase their efforts considerably in order to restore
peace to the region and have adopted an original
approach based on a joint commitment on the part of
the two organizations over the long term.

The Security Council must ensure that the future
peacekeeping presence, whatever its specific
modalities, is able to contribute effectively to making
civilian populations safer. My delegation expects the
Sudanese Government to be diligent in dealing with the
issues that arise out of the implementation of the
outcome of the Addis Ababa meeting.

I should like also to make two key observations.

First, an expanded international peacekeeping
presence can be fully effective only if the parties
establish and implement a genuine ceasefire and
resume the political process initiated by the Abuja
Agreement.

Secondly, the Darfur crisis cannot be resolved
without taking into account its regional implications in
the Central African Republic and in Chad. We
understand that this regional dimension was at the
heart of the discussions that took place among the
heads of the State of the region yesterday in Tripoli.
We are also awaiting with interest the
recommendations that the Secretary-General will
submit to the Council in the near future regarding a
United Nations presence in those areas of Chad and the
Central African Republic bordering the Sudan.

On the question of Darfur, I would like to ask
Mr. Egeland some questions on the issue he raised
concerning the destruction of traditional structures. To
what extent is that phenomenon widespread and
advanced? How can the international community
respond to the destruction of communities and of the
country's economic fabric as a result of the conflict?
Can those traditional structures, or what is left of them,
serve, in some cases, as an effective channel for the
distribution of assistance, or must we rely exclusively
and directly on non-governmental and local
organizations?

Finally, I should like to make a few brief
comments on the situation in Uganda and on the Lord's
Resistance Army.

First, France welcomes the renewal on
lNovember of the ceasefire agreement between the
Government of Uganda and the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA). We also welcome the southern Sudanese
mediation and the efforts made by Mr. Egeland to
support it. The international community is now
focusing on the two parties, which must translate into
reality the hopes emanating from the Juba discussions.
France welcomes the improved humanitarian
situation on the ground, the return of some of the
displaced persons to their homes, and the establishment
of a joint follow-up committee for the emergency plan.

The second point relates to Uganda and to non-
combatants detained by the LRA and, specifically, to
the situation of Acholi and Sudanese children who have
not yet been returned to their families and whose early
release is imperative. We urge the Government of
Uganda and the LRA to cooperate fully with UNICEF
and the High Commissioner on Human Rights, which
are implementing on the ground resolution 1612 (2005)
on children and armed conflict. We ask them in
particular to elaborate, jointly with UNICEF and the
High Commissioner on Human Rights, action plans for
the demobilization of all children. Children must be a
priority for both parties, as they should be for the
Council, which must remain focused on their situation
through the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict.

Finally, I wish to emphasize, as several
delegations did earlier, that the most serious crimes
must not go unpunished. As Mr. Egeland stated, there
can be no peace without justice.

