Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this meeting on the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), whose
success is cause for satisfaction for the international
community.

I take this opportunity to express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General for the high quality of his
report and to pay due tribute to Mr. Vieira de Mello for
the work he has accomplished within UNTAET.

My delegation welcomes the presence here at the
start of the meeting of Mr. John Howard, Prime
Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia, whose
country has made a substantial contribution to the
maintenance of peace and stability in East Timor.

I would also like to welcome Mr. Ramos-Horta,
Senior Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
East Timor, who is one of the tireless architects of the
East Timorese people's struggle for self-determination.

The positive outcome in resolving the issue of
East Timor is to the credit of the international
community as a whole, and specifically the United
Nations. The efforts undertaken in the political,
economic, social, security and humanitarian areas are,
in the View of my delegation, invaluable and should be
encouraged.

Regarding the political aspect, my delegation
welcomes the discussion and approval of most of the
new draft constitution, and hopes that the discussion
will be concluded on time in order to enable its final
adoption.

We appreciate the dialogue under way between
East Timor, Indonesia and UNTAET. We encourage the
continuation of this dialogue in order to reach a final
settlement of all the problems that have not been
resolved. In this respect, my delegation anticipates with
interest the results of the high-level meetings planned
for February 2002.

My delegation expresses the wish that the
presidential elections and the declaration of
independence, to take place in April and May 2002
respectively, be carried out peacefully and
democratically.

My delegation also greatly appreciates the actions
taken to find a solution to humanitarian problems,
particularly with regard to refugees. In this respect, we
welcome the establishment of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation, which must be
supported.

With regard to security, we note with satisfaction
that reported crime remains low. However, vigilance
and deterrence measures must be maintained and
reinforced.

With regard to violence against women and
children, my delegation supports the proposal on
multisectoral interventions. We think that such
interventions could, within a complementary
framework, be coordinated by the Division for the
Advancement of Women of the United Nations
Secretariat, the United Nations Children's Fund and the
United Nations Development Fund for Women.

The establishment in September 2001 of the
Planning Commission is an excellent initiative. It
should speed up the completion of the final version of
the National Development Plan. The international
community's support is essential for the formulation of
a Land and Property Code, which will enable the
settlement of legal disputes and encourage investment.

My delegation supports the provisions of section
III of the report on UNTAET's successor mission. We
especially endorse paragraph 75 of the report and urge
the international community to consolidate past
achievements by providing the necessary support of
financial and human resources.

We welcome the fact that planning by the
Integrated Mission Task Force continues at
Headquarters and by integrated planning teams in the
field. Coordination between these teams will make it
possible to elaborate strategies guaranteeing a better
follow-up by the United Nations Mission after
independence.

The drafting of laws and the establishment of
democratic institutions is one thing. Respect for them
is quite another. Progress towards democracy can be
strengthened only through solid educational
programmes for the East Timorese. That is why my
delegation suggests organizing an international donors'
conference, preferably before the declaration of
independence. Such a meeting would mobilize
resources and direct them to programmes that have
been previously selected.

My delegation supports the Secretary-General's
initiative underlining that international assistance for
East Timor must be transformed as quickly as possible
into a more normal formula for development aid.

In conclusion, my delegation approves the
recommendation on the extension of UNTAET's
mandate as indicated in paragraph 104 of the report.
We await with interest the Secretary-General's
proposals for UNTAET'S successor mission after
independence.

