Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): My delegation also is very
happy with the format of this meeting, and I praise you,
Mr. President, for organizing it. Naturally I would recall
that this is one of the guidelines that we have already
adopted in the Council, and I believe that this practice will
continue in future. The fact that other States Members of
the Organization are participating here or listening to us
constitutes an incentive to go ahead with this decision
already taken by the Security Council.

I am pleased also to see Under-Secretary-General
Miyet at this meeting. As he told us in the beginning of his
intervention, he also is pleased to be here, and we welcome
his presence at this open briefing. The Council has
benefited a lot from the briefings of Mr. Miyet, and this is
a good opportunity for other States to listen to him.

Ambassador Dahlgren is also creating a precedent
here, as was already underlined by my colleagues. I would
like to underline it as well. It is very important that we are
having this open meeting because it underlines the more
active role we want the sanctions committees and their
Chairpersons to play.
We are debating these proposals in the Security
Council, and I very much hope we will take decisions by
the end of this month - we are in your hands,
Mr. President, until the end of this month - to adopt some
guidelines on the questions relating to the debate on
sanctions referred to by Ambassador Amorim. The most
important point is the role of the Chairpersons of the
sanctions committees.

As Ambassador Dahlgren said here, it is not only
important that the Chairpersons can get better information
during their visits to the region or countries targeted, by the
sanctions; it is not only gathering better information that is
important, and afterwards coming here and sharing this
information as Ambassador Dahlgren did with us this
morning - the other point that he made regarding the
implementation of sanctions is also very important. This is
absolutely essential. We are going on and on, and it is clear
that we have to address this question of arms embargoes in
a different way. Because if not, they are ineffective, and the
Council sometimes seems to be collaborating passively
with situations that are totally unacceptable.

We can do this only in an open way. We can do this
only with the participation of all the Member States of the
Organization. It is not only the Security Council that can
do this. This is a responsibility of the whole Organization.
For the Organization to be responsible, naturally it is
important for the Security Council to provide information
and to share these elements and this work with the
general membership. It is important to reveal to the
general membership more of the work of the sanctions
committees and the work we do in these committees.

Regarding the situation in Sierra Leone, I would like
very much again to address and thank Ambassador
Dahlgren for the very good briefing, in addition to the
excellent report that we have from the Secretary-General.
Given the time limits, I would just underline two points
regarding the information that was shared with us. First
of all, Ambassador Dahlgren provides a very vivid picture
of how appalling the human rights situation in Sierra
Leone is. One point he made is very important. It is
important that it be clear that those who are committing
these crimes will not be able to do so with impunity. That
is why it so important that the International Criminal
Court was created this year in Rome. This is very
important, because it is absolutely essential to avoid
impunity in future situations, as well as in the ones we
are facing now.

At the same, this calls our attention to another point.
In many of these conflicts there can be no military
solutions. We have to have, in the end, dialogue and
national reconciliation. National reconciliation is an
important factor in which, again, human rights play an
important role - the guarantee of individuals' rights.
That is why the appeal of the Secretary-General to
President Kabbah on the questions of executions and the
death penalty is, in my opinion, so important.

Naturally, I would like to praise again what
Ambassador Dahlgren said about the situation of children.
This is an important aspect, and this is why, too, it is so
important for the whole Organization to support the role
of Ambassador Olara Otunnu. Olara Otunnu is now
dealing with the situation of children in armed conflicts,
and we have to give him all possible support, and we
have to praise the Secretary-General for creating this
important function at the United Nations.

 

Once again I would like to praise the work of
Ambassador Dahlgren and the initiative that he himself
took, not only this second time. He visited the region twice:
the first time in his national capacity, and this time as
Chairman of the sanctions Committee. I would like very
much to praise him for this.

