Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing
this briefing. We thank the Under-Secretary-General
for his comments and the Force Commanders of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the United
Nations Mission in Liberia, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for their insightful
remarks. We also welcome the presence of the other
Force Commanders of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations and praise their commitments
and efforts, as well as the outstanding work of all the
personnel in peacekeeping missions.

One of the key recurring issues in discussions on
peacekeeping has been the need for the Council to
provide peacekeeping missions with clear, credible and
achievable mandates matched by adequate resources in
order to fulfil their mandated tasks. Bringing timely
and relevant information to the Council is therefore
indispensable for decision-making. To that end, we
emphasize that each resolution needs to be clearly and
accurately reflected in the concept of operations during
its implementation.

Starting at the beginning of the year, significant
documents on the interrelation between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding and between security and
development have been released. Discussions on these
issues must identify a practical way forward for the
main challenges and obstacles and offer solutions for
capacity-development, coordination and field guidance.

The growing complexity of tasks entrusted to
peacekeeping missions and the scarcity of specific
resources, in particular civilian support capacities, can
place the success of a mission at risk. Bosnia and
Herzegovina welcomes activities related to the review
of the international civilian capacities. We believe that
ongoing activities with regard to the recommendations
of and discussions on this study will lead towards
concrete improvements and practical and feasible
proposals in this area. Moreover, cooperation between
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support should bring about viable
solutions, positive changes and tangible results on the
ground.

In this regard, we underline the importance of
cooperation, consultation and exchange of views with
troop- and police-contributing countries. Mobilizing
Member States' support is essential for dealing with a
capability-driven approach that concentrates on skills,
equipment and capacity.

It is evident that missions with protection
mandates include diverse activities aimed at ensuring
the safety and physical protection of civilian
populations. Information-gathering, timely and
accurate data about the local situation and
circumstances, and their analysis are crucial.
Nevertheless, missions should have appropriate
resources to analyse those data and to assist in
restoring an environment in which the host State is able
to exercise its primary responsibility to protect its
citizens. This aspect certainly includes other
processes - such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, security sector reform, supporting
electoral processes and the empowerment of local
communities - in order to facilitate the transition to
sustainable peacebuilding.

The need to implement an effective exit strategy
must be coordinated with the quality of personnel and
equipment and linked to corresponding operational
mandates and objectives. The cultural sensitivities of
the area of deployment should also be taken into
account in order to avoid unnecessary
misunderstandings between a mission and the host
country and its communities.

This year we have witnessed the authorization of
two new missions: the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei and the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan. Bosnia and Herzegovina is
of the view that the Organization needs to perform to
the best of its ability to apply its know-how and the
lessons learned from previous peacekeeping missions,
while the Council must provide the missions with the
strategic guidance and adequate support they need. In
that regard, the Mission in South Sudan has to
contribute to improving governance capacity and the
rule of law.

The mandate is undoubtedly of vital importance
in providing guidance for the future reconfiguration of
a mission. Developments on the ground must be taken
into account, making the mandate of a mission more
realistic and attainable.

Finally, we emphasize that a peacekeeping
mission is part of the political solution to conflict, but
that it cannot be a substitute for the solution.
Therefore, activities on the ground must be
strengthened, together with efforts on preventive
diplomacy, early warning or conflict mediation, and
focused on national priorities and national actors.
Paying attention to those aspects needs to be an
integral part of each peacekeeping mission in order to
avoid the recurrence of conflict, contribute to a
country's development and lasting peace and, above
all, guarantee international security.

