The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Israel and Saudi Arabia, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Royal Highness Prince Saud Al-Faisal,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Shalev
(Israel) and Prince Sand Al-Faisal (Saudi Arabia) took seats at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
25 September 2008 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2008/623 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to participate in the meeting of the
Security Council which will be held on Friday,
26 September 2008, regarding the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President
of the Palestinian National Authority, to participate in
2
the meeting, in accordance with the rules of procedure
and previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abbas
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
25 September 2008 from the Permanent Representative
of the Libyan Arab J amahiriya to the United Nations,
in which he requests that the Council extend an
invitation to His Excellency Mr. Amre Moussa,
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, to
participate in this meeting. IfI hear no objection, I
shall take it that the Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 to Mr. Amre Moussa.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Moussa to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in response to a letter dated 22 September
2008 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Mission of Saudi Arabia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council and contained in document S/2008/615.

I now give the floor to His Royal Highness Prince
Saud Al-Faisal.


