Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): We
join others in thanking Assistant Secretary-General
Kalomoh for his comprehensive report on the
multidisciplinary assessment mission to Central Africa
regarding the need for an integrated approach to issues
of peace, security and development in the Central
Africa region. As you know, we have been a long-time
supporter and financial contributor to peace and
development projects in Central Africa, both bilaterally
and multilaterally. We are greatly pleased that the
peace processes in a number of Central African States,
particularly in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Angola and Burundi, have made significant progress in
recent years. Forward movement in those peace
processes should allow for better opportunities to
institutionalize stability, along with economic progress,
in the Central African region.

We are also pleased that there have been some
significant economic changes in certain Central
African States. For example, the Chad-Cameroon
pipeline and oil exploration and production in
Equatorial Guinea and Sao Tome and Principe should
provide further opportunities to Central Africa for
economic advancement. However, to take advantage of
those opportunities, those countries, as well as the rest
of the Central African States, must make a concerted
effort to invest in infrastructure and the health,
education and well-being of their populations.
Governments must ensure the protection of human
rights and the transparent and judicious use of national
funds for targeted and comprehensive development
programmes.

We would recommend that the decision on
naming a special envoy be deferred until after the
Great Lakes conference has issued its results and
recommendations. Many Central African countries will
be involved in the Great Lakes conference, and the
United Nations-African Union partnership in the
conference has already committed to encouraging and
coordinating the contributions of various regional and
subregional African organizations. Therefore the
conference, with the stated goals of promoting
sustainable peace, political stability, economic
development and regional integration, may incorporate
many critical elements laid out in the multidisciplinary
assessment mission report, and may in fact recommend
ways to enhance Central African integration and
strengthen its regional organizations.

We would also be concerned that adding yet
another bureaucratic layer to the United Nations
structures already in the Central African region might
not necessarily ensure better coordination of existing
United Nations bodies in the region and could cause
confusion as to the responsibilities of existing United
Nations representatives. A more effective response
might be to ensure that United Nations offices,
missions and agencies already in the region be
challenged to work more effectively together.

