Mr. Keating: We meet at an auspicious moment,
at the conclusion of an extended and exhaustive
parliamentary electoral process and just 12 days before
the election of a new President. We also meet at a time
when Al-Shabaab is doing everything it can to discredit
and disrupt the process, as we are seeing in Mogadishu
and in the attack in Kulbiyo today. Allow me to extend
my deepest condolences to the families of the soldiers
and civilians whose lives have been lost.

An immediate priority is to ensure that the date
set by the Joint Federal Election Committee for the
presidential vote is adhered to. The date has been set on
technical grounds, and pressures to change it on political

grounds should be resisted. It is also essential that the
last stage of this process be conducted transparently,
according to the rules that have been agreed and that
have been designed to ensure a free and fair election.
All candidates must honour the provisions ofthe code of
conduct they signed when registering their candidacy.

This is particularly important because the
parliamentary stage of the process was marred by
several instances of malpractice, including bribery
and vote-buying, harassment and intimidation, and
manipulation as well as repeated and protracted delays.
Some were high-profile and egregious, though the
majority of contests were correctly conducted. They
were widely watched, including through social media.

The electoral process has held up a mirror to
Somalis in which they have seen the good and the bad
regarding how power is exercised, the relationship
between elders, clan power brokers, politicians,
business, ordinary citizens, women and men. They do
not like everything they have seen, least of all the levels
of corruption and the absence of institutions that can
ensure legal and financial accountability.

Many important lessons have been learned. The ad
hoc electoral bodies have done a remarkable job, but
had difficulties withstanding political pressure, threats
and inducements. The electoral timetable was subject
to repeated delays, often because the process was used
to try to resolve very long-standing disputes between
clans, states and other actors.

The point is that the process was essentially a
political one, used for inter- and intra-clan negotiations
and reconciliation, and should be in part evaluated as
such. The electoral features were essential, as they set
the stage for the move to universal suffrage.

These lessons must be addressed in planning the
one-person, one-vote elections scheduled for 2020. The
National Independent Electoral Commission needs to
be empowered, a voter registry established and a robust
legal mechanism put in place to adjudicate disputes and
sanction abusive behavior. Efforts in this regard must
begin as soon as the electoral process concludes.

Despite the problems it has faced, the process
has had very encouraging outcomes and marks an
important milestone in Somalia's evolution and post-
conflict transformation. An Upper House has come
into existence, its 54 members chosen on a federal
State rather than a clan basis. This embodiment of the
emerging federal character of Somalia could play a
central role in advancing a genuinely national agenda.

The number of voters has significantly increased.
The electorate was expanded from 135 men in 2012 to
more than 13,000 individuals, 30 per cent of whom are
women. Almost a quarter of the members of Parliament
are now women, a truly remarkable achievement and the
result of an effective political mobilization supported
by the United Nations and the international community
and some Somali leaders.

There has been genuine electoral competition.
Voting took place in six locations around the country,
again reflecting emerging federal State structures. The
new Parliament is younger, more diverse and likely to
be more responsive to the electorate than the previous
one. In short, this Parliament is more legitimate and
representative than any since the last elections were
held, in 1969.

And despite the horrendous attack by Al-Shabaab
on a hotel used by parliamentarians in Mogadishu only
two days ago, terrorists have been unable to derail the
electoral process. This in and of itself is an important
message. Mogadishu will remain an unusually target-
rich environment until the presidential election is
concluded, another reason why the schedule should not
be allowed to slip.

Let me pay tribute here also to the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and to the
Somali security and intelligence forces for protecting
electoral sites around the country. They deserve
great credit for fulfilling a dangerous job in very
difficult circumstances.

The election ofa President accepted as legitimate by
the population and by the international community will
set the stage for Somalia to tackle the serious challenges
ahead. However, if voting for the next President is not
secret or seen as compromised by corruption, coercion
or external interference, then the country could face a
protracted period of uncertainty.

This is the last thing Somalia needs. Somalis expect
and deserve an administration that will address a number
of urgent priorities. Many of these are on the agenda of
the presidential candidates, including the incumbent.
Let me name four: reform of the security sector;
acceleration of the constitutional review; reconciliation
and the resolution of many festering conflicts around
the country; and strengthening governance, at both
the centre and locally, both to generate revenues and
provide services.

Unfortunately, there is also a fifth, urgent priority:
responding to the current drought. Five million people
are estimated to be in need around the country, from
Somaliland and Puntland in the north to coastal areas
in the centre and Jubaland in the south. An estimated
320,000 children under 5 are acutely malnourished.
Coping capacities have been eroded to the point
of collapse.

The drought response plan seeks $864 million,
$300 million of which is required in the first quarter
of this year. The Famine Early Warning System
Network reports that famine is now looming and that
urgent action to ramp up assistance and ensure access
is needed to mitigate the potential for a large-scale
loss of life. The drought also has serious political and
security implications. It is exacerbating competition for
resources such as water and intensifying local conflicts.
The number of displaced persons is visibly growing.
Reports and images of malnutrition are circulating on
social media.

The perceived inability of the federal and local
governments to respond will damage their legitimacy
and will be exploited by Al-Shabaab. The drought is
being cited by Somaliland as a key factor in postponing
its elections from March until October. Revenues from
the livestock trade are dropping, and financial resources
committed to drought response will impact public and
security-sector payroll commitments. In a nutshell,
failure to support the drought response could halt and
even undermine the pursuit of key State-building and
peacebuilding objectives.

Security-sector reform must not be delayed or
derailed. The prospects for peace and stability depend
upon Somalis assuming greater political and financial
responsibility for their own security. A plan for
achieving this is urgently required.

AMISOM. and the troop-contributing countries,
as they have made clear, will not stay forever. Their
presence has been and remains indispensable to
securing Somalia, to creating the space for the federal
State-building project and to protecting the elections.
They will not stay unless the immediate funding issues
are addressed and unless they believe that there is a
credible plan whereby the Somali security forces and
police are able to hold those areas that have been
liberated from Al-Shabaab.
The 20 per cent cut in the European Union's
(EU) generous support for the African Union (AU) in
Somalia is a source ofgreat concern. AMISOM. funding
needs to be put on a sustainable and predictable basis.
I urge the Council to review the options for doing this,
including the use of assessed contributions. The Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia will no doubt address
the Council on these matters, including the need for
immediate support for the planned offensive against
Al-Shabaab.

But even as the financial problem is addressed, the
larger issue of sustainable security in Somalia remains,
given additional urgency by the stated intention of
several troop-contributing countries to leave. Key to
this will be building Somali national security forces,
whether army, police, maritime or intelligence, that
reflect the emerging federal State; that are trusted by
all Somalis and not seen as monopolized by certain
clans; that are accountable to the political leadership;
and that are affordable.

Years of investment by the international community
have yielded limited results. Al-Shabaab is degraded but
remains a potent threat. One reason is that the approach
to security has in the past been largely military and
operational. That is of course essential, but not enough.

The imperative for the incoming President and
Government is to reach a political agreement among
Somalis regarding the architecture, ownership, funding
and purpose of the security forces as the basis for
more coherent and coordinated international support
by the international community, notably the African
Union, the United Nations and its partners. I hope the
necessary elements can be put in place by the time of
the next high-level conference on Somalia, scheduled to
take place in London in May.

The African Union and the United Nations are
committed to working closely together with major
investors, the broader international community and
the new Somali Administration on a comprehensive
approach to security. That effort must draw upon
the respective capacities and strengths of the key
stakeholders, whether in funding and supporting
AMISOM, building Somali national security forces,
establishing and extending the rule of law and State
authority at the local level or preventing and countering
violent extremism.

Sustainable security and Somalia's sovereignty
require a reduction in its heavy financial dependence
upon the outside world, as well as success in raising
domestic revenues for the provision of public
goods, including the rule of law and security. The
international financial institutions have a critical role
to strengthen financial management capacities and
accountability mechanisms.

Another priority is the resumption of the
constitutional review process to address critical
outstanding political issues. Those include the
delineation of responsibilities between the President
and the Prime Minister and between the Upper House
and the House of the People, as well as between the
respective roles and responsibilities of the Federal
Government and the Federal member states in a range
of areas, including resource- and revenue-sharing, the
judicial system and the road map towards one-person,
one-vote elections. The agreement reached between the
Federal Government and member states on policing
sets a good precedent; it now needs to be implemented.

The constitutional review process is all the more
meaningful now that the Federal map of Somalia
is complete, with the creation of Hir-Shabelle in
November. The electoral process has put into sharp
relief the many unresolved disputes and conflicts
around the country. The most high profile are between
Somaliland and Somalia, and the dispute in Galkayo,
but there are at least half a dozen others, any one of
which has the potential to turn violent at great human
and political cost. My Somali interlocutors have made
it clear that they want the United Nations, working
with its AU, EU and Intergovernmental Authority on
Development partners, to focus on building Somali
capacities to prevent and resolve conflicts and to
support reconciliation processes. Grounding that
political process in the rule of law, with a strong and
constructive role by the new Parliament, could be one
of the strongest guarantors of long-term stability and
durable governance reform in Somalia.

Ordinary Somalis must benefit from our collective
efforts. Significant work remains to be done to improve
the country's dismal human rights situation. I am
particularly concerned by the plight of children affected
by armed conflict and the unacceptable incidence of
abduction and forced recruitment by Al-Shabaab. The
majority of its militants consist of children deliberately
targeted in communities and areas under Al-Shabaab's
control. I would like to add my voice to that of Secretary-

General Guterres, as he highlighted in his recent report
(S/2016/1098) on children and armed conflict, to speak
out against that alarming situation.
As requested by the Security Council, the United
Nations family has started a review of its presence in
Somalia, with a view to supporting the next political
cycle and, in particular, to addressing the priorities I
have just outlined. I would like to mention that, given
the postponements of the electoral process, the review
will obviously not be completed by the end of this
month. However, we intend to engage with the new
Government as soon as possible and to revert to the
Council in the coming months.

Allow me to conclude by thanking members of the
Council for their unified position on Somalia and the
support that I and my Office are receiving from them.
As I have said before, progress in Somalia is fragile and
reversible, and fraught with complexity. But the stage is
gradually being set for Somalia to move to a new phase
in sustaining peace, preventing and resolving violent
conflict and building a functional, Federal State.
Ultimately, it is the Somalis who will determine their
own fate - but the Council's support is central to their
chances of success.

