Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Welcome, Mr. President, Minister-Professor
Jayakumar, to this celebratory meeting of the Security
Council. Your presence here among us today confirms
the serious approach that Singapore has taken to the
consideration of this subject.

We extend a warm welcome to the people of East
Timor, to its President, Xanana Gusmao, to Jose
Ramos-Horta and to the United Nations as a whole on
the birth of this new State. We express our hopes and
our best wishes today for the prosperity, the harmony
and the unity of the Timorese people.

Colombia is proud to be a member of the Security
Council, and we share the satisfaction of having
contributed to the collective effort of ensuring that the
fundamental principle of self-determination of peoples
is a reality in East Timor.

We support the statement made by the
representative of Costa Rica on behalf of the members
of the Rio Group. We commend the fine work of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), including of course, that of Mr.
Sergio Vieira de Mello and all of his staff. It would be
difficult to enumerate the successes of this United
Nations participation in the establishment of a public
administration, the training of local personnel, the
creation of local capacities, the carrying out of
reconstruction and development tasks, the
rehabilitation of the physical and social infrastructure
and the provision of social services, as well as the
launching of the new Constitution and the holding of
elections.

We recognize the good diplomatic and trade
relations that East Timor is beginning to build with its
neighbours. We are delighted at the substantive
progress made in normalizing relations with Indonesia
and, in addition, we recognize the role of Australia and
Japan in the entire process of self-determination and
the creation of the economic conditions that can ensure
the progress of this new State. We also want to mention
the constant activities of the Government of Portugal in
this regard.

In celebrating the past, which has culminated in
the independence of East Timor, we join those who
express their caution about the future. The elimination
of extreme poverty, the creation of sources of
sustainable economic resources, the strengthening of
institutions, the consolidation of democracy, access to
international markets and the attraction of direct
foreign investment are some of the challenges that will
have to be met by the new autonomous Government.
We trust that in a few years, when we evaluate the
success of the administration that is beginning today,
we will also be examining with a critical eye the
attitude and the commitment of the international
community towards this new State, including the donor
community. We also underscore, as a special challenge,
the protection of the role of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation, as a mechanism
for reconciliation and justice. It is fundamental to know
the truth regarding violations of human rights that
occurred between 1974 and 1999 and to support the
reintegration of those guilty of minor offences through
community-based mechanisms, as was mentioned in
the recent report of the Secretary-General.
The United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET), established by resolution 1410
(2002) of 17 May, will have important work to
accomplish in the next two years, contributing to the
consolidation and the stability of the new State. We
reiterate our confidence that, under the leadership of
Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, UNMISET will
gradually be able to transfer all operational
responsibilities to the authorities of East Timor through
an ongoing process of evaluation and monitoring.

As a Security Council member, it will be our
pleasure and our honour to consider and to support East
Timor's request to be admitted as a full-fledged
member of the United Nations.

