Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I should like to express our thanks to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen, for the
comprehensive briefing that he has just provided on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and on the events that
have occurred there in the months of February, March
and April. Likewise, I should like to thank Mr. Nebojsa
Covic for his statement.
I should like to associate myself with the
gratitude expressed in the report to the men and women
of UNMIK for their unswerving dedication and
commitment to the values and objectives of the
Organization in the daily conduct of their tasks. I wish
to underscore the fact that my country is the eighth
largest troop contributor to the police component of the
Mission.

In connection with the issues raised by
Mr. Jessen-Petersen, we are pleased to note the efforts
made by the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government with a View to the full implementation of
the standards for Kosovo, as we are convinced that
sustained progress in the implementation of those
standards is a basic prerequisite for progress to be
made in the process that will determine the future
status of Kosovo. Nonetheless, it is disturbing to know
that acts of non-compliance persist and that none of the
standards has yet been entirely implemented.

In that regard, it is fitting to recall that the
standards were prepared in order specifically to define
the final status of Kosovo in the framework of the
"standards before status" policy, which was designed
for Kosovo and endorsed by the Council in
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). That is why
we consider it essential that those who compose and
represent the Provisional Institutions agree to accept
and implement those standards, which are understood
as goals to be achieved and as a sign of the will of
those who live in Kosovo to develop a multi-ethnic,
democratic and sustainable society.

Equally of concern is the information regarding
the increase in tension between the Government parties
and the opposition in the framework of questions that
are decisive to the future of Kosovo, as well as the
persistence of elements that are prepared to resort to
violence. It is undeniable that a possible escalation of
violence and an increase in political strife could
destabilize the situation and interrupt the process that
is necessary to determine the future status of Kosovo.

In that regard, we endorse the Secretary-
General's statement in his report that progress depends
on a constructive, democratic dynamic between the
Government and the opposition. There is a need for a
genuine commitment and for the responsible discharge
of their respective functions as well as a complete
rejection of violence in order to ensure that work is
carried out jointly that will yield concrete results for
the benefit of the population.

Furthermore, we welcome the progress that has
been made in the direct dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade on practical questions, together with the
declared will on the part of Belgrade's political leaders
to participate in this process. It is also encouraging to
see that there is greater freedom of movement and that
the Kosovo Serbs are less dependent on the escorts that
accompany them when they travel in majority areas.

In that regard, Argentina agrees with the
Secretary-General that mutual trust among the
communities of Kosovo is the foundation of lasting
security. This means mainly that the Kosovo Albanians
and their leaders must step up their efforts to reach out
to the Kosovo Serbs, while the latter must show their
concrete will to integrate into Kosovo society.

Argentina affirms that there can be no prosperous
and peaceful future for Kosovo without full respect for
the diversity of its people. A lasting solution to the
question of Kosovo must be reached on the basis of
full respect for the principle of territorial integrity.

In that framework, we believe that it is a matter
of priority to emphasize the importance of respect for
human rights - including the rights of refugees and of
displaced persons - and international humanitarian
law as well as respect for the rights of minorities.

The political process must be propelled by the
achievement of real progress in the implementation of
the eight standards, an achievement which is essential
to the sustainability of any process related to the future
status of Kosovo. In that regard, we support the
conducting of a comprehensive review under the terms
of resolution 1244 (1999) in order to evaluate the
current situation and conditions with a view to the
adoption of measures in accordance with the
recommendations of the Secretary-General.

We believe that the support given by the
international community to those who have
responsibilities in the process - that is, the population
of Kosovo and their representatives in the Provisional
Institutions - will help the process move towards
ensuring the sustainability of a potential political
agreement.

