Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (Spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for
his report.

Russia supports building up the international
efforts to resolve crisis situations, particularly in
the Middle East and North Africa. That vast region,
which stretches from the borders of Lebanon or Syria
and Israel to the Persian Gulf and Western Sahara, is
unfortunately still teetering on the edge of another
escalation, in a fragile situation that could collapse as
a result of a minor political miscalculation or careless
step. The consequences of such a scenario could be
disastrous for the whole world. In such circumstances,
preventive diplomacy is particularly vital. It is too late
to take steps to forestall conflicts that are already at
an acute stage of armed confrontation. The focus has
to be on finding peaceful solutions. But in the case of
Palestine it is still possible to put the situation back on
the political track, preventing a new round of violence
in the very heart of the Middle East.

The state of affairs in the Palestinian-Israeli
settlement is extremely worrying. Recent events in and
around Gaza have confirmed that violence is filling the
vacuum that has formed in the absence of any progress
in resuming the political process. The report of the
Quartet of international mediators on a settlement in
the Middle East warned of this threat as long ago as
July 2016 and also talked about how to prevent such
a development. Regrettably, we have been obliged
to conclude that none of its recommendations in that
regard have been fulfilled. The problems of illegal
Israeli settlements, the Israeli authorities' destruction
of Palestinian property and provocative rhetoric on
both sides have only worsened. We are worried about
the increasing tendency to take unilateral approaches
that do not contribute to the implementation of the
agreements previously reached within the framework
of international organizations, chief among them
the United Nations. We are firmly convinced of
the inadmissibility of any actions that prejudge the
outcome of the peace talks. Attempts to reinforce the
new realities on the ground through national legislation
do nothing to advance the cause of peace.

The only possible path to a settlement is a direct
dialogue between the parties to the conflict that
can lead to achieving a two-State formula based on
internationally recognized foundations, including the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative. Russia is ready to give every assistance
to a resumption and to do it in cooperation with the other
international players, including through the Quartet.
We will continue to work through our bilateral relations
with Israel and Palestine. President Putin of Russia held
constructive talks with Prime Minister Netanyahu and
President Abbas during their stay in Moscow a few days
ago. So far these have been separate meetings, but our
offer of holding a Palestinian-Israeli summit in Russia
remains on the table. I want to emphasize that our
proposal has the agreement of the Palestinian side. Our
principled vision was again presented to Israel during
our Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov's visit to West
Jerusalem just the other day. We value the role of the
other countries of the region with regard to Palestine
and Israel, especially Egypt and Jordan. We are helping
our Egyptian partners in their efforts to resolve the
division in the Palestinian ranks through our contacts
with a wide range of Palestinian factions.

We support the international aid to Palestine,
including through the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). I listened carefully to what my colleague
Mrs. Haley said about that. I would like to believe
that after such an emotional performance there will
be a qualitative change in the situation in that regard.
UNRWA's activities go beyond its purely humanitarian
mission and are an important stabilizing factor for
Palestine and the entire region. Serious consequences
are likely if its work falters owing to a lack of
financial resources.

Progress in resuming the Palestinian-Israeli
political process will undoubtedly have a positive
impact on the overall situation in the Middle East and
North Africa. It is crucial that we all work to unite our
efforts in that regard and in other areas, including Syria,
Yemen and Libya. It will also be important not to cut
back our support to the authorities in Iraq for the future
stabilization of the situation there. Helping Syrian
refugees to return to their homeland will contribute
both to normalizing the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic and to relieving the socioeconomic situation
in the countries that are hosting refugees, especially
Syria's neighbours Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey.

As we see it, the Security Council debate held at
Russia's initiative on 25 June (see S/PV.8293) affirmed
the urgent need for coming up with a positive and
unifying common agenda on the Middle East for the
Security Council and the entire international community.
We have to translate that vision into practical action
while preserving the collective-security instruments
we already have, such as the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action for Iran's nuclear programme, which has a
crucial role to play in the global non-proliferation
regime and whose preservation will help to prevent an
uncontrolled rise in tensions in the region.

Russia is ready to participate in these efforts with all
interested partners on a basis of an open and impartial
dialogue, as exemplified in the recent talks between
President Putin and President Trump in Helsinki.

