Mr. Mamba (Swaziland): Allow me, Mr.
President, on behalf of the delegation of the Kingdom
of Swaziland, to extend my congratulations to you on
your assumption of the presidency of this important
organ for the month of May and to thank you for
convening this meeting of the Council to consider the
report on the Security Council mission visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also extend our
thanks to Ambassador Holbrooke for his introduction
of the report on the mission this morning and for his
able leadership of the mission during its visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

A little over four months ago, under the
presidency of the United States, the Security Council
convened to consider the question relating to the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
That meeting was graced by the presence and
participation of heads of State from the region. During
that meeting, the heads of State made it clear that the
Lusaka peace process had reached a stalemate and that
there was an urgent need for it to be supported in order
for its ultimate goal to be realized. The recent fact-
finding visit to the region by the Security Council
mission is but a fulfilment of the desire expressed by
the leaders of the region in January that urgent action
be taken by the international community to bring
durable peace to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and bears testimony to the fact that the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have suffered long
enough and that the international community must act
now. Further inaction will only serve to worsen the
situation. It is with this concern in mind that my
delegation welcomes and considers the visit of the
Security Council's mission to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo as a clear expression of the Security
Council's commitment to the strengthening of the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

We welcome the mission's efforts to harmonize
relations between the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) and the Government in Kinshasa, as
demonstrated by the signing of the status-of-forces
agreement on 4 May. We are convinced that this
agreement will be crucial in ensuring the effectiveness
of MONUC and that eventually it will be pivotal to the
deployment of phase II of MONUC, the success of
which will be a major milestone in the peace process.
My delegation is disturbed to learn that the inter-
Congolese dialogue, a vital and critical component of
the peace process, is beset with difficulties, including
lack of funds and logistical support. We join those who
have spoken before us in encouraging those that have
pledged funds in support of the efforts of the facilitator,
Sir Ketumile Masire, to make them available without
further delay. We cannot agree more with the mission's
observation that protracted discussions over the venue
of the dialogue should not be allowed to delay the
talks' being launched as expeditiously as possible.

The report further addresses the current
circumstances of peacekeeping in Africa and
elsewhere, with particular emphasis on the Sierra
Leone tragedy, about the deployment of peacekeepers
before a conflict has run its course. My delegation fully
supports the recommendations of the mission that the
developments in Sierra Leone should not be used as a
yardstick for future deployments of this nature in the
continent and that the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must be viewed on its own
merits. We are therefore in favour of the View that the
Secretary-General, acting within the confines of
resolution 1291 (2000), should solicit credible
assurances from the parties to the conflict for the
security and freedom of movement of United Nations
and other related personnel.

