Mrs. Patterson (United States of America): The
United States voted in favour of the resolution
supporting the extension of the present mandate of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
through the end of July 2005. We agree with the
Security Council that UNIFIL continues to play a
critical role in attempting to maintain stability in
southern Lebanon, and we feel that this resolution
reflects the continued concern of the international
community about the persistent sources of instability in
the area. We reiterate that the interests of both sides are
served by peace and security along the Blue Line, and
we urge again that calm and restraint prevail in the
area.

The Secretary-General has affirmed that UNIFIL
has essentially completed two of its three mandates,
with the one remaining mandate being the restoration
of international peace and security. We remain
concerned by what the Secretary-General termed the
disturbing activities of Hizbullah in the area. As we
saw with the incidents of 9 and 17 January, which
resulted in the unfortunate loss of life on both sides of
the Blue Line - including one United Nations military
observer, a French national - Hizbullah remains a
persistent source of violence and an obstacle to the
fulfilment of that final mandate.

Yet the Lebanese Government continues to
condone Hizbullah operations launched from its
territory, even those that show a complete disregard for
the Blue Line. As the Secretary-General's recent report
on UNIFIL operations reaffirms, the continually
asserted position of the Government of Lebanon -
that the Blue Line is not valid in the Shab'a farms
area - is not compatible with Security Council
resolutions and, in any case, is no excuse for allowing
Hizbullah to engage in violence along and across the
Blue Line.

Furthermore, it is incumbent upon the
Government of Lebanon to fully extend and exercise
its sole and effective authority over all its territory up
to the Blue Line, consistent with numerous Security
Council resolutions. As was evidenced by the rocket
attacks launched from Lebanese territory by rogue
elements last October and November, the failure of the
Lebanese Government to deploy its armed forces in
sufficient numbers to ensure a calm environment
throughout the area poses a grave threat to peace and
security there.

Again, we believe that UNIFIL continues to serve
an important purpose, yet we feel that the continued
spectre of armed militias in southern Lebanon, coupled
with the Lebanese Government's unwillingness to
assert its sole and effective control over all its territory,
are the greatest impediments to UNIFIL's expeditiously
fulfilling its final mandate of restoring peace and
security along the Blue Line.

It is the policy of the United States Government
to ensure that United States persons participating in
United Nations peace operations, including members of
the armed services of the United States of America, are
protected from criminal prosecution or other assertion
of jurisdiction by the International Criminal Court. If
United States persons were involved, the United States
would seek express provisions providing protection for
United States persons from countries hosting any
mission established or authorized by the Security
Council.

The United States does not have any persons
serving in UNIFIL, however, and has agreed not to
seek such express provisions in this case.

