Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): My delegation
welcomes wholeheartedly the Secretary-General's
comprehensive and timely report on Africa, pursuant to
the presidential statement adopted at the special
ministerial meeting on Africa in September of last year.
I should also like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
able leadership in guiding the deliberations of the
Council. My congratulations also go to your predecessor,
the Ambassador of Gabon, on his successful presidency
during the month of March.

The Republic of Korea believes that for there to be
durable peace, stability and development in Africa,
conflict resolution in that region calls for a comprehensive
approach that takes into account the complex range of
root causes and the devastating consequences in the
region. This is why my delegation welcomes the
Secretary-General's analysis of the diverse sources of
conflict in Africa and the various strategies intended to
respond to conflict situations.

Despite the continent's many unresolved issues and
uncertainties, there is strong optimism in Africa these
days. In many countries across Africa, dedicated political
leaders and hard-working people have contributed to
accelerating economic development on a sustainable basis,
and democracy has taken firm root, and this trend is
spreading all across the continent. Equally encouraging is
the fact that the Security Council, reflecting the
international community's firm commitment to durable
peace and development in Africa, has been actively
engaged in the continent. In addition, the Secretary-
General has undertaken many initiatives for Africa and
introduced pragmatic recommendations in his report.

Against that backdrop, I should now like to make
several comments on the Secretary-General's report.

 

First, the strategy of conflict prevention is an essential
element in addressing conflicts in Africa. As we are well
aware, it is far less costly to prevent crises than to react to
them. However, it is also true that crises cannot be
prevented by mere words of warning. Indeed, advance
warning is important, but to be effective it should be
matched by early preventive action. In this regard, we
believe that such proactive measures as the dispatch of fact-
finding missions at an early stage and the preventive
deployment of peacekeepers should be further developed.

We are also of the view that the international
community should undertake more resolute efforts to stanch
the arms flow into the region, thereby eliminating one of
the structural causes of persistent conflicts. Among other
things, we need to ensure stricter compliance with the arms
embargoes imposed by the Security Council on conflict
areas in Africa. To that end, my country firmly supports the
Secretary-General's proposal that Member States should
enact legislation facilitating prosecution in national courts
of violations of Security Council arms embargoes, and that
the Council should have an urgent look at the source of
arms trafficking and at illicit arms merchants.

Secondly, the Security Council, in its presidential
statement on protection for humanitarian assistance in
conflict situations adopted last June, highlighted the need
for protection to alleviate the suffering of refugees and
displaced persons in conflict situations. At that time, we
stressed, inter alia, that it is virtually impossible to provide
effective relief and protection for those in environments
where the warring parties refuse to abide by the norms of
international humanitarian law.

In this context, we support fully the Secretary-
General's recommendations to hold combatants financially
liable to their victims under international law and to
develop international legal machinery to facilitate efforts
not only to seize the assets of transgressing parties and their
leaders but also to hold those who violate rules of
international humanitarian law criminally responsible. We
also concur with the Secretary-General' s point that refugees
should be settled at a reasonable distance from any border,
in camps of limited size, in accordance with the
Organization of African Unity's refugee Convention.

By the same token, we highly appreciate the
Secretary-General's initiative for a follow-up to the
presidential statement on protection for humanitarian
assistance and look forward to his comprehensive report
containing practical recommendations. Among other things,
we hope practical measures will be forthcoming on how to
ensure separation of bona fide refugees from militants and
a "zone of peace" for children in conflict situations.

Thirdly, the Secretary-General has emphasized the
importance of good governance and sustainable
development as long-term guarantors of peace. We could
not agree more. Any prescription for conflict must treat
its root causes. The primary tenets of good governance -
democratic institutions and practices and respect for
human rights based upon reverence for life - are
fundamental to the durable peace and prosperity of the
continent, channelling ethnic and tribal differences into
the democratic process.

To help sustain the encouraging pace of economic
growth and reform in Africa, the international community
needs to provide active support, financial and otherwise,
to the various initiatives already under way or planned for
African development. We are of the view that the
Secretary-General's diverse and specific recommendations
to that effect call for the strong support of the
international community for their immediate
implementation.

The Secretary-General, by way of his report, has
prescribed potentially far-reaching remedies for the
political, economic, and social ills which have
encumbered the African continent for so long. It is a
blueprint for change in the way of life in the continent
and emphasizes the substantial role all Africans must play
in defining their future. We share the Secretary-General's
View that conflict in Africa is neither inevitable nor
intractable. As he points out, conflict is caused by human
action, and can be ended by human action.

Now the question is, can the international
community and the people of Africa summon the political
will to bring about such action? I have complete faith in
our concerted ability to do so. A good beginning has
already been made through last year's ministerial meeting
and today's open debate on the Secretary-General's
report. Now it is incumbent upon us to sustain that
momentum. We look forward to the biennial ministerial
meetings and the summit meeting of the Council in five
years, as proposed by the Secretary-General. For its part,
the Republic of Korea, as an ardent supporter of Africa's
ongoing endeavour towards durable peace and sustainable
development, will continue to be actively involved in that
common effort.

