Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): I would like to join
others in saying what a pleasure it is to have Foreign
Minister Ramos-Horta here with us today. I would also
like to thank Mr. Hasegawa for the introduction and
briefing he gave with regard to the report of the
Secretary-General.

New Zealand joins other speakers in reflecting on
the unprecedented progress made by Timor-Leste
towards self-sufficiency in just 5 years. Given the
events of 1999, that has been a truly remarkable
achievement, and one that should rightly engender
pride among Timor-Leste's Government and people.
When we consider the scale of suffering in terrible
conflicts unfolding elsewhere on the international
stage, it is heartening to see Timor-Leste focussing on
the tasks associated with post-conflict peacebuilding.

The consolidation phase of the United Nations
role in Timor-Leste, which was initiated last year,
requires that a delicate balance be struck between a
robust assessment of what is needed on the ground and
an instinctive caution not to precipitously withdraw.
We continue to see a role, beyond a standard
developmental one, for the United Nations in Timor-
Leste to safeguard the enormous progress that has been
made to date.

The Secretary-General's latest report provides
guidance on the areas in which the international
community should continue to support Timor-Leste
and identifies those sectors that are considered crucial
for long-term stability. We consider a modest, time-
bound follow-on mission to the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET), tasked
primarily with capacity-building, to be an appropriate
way to assist Timor-Leste's transition to a sustainable
development assistance framework.

The evidence of warm and strengthened relations
between Timor-Leste and Indonesia is to be welcomed.
We are encouraged by the further progress on
demarcation of the border, which has been referred to
here today, including in the statement just made by the
Permanent Representative of Indonesia. We look
forward to further progress being achieved before the
conclusion of UNMISET's mandate in May this year.
We urge both Governments to also give priority to a
response to the draft legal framework to guide border
normalization issues, which was passed to them for
consideration in November last year.

As a regional neighbour, Timor-Leste will
continue to be one of our core bilateral development
assistance partners. We will keep under review our
bilateral assistance to determine whether there

is

additional assistance that we can provide. But we agree
that there remain many capacity-building tasks that can
best be provided for by multilateral institutions. We

therefore consider it appropriate that development
agencies and international financial institutions have
begun to assume some responsibilities that currently
rest with the peacekeeping mission. We strongly
support that as a means to assist Timor-Leste's
transition from a peacekeeping to sustainable
developmental framework.

