Mr. Atieh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, my delegation thanks you for
your initiative of convening this meeting on Kosovo.
We also express our thanks to Mr. Guehenno for his
detailed and comprehensive briefing on the most recent
developments in Kosovo, in particular, with respect to
the local elections recently held there.

Furthermore, my delegation welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2002/ 1126) pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The report
indicates that the process of establishing standards for
local political leaders and officials and civil service
personnel was explained and promoted on a large scale
under the slogan "standards before status". It is
gratifying that the majority of the political forces in
Kosovo welcomed that approach and expressed their
readiness to implement the agreed standards.

My delegation commends the efforts of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) to change the political dynamics, to
provide an incentive for getting rid of parallel
structures and to encourage all communities to
participate in joint institutions. What is a matter of
concern to us is that, despite the continued efforts to
increase the representation of minorities in all
departments of the civil service, there remain a number
of obstacles, security concerns, ethnic tension and
restrictions on the freedom of movement, which limit
the employment of qualified members of minorities in
those institutions. The report points out that the
security situation has remained calm during the period
under review, despite sporadic incidents of civil unrest.
Nevertheless, the report indicates that economic crime
and corruption are still prevalent in the region under
the control of UNMIK. Indeed, UNMIK arrested those
accused of tax evasion, smuggling, money-laundering
and swindling with the help of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and the Kosovo Police Service. We support
the efforts made by the United Nations with a view
towards consolidating the principle of the rule of law in
Kosovo, which would lead to calm in the entire region.

My delegation encourages friendly relations and
regular contact between UNMIK, the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Albania and Slovenia, since this will
contribute to peace and stability within the Balkan
region.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to praise
the efforts made by Special Representative Steiner and
UNMIK towards strengthening the rule of law. We
hope that the question of the return of the minorities
will be accorded the necessary attention that would
help to establish stability in Kosovo. We hope that the
recent local elections in Kosovo will be the first step in
a fruitful endeavour and will contribute to the security
and safety of all communities and ethnic minorities in
the country.

