Mr. Chambas: Despite laudable progress in
democratic consolidation, the security situation in
West Africa and the Sahel remains a cause for concern.
The efforts of Member States of the region to deliver
on development, improve infrastructure, create jobs
and strengthen human security are being hampered by
traditional and new drivers of conflict and insecurity.

Terrorism and violent extremism, in addition to the
humanitarian crisis and threats to State integrity that
they generate, have exacerbated traditional threats.
These factors, combined with climate change, youth
bulge and unemployment, and unchecked urbanization
constitute veritable push factors underpinning the surge
in irregular migration and human trafficking.

In the Sahel, persistent instability in Mali is
spilling over into Burkina Faso and the Niger, with
deadly attacks along border areas. The Liptako-
Gourma region, linking Mali with Burkina Faso and
the Niger, has experienced a significant expansion of
Violent extremist and terrorist activities in the past few
months, including coordinated cross-border attacks
against security posts and the ransacking of border
settlements. Violent extremist groups targeted the
northern provinces of Soum, Loroum and Yatenga in
Burkina Faso and the western regions of Tillabery and
Tahoua in the Niger. Insecurity in those border areas
has detrimental effects on the local economy.

The leaders of the three countries met in Niamey
on 24 January under the auspices of the Liptako-
Gourma authority and announced that they would be
setting up a multinational stabilization force. That
announcement came against the backdrop of ongoing
discussions on the operationalization of the Group of
Five States for the Sahel joint force, an initiative that
encompasses all three Liptako-Gourma countries, as
well as Chad and Mauritania, and which the Security
Council welcomed through the adoption of resolution
2359 (2017) of 21 June. I would like to commend the
countries of the Sahel for their continuous efforts to
tackle security challenges at the national and regional
levels. More support is needed to assist them in that
challenging task.

The Lake Chad basin remains an equally challenging
pole of insecurity. Despite the commendable efforts
of the Multinational Joint Task Force, which have
substantially degraded Boko Haram's capabilities,
shrunk its geographical reach and freed thousands of
captives, recent attacks in Maiduguri and the Diffa
region demonstrate that Boko Haram continues to pose
a serious threat to the area. The mode and sophistication
of those attacks have raised suspicions that the Boko
Haram militants might have acquired reinforcements.

That situation continues to have devastating
humanitarian consequences. Up to 5.2 million
women, men and innocent boys and girls, many of
whom have been displaced across the Lake Chad
basin, are struggling for their very subsistence. The
failure to provide basic services and viable livelihood
opportunities for communities in affected areas risks
derailing recent successes against Boko Haram. The
Lake Chad Basin Commission regeneration plan offers
a useful framework of cooperation to tackle the root
causes of the worsening security environment.

In January, five field workers of the
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission were killed in
an attack by unidentified armed elements near Kontcha,
a region that was believed to be unaffected by the Boko
Haram threat. While investigation into the matter is
ongoing, the United Nations is working closely with
the authorities of Cameroon and Nigeria to strengthen
the security protocol for the resumption of border pillar
construction in the area.

The threat of terrorist and Violent extremist groups
should not divert our attention from other pressing

security threats, such as the intercommunal tensions
witnessed in several countries. Clashes between
farmers and herders across the region threaten to
undermine peace, social cohesion and food security.
The United Nations continues to advocate for a
regional solution, while at the same time supporting the
countries of the region in strengthening their national
peace architecture.

West Africa and the Sahel also continue to be
negatively affected by transnational organized crime
and other cross-cutting threats to peace and security.
Smugglers of drugs, human beings and weapons
continue to criss-cross borders and establish new
operational zones where the State has withdrawn or
maintains only a tentative presence. Insecurity and
lawlessness also stretch to the Gulf of Guinea, where
criminal elements increasingly resort to piracy and
hostage-taking.

In that context, let me stress that the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel presents
a multidimensional approach to addressing the
challenges of governance, security and resilience in
the region. The implementation of the Strategy has
registered notable progress. I chaired two meetings of
the Steering Committee in May and June, which agreed
on a clear division of responsibilities among United
Nations entities for advocacy, strategic guidance and
programmatic activities. While aiming to streamline
efforts and reduce duplication among the various actors
in the Sahel, the United Nations is also focusing on
linking the Ministerial Coordination Platform of Sahel
Strategies to the mechanisms of the United Nations
Strategy. At the same time, the respective United
Nations country teams are stepping up efforts to ensure
tangible results at the country level.

In Burkina Faso and The Gambia, the United
Nations continues to pursue the sustaining peace
approach in support of the priorities of the respective
Governments. The United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) is focusing on
complementing ongoing development interventions
by the United Nations country teams with targeted
political interventions and institutional strengthening in
politically sensitive areas such as justice and the rule of
law, security sector reform and national reconciliation.

In the context of transitions from peacekeeping, I
have already liaised with authorities in Cote d'lvoire,
and I plan to visit the country soon after today's
briefing to the Security Council. My objective will
be to work with Ivoirian stakeholders to sustain the
country's strong recovery and to bolster peace and
security efforts. In the light of the recent mutinies
that have threatened the so far impressive recovery of
the country, continuous support to deepen the reform
of the defence and security sector, as well as national
reconciliation and disarmament efforts, is imperative.

Constitutional review efforts in the subregion
should be conducted in an inclusive, participatory
and transparent manner to strengthen the foundations
for democratic governance. I have continuously
engaged with national stakeholders, civil society and
diplomatic partners throughout the subregion, with a
view to building consensus on this and other critical
issues. I remain hopeful that countries in the region
will accelerate progress towards fully implementing
regional standards and respective national legislation
on promoting the participation of women in
decision-making, as well as overall respect for human
rights, including the effective integration of youth in
political and development processes.

In conclusion, let me assure the Council that
UNOWAS will continue to work closely with all
stakeholders and development partners in the region
to help consolidate peace and stability in West Africa
and the Sahel. I also reiterate my appeal to partners to
maintain their engagement, including through financial
support, to continue saving lives and to promote
sustainable solutions.

