Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
strongly condemns the terrorist attack that took
place in London yesterday and would like to offer its
condolences to the bereaved families of the innocent
victims and our sympathy to the injured. Terrorism is
the common enemy of the international community.
China is resolutely opposed to all forms ofterrorism and
is ready to step up its cooperation with the international
community in our joint response to terrorist threats and
challenges, with the goal of maintaining world peace
and security.

China was pleased to welcome Mr. Boris
Johnson, Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom,
as he presided over today's meeting. We also welcome
President Farmajo of Somalia, who joined us by video
link, and to acknowledge the presence of Foreign
Minister Omar of Somalia at today's meeting. China
listened attentively to the statements made by President
Farmajo; Mr. Keating, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia; an Mr. Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia.

Somalia is entering a crucial stage of national
reconstruction. China congratulates President Farmajo
on his election and welcomes his appointment of
Mr. Hassan Ali Khayre as Prime Minister. We also
commend his commitment to advancing the political
process of stabilizing the country and pressing ahead
with economic reconstruction. We are confident
that the Government and the people of Somalia will
contininue to make new progress in the reconstruction
of their country.

The security and humanitarian situation in Somalia
remains precarious, given rampant terrorist activities
and the recent grip of a crippling famine. Somalia still
has a long way to go in its quest for peace and stability.
That is why there is a need for unwavering support and
assistance from the international community. China
welcomes the Security Council's unanimous adoption
this morning of resolution 2346 (2017), on the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, which will enable it to carry out
the assessment of the post-election situation in Somalia
and provide targeted support, based on the Government
of Somalia's needs, to enable it to advance its peace
process and national reconstruction. Secretary-General
Guterres and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Faki, both visited Somalia this month
in a testament to the solidarity of the African Union and
the United Nations with Somalia as it works to rebuild
itself in the new context. China highly commends
those efforts.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
deployment of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). Over the past decade, AMISOM. and
countries in the region have assisted the Government
of Somalia in actively combating terrorism. The
United Nations has provided robust logistics support
to AMISOM. and has diligently coordinated the
international assistance directed to Somalia. Thanks to
those efforts, the situation in Somalia has gradually made
a turn for the better. That is also an illustration of the
positive momentum towards stability and development
across the African continent driven by a commitment to
unity, self-reliance, peace and development.

Today some parts of Africa are still facing
daunting challenges characterized by continued
local conflicts, a lack of development capacity and a
precarious humanitarian situation. The United Nations
has cooperated well with the African Union and other
countries of the region on Somalia, providing useful
reference points for the Security Council in tackling
other hot-spot issues in Africa. China supports Africa in
in efforts to address African issues in African ways and
is supportive of the leading role played by the AU and
other regional and subregional organizations in seeking
political solutions to African hotspot issues, enhancing
coordination among various parties and building
synergies. All the parties should decide on priorities,
press the conflicting parties to settle their differences
through dialogue and consultation, identify the nature
and root causes of given problems, build mutual trust,
facilitate reconciliation and pursue lasting solutions.

The international community should nurture a
vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and
sustainable security, support capacity-building in
the African Standby Force and the African Union
Rapid Reaction Force, and generally improve Africa's
collective security capabilities. It is important to take a
holistic approach to peace and development, emphasize
conflict prevention, draw up clear-cut peacekeeping and
peacebuilding targets, and boost Africa's development
capabilities so as to promote stability and development
in Africa.

The Chinese Government attaches great importance
to its cooperation with Africa. During the Johannesburg
summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation,
held in December 2015, China's President Xi Jinping
and African leaders agreed to upgrade China-Africa
relations to a comprehensive, strategic and cooperative
partnership. Ten cooperation initiatives for the next
three years were launched at the summit, focusing
on industrialization, agricultural modernization,
infrastructure, finance, green development, trade
and investment facilitation, poverty reduction, public
health, people-to-people exchanges and peace and
security. These outcomes are being implemented in a
swift and comprehensive manner.

So far, almost 50 per cent of China's pledged
$60 billion has materialized or is in the pipeline. China
will continue to act on the principles put forward by
President Xi - those of sincerity, practical results,
affinity and good faith - and uphold the value of
friendship, justice and shared interests. We will ensure
good progress in delivering on those initiatives and
assist African countries in expediting industrialization
and agricultural modernization. We will remain
actively engaged in promoting the cause of peace and
security in Africa and will further contribute to peace,
stability and development in Africa.

