Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I join other Council
members in warmly congratulating you, Mr. President,
on leading the Council through an extremely busy and
challenging month and programme of work. We highly
appreciate the steady and efficient manner in which you
have guided the Council and its work.

Malaysia reaffirms its support for the wrap-up
session, as it provides the Council with an opportunity
to collectively reflect on its work over the past month.
At the same time, it allows us to exchange views on the
possibility of moving forward certain issues or agendas
in the coming month.

I wish first to commend France for leading,
and Angola and the United States for co-leading the
Council's mission to Africa earlier this month. For my
delegation, the mission provided valuable insights and
first-hand experience of the situations and challenges
faced on the ground in Burundi and the Central African
Republic. The interaction during the ninth annual joint
consultative meeting between the United Nations
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council was also fruitful and, we believe,
paved the way for closer cooperation and coordination
between the two bodies. In that regard, we welcome the
joint communique issued following the conclusion, on
12 March, of the joint consultative meeting in Addis
Ababa.

The statistics for March that you just detailed,
Mr. President, reaffirm that the Council not only
continues to be engaged but has also actively pronounced
and acted on the various issues on its agenda. It
has taken a number of important and, in our View,
meaningful decisions on a number of key issues related
to the situations in Afghanistan, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Lebanon,
Libya, South Sudan and Yemen, among others.

On the whole, and over the past month, we believe
that the Council has remained united on a wide and
diverse range of issues and situations. Such unity
of both intent and purpose is important and must be
maintained if the Council is to continue effectively and
efficiently discharging its responsibilities mandated
under the Charter of the United Nations. It is, however,
unfortunate that on certain issues that are in equally if
not more pressing need of the Council's effective and
resolute response, such unity appears to remain elusive.
In that connection, I would like to reaffirm Malaysia's
commitment to continuing to work constructively to
ensure that the Council acts concertedly and collectively
on all issues and situations in its purview, including, in
fact especially, on those that are more difficult.

I would also like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to France
for organizing last week's two thematic open debates
on children and armed conflict (see S/PV.7414) and
the situation of minorities (see S/PV.7419). Moving
forward, we believe that the rich discussion engaged
during both debates could better inform not only the
Council but also all interested partners and stakeholders
in framing possible next steps or courses of action. We
also believe that holding such debates helps to focus the
Council's discussion on, among other things, certain
underlying themes, which include the threat posed by
terrorism, violent extremism and the perpetrators of
related heinous acts. On that note, we would like to
recall the Council's most recent press statement on
the terrorist attacks in Mogadishu this past weekend
(SC/11844), which resulted in the death of one of our
colleagues, Ambassador Yusuf Mohammed Ismail
Bari-Bari, the Permanent Representative of Somalia to
the United Nations in Geneva, along with other victims.
We reiterate our strong condemnation of the attack and
stress that the perpetrators must be held to account.

With regard to the issue of children and armed
conflict, we appreciate the novel approach that France
has introduced on how it might be further taken forward
by the Council. We look forward to continuing the
momentum and excellent cooperation and partnership
on the issue with France and all Council members
between now and June, and beyond.

In March we also received a final briefing from
Mr. Robert Serry, the outgoing Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process (see S/PV.7417). We
greatly value Mr. Serry's efforts and contributions to
the work of the Council and the United Nations system
as a whole, and we would like to express our deep
appreciation for his commitment and professionalism
in that regard. Malaysia would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate Nigeria on the successful
holding of presidential elections this past weekend. We
believe that a strong and united Nigeria is also in the
interests of partners and stakeholders at the regional
and international levels, including in the context of the
ongoing efforts to combat the threat posed by Boko
Haram in the region.

In conclusion, we would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate Jordan on its incoming presidency of
the Council for April. We reaffirm our commitment to
working closely and constructively with Jordan and all
Council members in the month oprril, which promises
to be as busy and challenging as March has been.

