Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): This debate
coincides with the final stages of a long and intense
process of negotiation on the framework for Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) reform. Thus, it is our
hope that this open debate will be a further source of
inspiration for Council members.

In that sense, we would like to offer a few brief
comments on the envisaged reform. At the outset, it is
important to note that, as outlined in the report on the
revitalization of the CTC (S/2004/ 124, annex), the
reform would not alter the substance of resolution 1373
(2001), in particular, the obligations placed on Member
States. The reform is intended merely to make the
institutional changes necessary to bring the CTC's
structure and expert capacity in line with the challenges
lying ahead.

There continue to be intense discussions about
the institutional implications of CTC reform. We share
the view of those who emphasize that any revitalization
measure must uphold the institutional balance of the
Organization, and the integrity of the Secretariat in
particular. We have taken note of the views expressed
by the Secretariat in that respect, which were also
referred to earlier in this debate, and we are confident
that the Council will find agreement on reform that is
in conformity with the principles mentioned earlier.

We welcome the intention to increase the CTC's
capacity, in particular in the field of the coordination of
technical assistance. In that respect, the strictly
consensual nature of technical assistance needs to be
underlined, as well as the particular role of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), based
in Vienna. Notwithstanding the global coordinating
role of the CTC, the UNODC continues to be the prime
United Nations body for the actual delivery of
technical assistance.

In the past, we have stressed that the work of the
CTC, in particular in the field of technical assistance,
should be tailored to meet the needs of human rights
and the rule of law, which must be reconciled with
measures aimed at effectively countering terrorism.
That becomes all the more important in the light of
visits by CTC experts to States to discuss the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), as foreseen
in the revitalization report, and in the light of the future
reports of the proposed Executive Director on the
implementation of that resolution. It is therefore crucial
that the staff of the assessment and technical assistance
office possess the necessary qualifications and
awareness in this area and that the envisaged liaison
with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights be thoroughly put
into practice. We believe that the recruitment of a
human rights adviser would be a good way to achieve
that goal.

Finally, let me express once again Liechtenstein's
commitment to international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism and to cooperation with the Security
Council, and in particular with the CTC and with the
sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999).

