Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China is highly concerned about the developments in
Syria. We call on the various parties in Syria to
exercise restraint and to avoid more bloodshed and all
forms of violence. We hope that the Syrian
Government will implement commitments to reform.
We also hope that a Syrian-led and inclusive political
process will be launched as soon as possible, so as to
facilitate the early easing of tension there.

The international community should provide
constructive assistance to facilitate the achievement of
the objectives I have mentioned. In the meantime, it
should fully respect Syria's sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. Whether the Security Council
takes further action on the question of Syria should
depend upon whether it would facilitate the easing of
tension in Syria, help to defuse differences through
political dialogue and contribute to the maintenance of
peace and stability in the Middle East. Most important,
is should depend upon whether it complies with the
Charter of the United Nations and the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of States -
which has a bearing upon the security and survival of
11-52974
developing countries, in particular small and medium-
sized countries, as well as on world peace and stability.

The Chinese Government's position on those
questions has been consistent and firm. On that basis,
China has always participated positively and
constructively in the consultations on the relevant draft
resolutions. At the moment, the Security Council has
before it two draft resolutions. One, which China
supports, advocates respect for the sovereignty of Syria
and resolving the crisis there through political
dialogue. With regard to the other draft resolution,
which the Council considered today, like quite a few
other Council members, China believes that, under the
current circumstances, sanctions or the threat thereof
does not help to resolve the question of Syria and,
instead, may further complicate the situation.
Regrettably and disappointingly, this major and
legitimate concern did not receive due attention from
the sponsors. As it now stands, the draft resolution
focuses solely on exerting pressure on Syria, even
threatening to impose sanctions. It does not help to
facilitate the easing of the situation in Syria. China
therefore voted against it.

Syria is an important country in the Middle East.
The maintenance of peace and stability in Syria serves
the common interests of the Syrian people and the
international community. Along with the international
community, China is willing to play a positive and
constructive role in appropriately resolving the
question of Syria. We will continue to support the
mediation efforts of the relevant countries and
organizations in the region.

