Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and
Mr. Rajasingham, Director ofthe Coordination Division
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, for their briefings.

There have been major changes recently in the
military and political situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic. Thanks to the fact that the terrorist threat has
been crushed in most of the country, the authority of
the legitimate Government has been restored and the
level of violence has significantly decreased. Active
efforts are under way to rebuild ruined infrastructure
and restore normal life to the liberated areas. Needless
to say, it would be premature to speak of an end to the
Syrian conflict, as a number of serious issues have to
be resolved first.

First of all, we must continue to work intensively
in support of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen's efforts to
give new impetus to the political settlement in Syria.
The Astana troika is facilitating his work and making
its own contribution to the political track. The work
of launching the constitutional committee and getting
the political process going is only one of the elements
in our joint push to settle the Syrian conflict. It will
be important to continue taking steps to combat the
terrorist threat and expand de-escalation throughout
Syria. In that context, we should be careful not to lose
sight of two points.
First, with regard to the situation in Idlib, we are
committed to implementing all the provisions of the
Russian-Turkish memorandum of September 2018.
We understand the concerns about the threats to
civilians there. Nonetheless, it is obvious to everyone
that the situation in that part of Syria is heading in
a dangerous direction. The Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham
terrorist group now controls almost 90 per cent of the
province. Terrorists continue their provocative raids
against Government forces. There have been 460 such
incidents since the beginning of the year, claiming
the lives of 30 people and injured around 100. We are
seriously concerned about new information showing
that Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham fighters, with the assistance
of the infamous White Helmets, are preparing to stage
new scenarios using toxic substances. On 23 March, we
received information that extremists were firing shells
filled with chemical substances at villages in northern
Hama, and several people were injured.

This status quo is unsustainable. If we do nothing
but observe, Idlib will become a source of constant
terrorist threats for Syria, its neighbours in the region
and other States. Pretending that the Al-Nusra Front
has suddenly become part of the moderate opposition
will not work either. We should not forget that a decent-
sized skeleton of international terrorism is still out there
in the provinces. Incidentally, many speakers today
expressed concern about the escalation of tensions in
Idlib, while completely forgetting the fact that at the
same time civilians are dying as a result of coalition
strikes in Baghouz, in Deir ez-Zor governorate. We have
not heard anyone calling for the situation in that area to
be frozen, despite the fact that what brought people to
the Al-Hol camp cannot be called anything other than a
large-scale humanitarian disaster. It is time to drop the
double standards. Is there any difference between the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the Al-Nusra
Front? Anyone who thinks so is seriously deluded.

The second point is that as history has shown,
the most intensive normalization in Syria is going on
where the legitimate Government's authority has been
restored. In that context, the illegal occupation of
various parts of the country, including the north-east
and in the area of Al-Tanf, is not only not conducive to
a settlement but undermines the prospects for it. I have
discussed Al-Tanf previously, and I want to emphasize
that the situation in southern Syrian in the area of the
Rukban camp, remains very difficult. In response to
humanitarian appeals, the Syrian Government gave its
consent to two humanitarian convoys, but the reality is
that keeping tens of thousands in a temporary camp on
a humanitarian drip is simply inhumane. A survey of
the residents of Rukban showed that an overwhelming
majority of them want to leave the camp but cannot.
Since May 2018 about 800 Syrians have managed to
get out of Rukban and return home, and each of them
paid $300 to the Maghawir Al-Thawra group for their
freedom. The most sustainable solution is resettlement.
In that regard, we have opened two humanitarian
corridors to get people out, and the Government of
Syria has also prepared six columns of comfortable
buses ready to go to straight to Rukban at any moment
in order to evacuate 2,400 people at once to places of
their choosing. The conditions in Latakia, Khalidiya,
Al-Amara, Homs, Mkhin, Al-Qaryatayn, Palmyra
and the Damascus and Aleppo suburbs can decently
accommodate more than 35,000 people.

On 26 March, the Russian military forces initiated a
coordinated discussion at the Jleb checkpoint to develop
gradual measures for moving people out of Rukban,
together with representatives of the Office ofthe United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Syrian Red Crescent Society and Syrian authorities.
Sheikhs from tribes in the camps also participated.
We invited our American colleagues, but they refused
to come or to allow the meeting participants into the
so-called security zone around Al-Tanf. Nonetheless,
we intend to continue our dialogue on Rukban with
all interested parties, including the United Nations,
the United States and Jordan, without preconditions
and without politicizing the humanitarian aspects of
the issue. We believe that the legal right of all Syrian
refugees and internally displaced persons to return to
their homes must be ensured and implemented.

As a matter of principle, the paradigm of
humanitarian assistance in Syria itself should be
reviewed. The Brussels III conference was important
in terms of collecting financial resources, but without
the participation of the Syrian Government it will
be impossible to solve the country's humanitarian
problems. We urge the organizers to reconsider their
approach. We emphasize the importance of putting a
definitive end to anti-regime projects whatever format
they are promoted in. We once again call on everyone
to recognize how damaging the unilateral sanctions
that a number of Western countries have imposed on
Damascus are, since they only worsen the humanitarian
situation in Syria and make ordinary people suffer.
Furthermore, these policies run counter to the logic of
humanitarian work. The result is that while one hand
is helping, the other is blocking the possibilities for
exploiting and strengthening the country's national
capacity to help the Syrian people. We could start by
freeing up funds allocated for Syrian development needs
through the major international financial institutions.

It is time to stop speculating about the refugees.
Their return must be voluntary. We all know that
most Syrians want to go back to their homeland. The
Syrian Government is ready to extend the necessary
assurances. The flow of Syrian refugees returning
to their permanent homes in Syria is constantly
growing. At the beginning of March a delegation led
by Mr. Filippo Grandi, the High Commissioner for
Refugees, visited Syria. Besides meeting with the
Syrian leadership in Damascus, the United Nations
representatives were able to visit places to which
Syrians had returned in Horns and Hama governorates.
It is notable that during this first-hand opportunity for
conversations with Syrians, the United Nations people
saw for themselves that returnees are living in normal
conditions and have expressed no complaints about the
conditions of their return.

We propose engaging in an honest joint effort to
restore stability to Syria, not only by countering the
threat of terrorism but by rebuilding the country's
economy. Russia is making its contribution. With
our assistance, more than 31,000 homes, 148 medical
facilities and 836 educational institutions have been
rebuilt, and more than 1,000 kilometres ofroad repaired.
Together we can bring the hostilities to an end and
focus on moving the political process forward, which
will enable national reconciliation to begin in Syria.

