The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Qatar.

Issues related to the fairness of the listing and
delisting procedures of the Security Council's
06-67095

sanctions committees are of interest to many. The
Security Council must ensure respect for legal
standards and norms, as well as for transparency, in
listing and delisting procedures. Heads of State and
Government and the General Assembly at last year's
World Summit called on the Security Council to
ensure, with the support of the Secretary-General, fair
and clear listing and delisting of individuals and
entities on sanctions lists, and to grant humanitarian
exceptions.

The Secretary-General is to be commended for
his 15 June 2006 recommendations to one of the
sanctions committees relating to delisting procedures,
particularly following my delegation's assertion of the
need for the Secretary-General to assume his
responsibility in that regard. The Secretary-General
stated in a letter that listed persons have the right, inter
alia, to an effective appeals mechanism. The
effectiveness of such a mechanism depends primarily
on its independence, neutrality and fairness and on
effective recourse by those listed to delisting and just
compensation.

International, national and regional courts must
review Security Council resolutions to ensure that they
comply fully with internationally recognized human
rights norms and the principles and purposes of the
United Nations Charter. On 22 June 2006, in its
statement on strengthening international law, the rule
of law and the maintenance of international peace and
security, the Security Council committed itself to
establishing fair and clear procedures for listing
individuals and entities in sanctions' lists.

My delegation voted in favour of today's
resolution so that the Security Council might reaffirm
its commitment to managing sanctions as carefully as
possible and in such a way as to ensure balance
between effectiveness and potential negative
consequences, and to following clear and fair
procedures for listing and delisting individuals and
entities and for granting humanitarian exceptions. We
continue to believe that there is hope for the Council's
ability to improve procedures on delisting from
sanctions' lists.

Although we voted in favour of the draft
resolution, we have some comments to make on its
annex, which represents a very modest and weak
attempt by the Council to improve the delisting
procedures. We remain gravely concerned that the
3
resolution failed to respect many legal norms and
standards that should be respected and applied by both
the Security Council and its sanctions Committees in
the delisting of individuals. Today the Council
established a focal point that lacks independence,
neutrality, standards or controls for delisting.
Therefore, this point of contact does not at all
constitute an effective means of fairness.

We express our regret that the sponsors of the
resolution did not take up our proposal to allow legal
representatives of listed persons to petition for
delisting, not just by those listed on the sanctions' lists,
especially since some listed persons are now deceased.
At this point one may wonder how the deceased
persons are to submit their requests for delisting, given
that they are dead. Despite the fact that it was sound
and logical, the sponsors also decided to set this
important proposal aside.

We also suggested that delisting requests could be
submitted through the focal point to the Secretary-
General or to United Nations offices working in or near
the State of nationality or residence of the individual
concerned. Regrettably, once again, that proposal was
not accepted by the co-sponsors.

My delegation proposed that, at a minimum, the
Committee should be able to provide necessary
recommendations in reviewing requests for delisting.
Once again, that proposal, regrettably, was not
acceptable to the sponsors.

We hope that the Security Council will review the
annex, and indeed the entire issue, and that there will
be transparency, objectivity and independence in the
consideration of delisting requests. We also hope that
there will be more respect for the rules of international
law and norms and for the legitimate calls of heads of
State and Government, international and regional
organizations, governmental and non-governmental
organizations and the many States that respect human
rights and the rule of law.

Through the resolution, the Security Council
commits itself to improving the listing and delisting
procedures and procedures regarding the granting of
humanitarian exceptions. That was the sole reason for
our voting in favour of the resolution, as well as the
hope that the Security Council would fulfil its
commitments, especially with regard to delisting. We
look forward to its doing so next year.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.
06-67095
