Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I welcome the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Meron, as well as Prosecutor
Brammertz, and I thank them for today's briefings. I
would like to assure you, Mr. President, and the highest
officials of the MICT present in the Chamber today,
of Croatia's full support for the mission and work of
the Mechanism.

As a victim of the brutal aggression in 19905,
during which numerous war crimes and crimes
against humanity were committed on its territory and
against its people, Croatia was a strong supporter of
the establishment of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) . We have placed our trust
in the Tribunal to serve as a shield against the extreme
level of brutality exercised during the aggression and
to properly punish the perpetrators of the worst crimes
committed in Europe since the Second World War.
With that purpose in mind, from the very beginning
of the ICTY's work, in 1993, until its closure, at the
end of 2017, Croatia closely and fully cooperated with
the Tribunal.

Unfortunately, after more than 25 years, a
significant number of victims and their families still
have not found long-awaited justice. Croatia therefore
fully supports the Mechanism and its continued efforts
to bring to justice the most prominent perpetrators of
the horrible crimes committed during the 1990s on the
territory of the former Yugoslavia.

Croatia did not hesitate to do its part in ensuring
accountability. It is worth repeating that an important
part of Croatia's accession to the European Union
(EU) 4 and we shall soon celebrate the fifth anniversary
of our EU membership - was a thorough reform of the
Croatian judicial system. The reform included creating
the specialized War Crimes Chambers and aligning it
with the highest international war crimes prosecution
standards. Full and unequivocal cooperation with the
ICTY was an essential part and parcel of Croatia's
EU accession process, and we have spared no effort
in meeting all ICTY's cooperation requests. That is
precisely the approach that we expect from all States
in the region, especially from Serbia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is pivotal that they establish independent
and impartial judiciaries and show restraint when it
comes to any form of manipulation in investigations and
prosecution processes in all types of cases, either those
initiated by domestic prosecutors or those transferred
to national courts by the ICTY.

In order to persist on this path and deliver results,
a strong political commitment is required, as well as a
more decisive approach in processing war crimes, in
particular those related to the highest military ranks.
Similarly, full cooperation with the Mechanism is
essential, and, in that regard, the EU's principled and
consistent conditionality policy serves as a strong
impetus, but also as an essential control mechanism.

We remain very concerned that Serbia's lack of
cooperation with the Tribunal continues with the
Mechanism as well. We underline the need for Serbia
to fully cooperate with the Mechanism, including by
fully accepting and implementing all of its rulings
and decisions. In addition, bearing in mind Serbia's
continuous disregard for some of the decisions of the
ICTY and the Mechanism, it would be contrary to the
main principles and interests of justice to hand over to
Serbia the case Prosecutor v. Petar Jojic' et al.

Cooperation with the Mechanism, as previously
with the Tribunal, as well as regional cooperation
among the States concerned pertaining to war-crime
issues have no alternative. Nonetheless, it has to be
emphasized that regional cooperation is not a one-way
street. It implies trust among the States concerned
and goes hand-in-hand with a willingness and sincere
commitment on the part of all States to prosecute war
crimes, without any double standards or exemptions
in relation to their nationals or members of certain
national groups.

As just mentioned by the Serbian Minister of
Justice in her statement, in a recent meeting between the
Croatian and Serbian Ministers of Justice - conducted
in a spirit of readiness to enhance cooperation - there
was agreement on the establishment of two joint
committees: one would work on bilateral agreement on
cooperation regarding the prosecution of war crimes,
and the other on the exchange oflists ofpersons accused
or convicted of war crimes. In the same vein, with a
view to resolving existing open issues in that area,
the Croatian Minister of Justice invited his Bosnian-
Herzegovinian colleague to Zagreb for a meeting,
which we expect to take place next week.

With respect to the reports we have before us (see S/2018/347 and S/2018/471), I have to stress that the
practice of naming unindicted co-conspirators in a
joint criminal enterprise is contrary in particular to the
European legal tradition, but also to the practice of a
number of American courts. That practice explicitly goes
against the main human rights standards and rules, such
as the right to a fair trial or the right to a good name and
reputation. That is particularly the case when the named
persons are deceased and do not have the possibility to
review the judgement in a separate procedure. I will not
enter into legal and other reasoning behind that well-
established legal standard, but will only briefly remind
the Council and the participants in the discussion of
the main principle of criminal law - everyone charged
with a criminal offence shall be presumed innocent
until proved guilty by the competent court in an inter
partes procedure according to law. In addition, there
is no legitimate interest or significant justification for
naming unindicted co-conspirators in the ICTY or
Mechanism's judgements, or in the formal statements
of its highest officials.

We are deeply concerned about the widespread
practice throughout the region of denying past
wrongdoing - a practice that goes hand-in-hand
with the glorification of war criminals and the crimes
committed. Part of that practice is revisionism, with its
devastating effects on the stability of the region. Croatia
therefore strongly condemns threats that Vojislav
Seselj, a convicted war criminal and current member
of the Serbian National Assembly, made against the
representatives of Croats in Vojvodina, Serbia.

When he was interviewed only a few hours after
the Appeals Chamber sentenced him to 10 years in
prison for crimes against humanity against Croats in
Vojvodina in 1992, Seselj openly stated that he would
readily repeat the crimes he was convicted of, and of
which he is proud. Regrettably, Serbian authorities
remained silent to those repeated outrageous outbursts
of hate against the Croatian minority in Vojvodina and
beyond, and Mr. Seselj is still sitting on the Serbian
Parliament, contrary to Serbia's own legislation.

As confirmed by the ICTY and the Mechanism's
judgements, hate speech and outrageous statements
can result in catastrophic consequences, instigating
war crimes and crimes against humanity. Politicians
and high-level officials bear particular responsibility
for unmasking such statements, their full meaning and
contextualization, as well as for their absolute rejection
and condemnation. That is precisely what we expect
from Serbian officials, exposing Seselj's words for what
they really are, that is, evil gibberish of a convicted
war criminal.

Croatia pays great attention to the remaining cases
before the Mechanism, in particular the Prosecutor v.
Stanisic' and Simatovie case. We have every confidence
that the prosecution will provide the Trial Chamber
with enough evidence to determine beyond any doubt
Stanisie and Simatovie's criminal responsibility in the
armed conflict in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as their role in the joint criminal enterprise
as established by the ICTY in the case of aggression
against Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are
convinced that a similar joint criminal enterprise with
the purpose of establishing an ethnically homogeneous
Serbian State in Bosnia and Herzegovina by criminal
means will also be determined in the final judgements
in the Karadeic' and Mladic cases.

Before concluding, allow me to stress that the issue
of missing persons is at the top of Croatia's agenda,
which aims to take all measures to account for persons
who perished, or remain missing, and provide their
family members with any information on their fate.
To that end, the strengthening of cooperation among
States in the region is of the utmost importance, which
includes the opening of all archives - something for
which Serbia still does not show readiness. We find the
Mechanism to be well-placed to play a supportive role
in that regard.

Finally, let me conclude by stating that Croatia
remains firmly committed to the development of good
relations and cooperation with neighbouring States, and
we strongly support their aspirations towards European
Union membership based on full compliance with the
membership conditions.

