The President (spoke in Arabic): I will make a
statement in my capacity as representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

The Syrian delegation expresses it gratitude to the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
Sir Jeremy Greenstock, to the Vice-Chairmen, the
Committee's members, the experts, the Committee
secretariat and the Translation Services for their
successful efforts during the previous phases of the
Committee's work. We also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for facilitating the work of the
Committee.

The Committee, in previous phases of its work
has been able to meet the requirements of its
commitments and mandate primarily through the
response of most Member States to the requirements of
resolution 1373 (2001). Specifically, 159 requisite
reports have been submitted to the Committee to date,
with four more reports to come. We note that a few
States have been unable to submit their reports. This in
no way is due to unwillingness to abide by the
requirements of the resolution but rather is due to
difficulties previously raised by the Committee
Chairman at previous meetings. Syria welcomes the
provision by the CTC of all forms of assistance -
technical, financial and administrative - to these
countries in the preparation of the requisite reports.

The Chairman of the CTC presented to the
Council a clear and precise work plan for the CTC's
next phase. While Syria is determined to make every
possible effort to ensure the realization of that work
plan through its cooperation in meeting the
expectations of Member States, we stress that
guaranteed success depends primarily on the response
from Member States. Success depends also on
concerted international efforts to combat all forms and
manifestations of terrorism, as well as an analysis of its
roots and causes.

Combating terrorism requires all of us to make
genuine and sincere efforts in different fields. It
requires of the Security Council members in particular
further coordination and concentration of efforts,
particularly at the regional level. The Syrian Arab
Republic, whose genuine contributions to combating
terrorism are known to many States, will continue to do
its utmost to achieve our common objectives.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

