Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank Tanzania
for having taken the initiative to convene this public
meeting on the situation in the Great Lakes region. I
would like to welcome you, Madam Foreign Minister,
and to thank you for personally presiding over this
meeting.

I would like to extend a warm welcome to the
Foreign Ministers and other high officials of the
Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Namibia, Botswana, Rwanda, the Sudan, Burundi,
Angola, Zimbabwe, Kenya, Uganda and Zambia, as
well as to the representatives of the African Union,
who have travelled from afar to attend this important
meeting. I would also like to welcome the Foreign
Minister of Belgium, the European Union
Commissioner and the special envoys of the
Netherlands and of Canada, who have come here to
participate in our discussion.

During the past decade or so, the Great Lakes
region has witnessed a great deal of turbulence and
conflict, which has had a huge impact on peace,
security, economic development and social stability in
that region and in the African continent as a whole. In
recent years, despite the continuation of disputes and
conflicts in some areas and the constraints on overall
economic and social development, encouraging
progress has been achieved as a result of the efforts of
the countries and peoples of the region, with the
assistance of the international community.

There is common understanding on all sides that
without stability in the Great Lakes region, there can
be no peace in Africa, and that without prosperity in
the Great Lakes region, Africa's renaissance cannot
take place. China supports United Nations efforts to
address the special needs of the Great Lakes region and
advocates that the Security Council put the question at
the top of its agenda and make more substantial inputs.

There is an old saying in Chinese: With united
and determined will, mountains can be moved. The
hard-working and ingenious people of the Great Lakes
region long for a stable and prosperous life. That is
their will, which, in due course, will yield the hoped-
for results. The Great Lakes region is endowed with
rich natural resources, and now that the situation is
moving in a positive direction, we are convinced that it
will not be long before peace is fully restored and
stable development achieved in the region.

China is of the view that in order to resolve the
conflict in the Great Lakes region in a comprehensive
manner, achieve national reconciliation and bring the
political transition to fruition so that the region can
embark on the road to sustainable development, a
number of issues require special attention.

First, the will of the countries concerned must be
fully respected. The positive developments in the Great
Lakes region are inseparable from the will and efforts
of the Governments and peoples concerned. The
advance of political transition in both the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi is based on the
broad support of the people. The facts on the ground
show that, without the political will of the countries
concerned and the participation of the local people,
there cannot be lasting peace. In helping the countries
of the Great Lakes region, the international community
should heed their concerns and their proposals.
Secondly, comprehensive cooperation at the
subregional level should be further strengthened. The
interests of the countries of the Great Lakes region are
closely linked. It is vital for the countries and the
parties concerned in the region to seek a proper
solution to the relevant issues through consultations
and dialogue on the basis of mutual respect for
sovereignty and territorial integrity. All countries
concerned should honour the commitments they have
undertaken and restore stability throughout the Great
Lakes region and ensure good-neighbourly relations
among each other in pursuit of peace, prosperity and
the development of the region as a whole.

We hope that the second Summit of the
International Conference for the Great Lakes Region
will be convened soon and that it will once again be
crowned with success, producing a programme of
action for the promotion of the peace, harmony,
development and progress of the Great Lakes region.

Thirdly, assistance by the international
community should be maintained and increased. The
political process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is at a critical juncture. Preparations for the
elections urgently require the support of the
international community. In Burundi's transition
towards post-conflict reconstruction, international
assistance remains essential. We hope that the
international community and other African regions will
continue to actively support the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in its disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme and the election process and
help consolidate peace in Burundi. It remains
imperative that we support the unremitting efforts of
those two countries to achieve peace, stability and
economic reconstruction.

China wholeheartedly supports the continued
important United Nations role in that regard. The
Security Council should give positive consideration to
all reasonable requests of the countries of the region
and act accordingly. We hope that the newly
established Peacebuilding Commission will also make
the post-conflict reconstruction of the Great Lakes
region a priority item on its agenda.

As a true friend to all countries of the Great
Lakes region, China has always followed closely the
developments in the situation in the region. We have
made practical efforts to promote the peace processes
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
Burundi, we have actively participated in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and we have
provided bilateral assistance, within our capacities, to
the economic and social development of those two
countries. We are ready to continue and strengthen our
comprehensive cooperation with countries of the Great
Lakes region and to play a positive role in promoting
the early achievement of lasting peace and prosperity
in the region.

In conclusion, the Chinese delegation supports
the draft resolution prepared by the United Republic of
Tanzania (S/2006/51) and would like to thank the
Permanent Mission of Tanzania for its diligent work in
that regard. We believe that the adoption of the draft
resolution will have a positive impact on the efforts to
promote the stability and development of the Great
Lakes region.

