At the outset, I would like to thank the briefers for their valuable briefings and extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Miguel Vargas Maldonado, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic. I would like to thank the Dominican Republic for convening this timely meeting and for choosing the important topic of protecting civilians from conflict-induced hunger, which represents an essential priority in the maintenance of international peace and security. Conflicts are currently on the rise and are characterized by widespread destruction, devastating impacts on civilian populations, increasing numbers of refugees and internally displaced people, and severe hunger and food insecurity. Hunger and malnutrition tied to conflicts are induced through many direct actions by belligerents, such as targeted attacks on food resources and related basic infrastructure, blockades or sieges, impediments to and restrictions on delivery of humanitarian relief, and the targeting of humanitarian actors and operations. In the long term, such impacts from conflict as economic recession, inflation, unemployment and disruption of essential services also contribute to food insecurity. Some countries in conflict are more vulnerable than others, owing to the deadly combination of poverty, violence, hunger and climate change, which can reach high, indeed life-threatening, levels, especially among women and children. Unfortunately, in many conflict zones, civilians are barred from access to food. Worse, conflict-induced food insecurity and starvation are used as a method of warfare and a means of applying pressure to achieve political ends. We condemn these practices, as they are an outrageous attack upon the personal dignity and inalienable rights of the targeted populations and a grave violation of international humanitarian law and international human rights law. Accordingly, we support all measures that lead to the full implementation of resolution 2417 (2018), particularly in terms of prevention, response, promotion of compliance and accountability. Furthermore, we appreciate and support all efforts of the United Nations and the World Food Programme undertaken in response to worsening food crises in conflict zones in order to alleviate the suffering of civilians. In conclusion, we reiterate the urgent need to continue and multiply international efforts aimed at addressing the factors that undermine food security and nutrition. In this regard, measures to support resilient livelihoods and the achievement of sustainable development must be combined with peacebuilding and conflict resolution efforts. In current situations on the ground, it is vital that an end be put to all forms of the use of starvation as a method of warfare and to the unlawful denial of humanitarian access. The devastating impacts of these abuses on civilian populations, and on children in particular, can affect their lives and last for decades, even after the political settlement of the conflicts that give rise to the abuses.
