Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for holding this important debate.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union.

Considerable progress has been achieved in
protecting civilians in recent years. However, to the
countless civilian victims of ongoing conflicts that fact
is of little, if any, comfort. There remains a significant
gap between the relevant international legal framework
and its implementation. It is therefore imperative that
the Security Council continue to address the issue on
the basis of a regular reporting cycle, with due analysis
of the problems encountered and lessons learned, doing
its utmost to garner political will for closing that gap.

The Council should systematically request
information on the protection of civilians from all
relevant United Nations entities and develop a more
robust collaboration on the matter with the United
Nations human rights machinery. Creating mechanisms
to track civilian casualties could be considered.

Accountability is fundamental to improving the
protection of civilians. Consistency and determination
in tackling impunity are a way of sending a strong
signal of deterrence to would-be perpetrators. When
respective Governments are unable or unwilling to
hold the perpetrators to account, the Council has
a responsibility to act, using the various tools at
its disposal, including fact-finding missions and
commissions of inquiry, targeted sanctions, referral to
the International Criminal Court and others.

Lithuania was one of the 57 States to sign a letter
in January, calling upon the Security Council to refer
the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court (ICC). My country continues to support the
role of the ICC as an effective instrument for pursuing
international criminal justice, and encourages the
Security Council to develop consistent and coherent
practices when it considers referrals to the ICC.

Journalists play a crucial role by informing the world
of the plight of civilian victims in conflict zones, and
often end up themselves the objects of armed attacks,
abductions and even killings. Lithuania supports the
call of the Secretary-General on the Council to address
attacks against journalists on a more regular basis and
to develop a more proactive approach to that issue.

My delegation is profoundly concerned by the
obstruction of humanitarian access and the deliberate
targeting ofhealth-care facilities and medical personnel.
We call on the Security Council to systematically
condemn in the strongest terms the attacks on medical
facilities and vehicles and the killing of humanitarian
and medical workers.

Furthermore, my delegation is deeply troubled by the
continued exposure of women and children to extreme
hardship and violence, including the widespread use
of sexual violence and rape as a means of warfare.
Protecting children in conflicts is a moral imperative
and a legal responsibility. We stress the importance of
the Paris Commitments and the Paris Principles as a key
standard in combatting the unlawful recruitment or use
of children by armed forces or armed groups, as well
as in securing the release of children concerned and
ensuring them the necessary protection. Lithuania also
calls on all States to further enhance their efforts aimed
at implementing resolution 1325 (2000) with respect
to ending impunity and guaranteeing accountability
for serious crimes against women and girls in armed
conflict and post-conflict situations.

With regard to United Nations peacekeeping
missions, we encourage the United Nations to further
develop the necessary doctrine, guidance and training
to ensure that peace operation mandates relating to the
protection of civilians can be implemented consistently,
coherently and effectively.

At the national level, Lithuania carries out
mandatory training in international humanitarian law
and rules governing armed conflicts, both in general
military education and in specific predeployment
training for troops leaving for international missions.
In Afghanistan, for example, such training enabled our
troops to take a proactive stance towards protecting
civilians by providing medical care, conducting
demining and supporting the rule of law.

The poorly regulated trade in arms and widespread
availability and misuse of weapons play into the
hands of the perpetrators of crimes against civilian
populations. Lithuania calls for the adoption of a
strong and legally binding arms trade treaty that would
enhance the protection of civilians in conflict and post-
conflict situations by strengthening controls on the
availability of arms. We also call for stronger action
in response to the growing use of explosive weapons
in high-density population areas, in defiance of the
international humanitarian law principles of distinction
and proportionality.

Finally, let me note that while seeking to reduce the
suffering and damage inflicted on civilians in armed
conflicts, we should also endeavour to develop more
proactive forward-looking approaches aimed at the
prevention of such crimes from taking place.

