The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule
37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representatives of Armenia, Belgium, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Croatia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Georgia, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Japan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malaysia, Namibia,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Qatar,
Slovakia, South Africa, Spain, the Sudan, Switzerland,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate
in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, to
participate in this meeting.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome Ms. Pillay,
who is joining today's meeting Via Video teleconference
from Geneva.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator to participate in this meeting.

On behalf of the Council, I wish to welcome
Ms. Amos, who is participating in today's meeting via
Video teleconference from Rio de Janeiro.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Philip
Spoerri, Director for International Law and Cooperation
at the International Committee of the Red Cross, to
participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2013/447, which contains the
text of a letter dated 1 August 2013 from the Permanent
Representative of Argentina to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note concerning the item on today's agenda.

The Security Council takes up this item today as
we commemorate World Humanitarian Day. Argentina
would like to pay tribute to those who have lost their
lives while rendering humanitarian assistance.

The Council last considered the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict at its open debate held
on 12 February under the presidency of the Republic
of Korea (see S/PV.6917). At that meeting, the Council
took up the report of the Secretary-General contained
in document S/2012/376 and the five challenges he
identified therein, namely, enhancing compliance with
international law by parties to a conflict, improving the
same compliance by non-State actors, improving the
protection of civilians by United Nations peacekeeping
and other missions, improving humanitarian access and
improving accountability for Violations.

As a result of that debate, the Council adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2013/2, which reaffirmed
its commitment to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and to the ongoing full implementation of all
its relevant previous resolutions, including resolutions
1265 (1999), 1296 (2000), 1674 (2006), 1738 (2006) and
1894 (2009), as well as all of its resolutions on women
and peace and security, children and armed conflict
and peacekeeping, and all the relevant statements of the
President.

The Council also reiterated its demand that all
parties to a conflict abide strictly by obligations
flowing from international humanitarian, human rights
and refugee law. It also underscored, among other
things, the need for secure and unhindered access for
humanitarian assistance. It also made reference to the
importance of ensuring that peacekeeping missions
develop protection strategies in order to carry out their
protection-of-civilian mandates. It also underscored
the importance of investigating events and reiterated
its commitment to the fight against impunity and
committed itself to follow up closely on its decisions
pertaining to international tribunals.

On 17 July, the Council held an open debate on the
protection of journalists, organized by the presidency
of the United States of America. The main goal of that
meeting was to continue to consider the protection
of civilians as part of the Council's commitment
by taking up various specific challenges, that is,
improving compliance with international humanitarian
law, human rights law and refugee law, improving
access to humanitarian assistance and strengthening
accountability for grave Violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights.

I am grateful for the presence of His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, to whom I now give
the floor.

