Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): We would like to thank
Special Envoy Sellassie for her briefing today. We see
considerable merit in increasing the frequency and
tempo of the Council's engagement with the Special
Envoy.

The Sahel is facing multifaceted challenges - drug
trafficking, human trafficking, irregular migration,
environmental degradation and the illicit proliferation
of small arms and light weapons. All of these remain
matters of great concern.

Armed groups, terrorists and criminal gangs
continue to pose a potent threat to peace and stability in
the region. As their activities are clearly transboundary,
addressing them will require the close cooperation and
collaboration of the countries in the region. It is in
recognition of that fact that members of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission - Chad, Cameroon, the Niger and
Nigeria, along with Benin are actively collaborating
within the framework of the Multinational Joint Task
Force in order to combat and defeat Boko Haram.
The effectiveness of our joint action is evident in the
steady progress the Task Force had made in the war
against Boko Haram. Territory has been reclaimed and
socioeconomic activities, including education, have

 
resumed in the liberated areas. To sustain those gains,
the Nigerian Government has begun to implement
rehabilitation and reconstruction programmes in the
areas of the country affected by Boko Haram.

The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
is another principal cause of insecurity in the Sahel.
Combating the problem is therefore crucial to improving
the security situation in the region. That will of course
require concerted action on the part of the international
community, regional organizations, States and other
stakeholders, including arms producers and exporters.
States in the region must intensify their efforts to
achieve the African Union's goal of silencing the guns.
We believe that full compliance with the Convention on
Small Arms and Light Weapons, their Ammunition and
other Related Materials of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) would aid that
concerted effort.

We would like to commend the Office of the Special
Envoy for the Sahel for its support to the Ministerial
Coordination Platform for the Sahel and other regional
mechanisms. We note the outcome of the Platform's
third meeting, held in November 2014, concerning the
establishment of thematic groups for addressing issues
of governance, security, resilience and development.
We expect that to facilitate implementation of the Sahel
initiatives and strategies. We strongly support efforts
to strengthen regional ownership of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. The Strategy's
prioritization of flagship projects is indeed a positive
development. We are convinced that emphasizing such
projects will help to mitigate the overlapping security
risks in the Sahel.

Nigeria believes that resolving the multifaceted
problems in the Sahel requires a holistic solution, and
that the path to a holistic solution lies in a comprehensive
and coordinated approach. While we welcome the
initiatives of the United Nations, we acknowledge the
significan efforts of other stakeholders to address the
challenges of the Sahel. They include the African Union
Strategy for the Sahel, the ECOWAS Sahel Strategy
and the Maghreb Arab Union' ssubregional programme
to combat desertification in the Maghreb. Others
include the European Union Strategy for Security
and Development in the Sahel and the commitments
of multilateral actors such as the Group of Five for
the Sahel. We believe that those initiatives can gain
from close coordination, based on the capabilities and
comparative advantages of the various stakeholders.

As the Secretary-General is embarking on the
strategic review of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel by the end of this year, we look
forward to recommendations that can not only deepen
the partnership of the United Nations with key regional
stakeholders but also strengthen regional ownership
of the process of implementing the Strategy. We want
to take this opportunity to pay special tribute to the
Special Envoy, Ms. Sellassie, for her astute leadership,
and we assure her of our continued and unalloyed
support.

