Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset, Sir, to offer my sincere
congratulations to you and your team on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April; I assure you of our full
cooperation. I wish also to congratulate Ambassador
Abdurrahman Mohamed Shalgham and the entire
delegation of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya on their
excellent presidency last month.

My thanks also go to Mr. Hedi Annabi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, for
his briefing this morning.

When the Council discussed the situation in Haiti
on 12 September 2008, that country was suffering
major damage caused by the hurricanes and floods of
August and September. Still today, as confirmed by the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/129), the
unfortunate fact is that, despite some progress, the
overall situation in Haiti continues to be of concern
because of the fragility of State institutions and the
security system, in addition to economic problems. But
it must be recognized that the overall political climate
has improved considerably, even though divisions and
tensions remain among political parties.

Political stability is crucial for Haiti, in particular
given the major political milestones of the coming two
years, including the holding of senatorial, legislative,
local and presidential elections and constitutional
reform. All political actors and civil society therefore
have the duty to everything possible to establish a
climate of peace through inclusive dialogue. To help
them in that task, the Government must put in place the
conditions necessary for the efficient planning of those
elections, especially by ensuring security, freedom,
democracy and transparency.

In the security sphere, we welcome the
dismantling of a number of armed gangs and a
reduction in the number of crimes, in particular
kidnappings. Here, we welcome the enormous support
provided by the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which has contributed to the
restoration and reform of the Haitian National Police.
But even in the light of these achievements, current
police staffing at all levels is insufficient to maintain
stability. Indeed, during its recent visit to Haiti, the
Security Council observed that the Haitian National
Police had insufficient qualified personnel and
equipment to monitor and control the borders. This
significantly reduces the effectiveness of efforts to
combat the drugs trade, which is considerable. The
international community, and in particular the United
Nations, should provide MINUSTAH with adequate
resources, enabling it to continue its programme and
meet the target of 14,000 trained police officers by
2011.

The restoration of State authority, the rule of law
and respect for human rights cannot be achieved
without far-reaching justice system reform. We
therefore encourage the Government to continue its
justice system reform plan. Here, we welcome the
12 March reopening of Haiti's Ecole de la
magistrature.

On the economic, social and humanitarian
situation, as confirmed by the report of the Secretary-
General, the disasters of 2008 deeply affected Haiti
both in human terms and in terms of the socio-
economic infrastructure. This is a grave burden for a
country the majority of whose population lives below
the poverty line and which was in addition hit hard by
unprecedented food and economic crises.

To be sure, economic recovery is first and
foremost the responsibility of the Government and the
people of Haiti. But it is true that this requires major
financial resources that the State alone cannot provide.
We therefore appeal to the international community, in
particular donor countries, and to the Haitian private
sector to support the Government, in particular through
job creation.

The initiative to convene a high-level donor

conference in Washington later this month comes at the

right moment. We hope it will yield major, urgent

decisions that can help Haiti address its pressing
humanitarian needs and pursue economic recovery.

My delegation wishes to state its satisfaction and
reaffirm its encouragement for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
personnel of MINUSTAH for the important work they
are doing in Haiti, in often difficult conditions. We
urge the Security Council to support them in their
mission and invite the countries of the region to
cooperate closely with MINUSTAH, in particular in the
sphere of border control.

We thank the countries that contribute troops to
MINUSTAH for their efforts and call on them to
maintain their involvement in helping Haiti to establish
lasting stability to the benefit of all, particularly the
countries of the region. We call on all States to do their
utmost to honour their pledged contributions to
MINUSTAH. We also call on the Government of Haiti
to enhance good governance so that the country can
enjoy the confidence and support of the international
community.

In conclusion, we thank the United States and
Mexico for having prepared the draft presidential
statement, which, of course, enjoys our full support.

