Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): First of all, let me express our most heartfelt
congratulations to you personally, Madam President,
and your friendly country, France, on your accession to
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March and your able leadership of the Council's work
over the past weeks. I also thank you for the initiative
to convene this open debate on the threat that terrorism
poses to international peace and security and on the
financing of terrorism that fuels it.

This debate is taking place following the most
heinous terrorist attacks, which have shaken the
world's conscience - the crime committed against the
worshippers in two mosques in New Zealand. Although
we are still bereaved as a result of that heinous crime,
we express our appreciation to the Government
and the people of New Zealand, who demonstrated
unparalleled love and sympathy and have remained
united. We commend the Muslims ofNew Zealand who
reciprocated with love. That reaffirms the tolerance
inherent in the Muslim religion.

The crime committed in New Zealand proves that
terrorism can be financed with either lots of funds or
scant resources. That is why the first step in the fight
against terrorism should be to combat its ideological
root causes in every society. We must also realize that
terrorism is not attributed to any one ethnicity, religion
or nationality. Regardless of terrorism in New Zealand,
terrorism against worshippers at the Al-Ibrahimi
Mosque in Hebron or the terrorist activities of Da'esh,
it all emanates from the same source of hatred and the
rejection of others.

Like other countries and societies, my country
has also suffered from terrorism. We have therefore
tried to eradicate it through various means. We have
fought it everywhere. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is
contributing to the war against Da'esh, we have fought
against Al-Qaida in Yemen and we continue to counter
the machinations of Hizbullah in Syria, Yemen and
elsewhere. Moreover, combating terrorism requires
drying up its financial resources. That is why we have
said that we cannot allow certain countries to carry
out suspicious practices under false pretexts in order
to support political extremism, which is a gateway
for terrorism.

My country has adhered to all the relevant
conventions in that regard and participated in every
conference aimed at diminishing the financing of,
and clamping down on, terrorism financing. For
environment xample, we have set up counselling-
service centres and an anti-ideological war centre. The
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was apioneer as one of the first
countries to counter the trend of recruiting, financing
and the incitement of terrorists through cyberspace.
Accordingly, in 2017, we established Etidal Centre
to combat extremist ideologies. We also established,
together with the United States and friendly Arab Gulf
nations, a centre to combat terrorism financing. We
also founded the Islamic coalition to combat terrorism
and terrorism financing. At the international level,
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre was
established as an initiative of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, which has financed it.

If we want to defeat terrorism, we must all be in
agreement that the threat of terrorism posed to any one
country constitutes a threat to us all. We must look past
our narrow interests and take into account the interests
and security of all countries.

Transparent and consistent cooperation are
essential in order to be successful in the fight against
terrorism. One of the most important examples in
that regard is the Security Council's establishment of
sanctions committees against terrorist groups, such as
Al-Qaida and Da'esh, because the Council is aware of
the threat to international peace and security that such
groups represent.
The threat posed by Da'esh and Al-Qaida continues
and the combatants of those two entities are still present
in countries and many regions either as part of an
organized group or individually. However, those groups
are diminishing and becoming increasingly weaker
militarily and in terms of ideology. Nevertheless, we
must highlight the fact that there are other terrorist
groups that are as dangerous and as great a threat as
Da'esh and Al-Qaida, and they threaten international
peace and security. Some of those other groups are
the armed Houthi group and Hizbullah militia that
conduct their activities throughout the region. Those
two groups work closely together under the protection
and support of Iran. My delegation therefore urges the
Security Council to start discussing the possibility of
designating the Houthi group and Hizbullah militia as
terrorist groups and to establish a sanctions committee
in that regard.

I would like to affirm that the policy conducted by
my country to combat terrorism and terrorism financing
is based on increasing international cooperation. Among
the most important challenges facing the security forces
in different States is the possibility of infiltration by
foreign groups or foreign terrorist fighters into their
countries without prior knowledge of their background.
That is why the relevant institutions in my country have
called for the sharing and exchange of information on
such individuals fighting with terrorist groups. We
have shared our data with other relevant stakeholders.

In conclusion, I would like to affirm that the
occupation of the territories of another State and the
false recognition of that occupation pave the way for
terrorism. That is why combating terrorism cannot
be accompanied by any measure that allows for
increasing the sentiments of injustice and rejection of
the occupation.

