The President (spoke in Russian): 1 shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

We thank the Permanent Representative of Spain
for his report on the work undertaken by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), which
he chairs, during the most recent reporting period.

The Russian Federation welcomes the successful
conclusion of talks to resolve the situation concerning
the Iran nuclear programme. We are pleased by the
adoption of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) and hope that, as set forth in and endorsed
in resolution 2231 (2015), it will enter into force in the
coming weeks. We believe that the Plan not only allows
for a satisfactory resolution of the Iran nuclear issue, in
full respect for Iran's right to engage in peaceful nuclear
activities, but also serves to strengthen confidence in
the Middle East, ensuring the lifting of obstacles to
normal regional economic and political cooperation,
with the full participation of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.

Active preparations are now under way to begin the
practical implementation of the JCPOA on a number
of different fronts. On 25 August, an extraordinary
meeting of the Board of Governors of the International
Atomic Energy Agency was held, at which the Agency
was mandated to undertake verification activities in the
framework of the JCPOA. This important step forward
will allow the Agency to reach agreement with Tehran
on specific parametres for future verification activities.
We believe that there is a need for the Board of
Governors to adopt, in due course, a separate resolution
to ensure Agency participation in the implementation
of the JCPOA on a sound footing and to consolidate the
continuity of the process.

We are carefully following the processes of
consideration of the agreement by the legislative bodies
of the United States and Iran. We hope that this will
all lead to a successful and smooth conclusion. With
Iran, we too are taking preparatory measures on certain
aspects of the JCPOA, which provides for bilateral
Russian-Iranian projects, including the establishment
of stable isotope production in Fordo and the shipment
of low enriched uranium from Iran.

Pursuant to the provisions of the J CPOA, 18 October
is the so-called date of adoption, after which Tehran
will begin taking practical measures to bring its nuclear
programme into conformity with its obligations under
the JCPOA. The United States and the European Union
members of the P5+l will begin to prepare the legal
framework for the lifting of their unilateral sanctions
on Iran. We have no reason to doubt that all sides will
honour their obligations in good faith.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The meeting rose at 5pm.
