Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the Presidents and the Prosecutors
of the two Tribunals for the briefings they have just
given us on developments in the implementation of
their completion strategies. We note that the two
Tribunals are seeking ways to lessen the impact of
factors which are holding back progress in their work.
That is most encouraging. In particular, we welcome
the Tribunals' efforts to speed up procedures through a
rational use of available resources. Increasing the
number of ad litem judges made available to the ICTR,
we think, has helped speed up the work of the Tribunal.

The Tribunals' reports offer a convincing analysis
of the number of days of deliberation necessary to
complete the cases before them, with estimates based
on the nature of the cases, taking into consideration the
cases of fugitives and the new tasks and timelines laid
down by resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).
This gives us a fairly precise idea of the prospects for
implementing the completion strategies. All of this
shows that the Tribunals have taken to heart the
international community's desire to see their work
completed on time. We welcome the fact that the
Tribunals have fully integrated the completion strategy
into their activities.

Nevertheless, in spite of the determination shown
by the Tribunals, it would seem that they are faced
with genuine time, economic, structural and political
constraints; these have introduced a certain amount of
uncertainty into their forecasts. The time constraints
relate to the internal management of the Tribunals, and
we fully trust in the Presidents and Registrars of the
Tribunals to overcome them. Rather, I shall discuss the
structural and political constraints, because it is in that
sphere that action by the Security Council might truly
make a difference.

These constraints are linked to specific problems
facing the international community. I refer in particular
to the recruitment freeze imposed on the Tribunals,
which they have asked to be lifted so that they can
make use of the services of legal officers in order to
face up to the increased workload stemming from the
need to speed up their procedures. In this regard, we
think that the Security Council working group on the
Tribunals should look into this issue in order to find a
way to solve the problem.

Another issue is the capacity of national judicial
systems that are being asked to take on the secondary
cases that the International Tribunals are supposed to
refer to them in order to focus on the cases of high-
ranking officials bearing major responsibility for
crimes falling within international jurisdiction. The
seminars organized by the Tribunals are, no doubt,
helpful in enhancing the national capacity of the
countries concerned; we support those seminars. But
the question of safeguarding and respecting
international norms should be stringently evaluated. In
that connection, the alternative formula of deferring
some cases to third-country tribunals should be given
all due consideration.

In dealing with this aspect of the completion
strategy, what is most to be feared is that cases will be
transferred to overburdened and politicized national
justice systems. Here, we encourage the Tribunals to
continue their discussions with third States which they
have determined to meet international norms in order
to ensure that accused are given speedy and fair trials.

In our view, political constraints are essentially
linked to a lack of cooperation from States that delay
handing over to the Tribunal persons who have been
accused and who are still at large on their territory. My
delegation urgently appeals to the Governments
concerned to apprehend those involved as soon as
possible and to hand them over to the Tribunals so that
they can answer for their acts before international
justice. In so doing, they would be making a very
valuable contribution to combating impunity and to
promoting respect for the rule of law and the principles
of humanity necessary for the preservation of
international peace and security.

In conclusion, we renew our firm support for the
officials of the two Tribunals. We pay tribute to them
for all their efforts to ensure that the rule of law
prevails.

