Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
reiterates its deep concern at the new cycle of Violence
that has been unleasehd in Palestine and Israel and
East Jerusalem. We especially condemn the intentional
burning of the Tomb of the Patriarch Joseph as well
as the bombing of the Beersheba Central Bus Station.
Those events are turning point in the resurgence of the
cr1s1s.

We understand the fear that has gripped much of the
Israeli public. But the peace and stability to which they
aspire will not be achieved through the securitization of
the problem. The solution cannot lie in stronger security
measures, home demolitions or punitive measures that
violate minimum standards of procedure and the right
to fair and dignified treatment.

We are concerned that some Palestinian young
people, owing to the frustration and lack of opportunities
resulting from the occupation, are taking the path of
violence to make their demands heard. At this critical
point, it is imperative to address the root causes of
conflict. The political horizon leading to a two-State
solution must be restored; this is a realistic alternative
that would allow both peoples to coexist peacefully.
The parties must commit themselves to that solution
in word and in deed, freezing the construction of and
dismantling settlements, as well as putting an end to
and rejecting any inflammatory rhetoric. In particular,
we call upon the leaders of both peoples to prevent
extremist positions from hijacking the political agenda.

The current spiral of violence should lead the
members of the Council to relaunch the process of
dialogue. To that end, it is Vital to create conditions
that promote trust between the parties. Any effort in
the quest for areas of convergence must include the
aspiration of Palestine to exercise its right to self-
determination, as well as the due security safeguards
required by Israel. We believe that faithful compliance
with the agreements reached and established practices
regarding the use of and visits to the Temple Mount are
key to reducing current tensions.

Finally, we take note of the letter sent yesterday by
the Secretary-General to the President of the Security
Council with regard to the request made by President
Abbas for the establishment of an international
protection system, transmitting a report setting out a
historical review of precedents in the area of protection.

