Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico regrets that we have not been able to reach an
agreement in the Security Council to continue to work
together on the task of disarming Iraq. Nevertheless,
those differences should not be an obstacle to the
Council's continued fulfilment of its mandate and of its
assumption of its responsibilities with regard to peace
and security in the world.

As President Vicente Fox said in his message to
the nation on 17 March, Mexico upholds a multilateral
approach to conflict resolution and deplores the path of
war. The world, as the President of Mexico stated,
"must continue to advocate solutions that are in
keeping with the spirit and letter of the Charter of the
United Nations. The Charter establishes that the use of
force must always be a last and exceptional recourse,
which can only be justified when all other means have
failed to produce results."

The Security Council is the only organ to which
the international community, whose will was expressed
in the Charter signed in San Francisco, has entrusted
the right to use force. As the President of Mexico said,
"In the present circumstances, what is at stake is the
very manner in which humanity is to handle matters as
pressing as disarmament and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, which our country has
always considered to be tremendously important."

I represent here a State and a nation that is deeply
peace-loving. The people of Mexico cherish peace and
have given its representatives a mandate to pursue it at
all times and in all circumstances. Mexico's strength is
based on our principles, which reflect the lessons
learned from history. In essence, they express our
interests, and it is as a function of them that we
participate in the debates in the Council, that we
present our points of view and that we fully shoulder
our responsibilities. The touchstone of these principles
is the peaceful settlement of disputes and disarmament.
These are the principles that lend momentum to the
multilateral avocation of our foreign policy.

It is in this light that Mexico believes deeply in
the reason for the existence of the United Nations,
because it reflects the hopes for peace and conviviality
and peaceful coexistence of millions of human beings.
The United Nations is the forum par excellence where
representatives of all States can meet, come to an
agreement and take collective decisions to preserve and
restore peace, where necessary, to face humanitarian
crises, help refugees, protect humanity from terrible
diseases such as AIDS, protect the environment, work
for sustainable development and fight for and preserve
the rights of women or children or the disabled. Our
Organization has the strength and the legitimacy to
discharge all these mandates. This is something to be
protected, strengthened and enhanced.

Mexico joins the efforts of the Secretary-General
to update the structure and methods of work of our
Organization to make the United Nations a system that
is increasingly relevant and effective and to ensure that
its responses will always be timely, appropriate and
relevant in order to combat poverty and
marginalization, which are the underlying causes of
hatred and violence.

Throughout the process of disarming Iraq, since
resolution 1441 (2002) was adopted, Mexico has
expressed its trust in the United Nations Monitoring,
Inspection and Verification Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
We would like to express our confidence in them once
again. This is the most robust, dynamic and effective
effort at peaceful disarmament that has ever been
attempted. We are convinced that with this instrument
and the mandate it had, the United Nations could have
brought about the peaceful disarmament of Iraq.

My country feels that this is no time for
recriminations. We now must analyse from the
Council's perspective the tasks that lie ahead. We must
do so with a clear sense of collective responsibility and
a clear understanding of the challenges that we face.
The first will be coping with the humanitarian situation
in Iraq and, if the war does take place, with the
reconstruction of the country. We fully trust in the
leadership and capacities of the Secretary-General. He
will have to propose the paths and actions that we will
then have to authorize here in the Council. The
responsibility for complying with existing United
Nations mandates in Iraq requires that the Council take
action immediately to restore the mandates that had
been blocked or suspended.

Mexico is a full participant in the combat against
terrorism. We have undertaken responsibilities here.
We have taken all kinds of measures to prevent this
scourge and to attack it. Fundamentally, and these are
our principles, we are all united.
