Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's broader debate on a region that
unfortunately makes up a very large portion of the
agenda of the Security Council and on which members
of the Council have been divided far too often.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his thought-provoking intervention earlier today on the
situation in the Middle East and North Africa.

We align ourselves with the statement to be made
later on behalf of the European Union.

Throughout history, the Middle East and North
Africa have acted as a confluence for many of the
world's peoples and religions and as a conduit for trade
and human interaction for the benefit and advancement
of the region and beyond. In the process, the region has
gifted us an unrivalled wealth of history and culture.
Today the Middle East and North Africa region is home
to a vibrant young population, striving to be active
citizens in inclusive open societies and to build better
futures for themselves and their fellow citizens, which
brings great hope.

Yet many aspirations are still held back. Intensifying
internal conflict and sectarian violence polarize
countries across the region. Increasingly, conflicts in
the Middle East are interlinked and there is a risk of
regionalization, which could have global consequences.
The goal to create a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction in the region, which has been supported
by the Security Council, has not materialized. There
have been setbacks in diplomatic efforts in that area.
Sweden, together with the rest of the European Union,
will continue to fully support the nuclear agreement
with Iran and its implementation.

The challenges in the Middle East and North Africa
are taking up an increasing portion of the Council's
agenda. At the same time, it could be argued that in
no other region has the Security Council been more
divided or more flagrantly failed to live up to its
responsibilities. During our time as an elected member,
we have tried to bridge the divides and contribute to
constructive, results-oriented discussions aimed at
making a real difference on the ground. It was in that
spirit that we hosted the Secretary-General's retreat in
Sweden in April. We came away with a renewed sense
of purpose and commitment to collective efforts. It
is only by working together that we can shoulder the
great responsibility that the Charter entrusts to the
Council. The permanent members of the Council have
a particular responsibility in this regard.

We must enhance our efforts for the millions of
civilians affected by conflict who depend on us to
uphold international law and ensure protection and
humanitarian assistance for those most in need. The
region is currently the scene of some of the worst
humanitarian disasters in modern times. Every day,
courageous humanitarian workers risk their lives
to provide assistance to people in need. For that we
are grateful, and we need to support them. The very
system that we have built over decades to protect the
most vulnerable in times of armed conflict is under
threat. The principles and rules of international
humanitarian law are frequently violated, including
through indiscriminate attacks on civilians, civilian
infrastructure and humanitarian workers, the inhuman
and degrading treatment of detained persons and
refusals to grant humanitarian access to people in need
of assistance. Even the international prohibition against
the use of chemical weapons has been violated. So far
this has been allowed to happen with impunity, but that
must change. We have a responsibility to ensure that
the perpetrators of such crimes are brought to justice
and held accountable.

Military strategies will not deliver sustainable
peace. Only inclusive political solutions and peaceful
settlements can end conflicts once and for all. The
brutal war in Syria is well into its eighth year. The
Israeli-Palestinian conflict has gone unresolved for
seven decades. The protracted conflict in Yemen has
just escalated even further. The United Nations is the
only international institution with the legitimacy and
credibility to facilitate the political processes needed
to end these conflicts. The leadership of the Secretary-
General and the use ofhis good offices is essential. We
in the Security Council must do all we can to provide
him with the support, unity and backing that he and his
Special Representatives need.

Regional and international dialogue and cooperation
must be the primary means for peacefully resolving
disputes. There is a need for a common framework in the
Middle East for discussion and cooperation on issues of
mutual interest and challenges, including security. The
experience of other regional security arrangements,
such as the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, including with the Paris Charter, could serve
as a model, as several speakers have mentioned this
morning. Such a framework should seek to establish
common norms and a comprehensive and collaborative
concept of security. More than anything, it could help
build well-needed confidence and trust between all
the countries in the region. Such a framework could
also serve as an effective counterpart and partner for
the United Nations in its efforts to prevent conflict
and promote peace, much like in Africa, where the
close cooperation of the United Nations with the
continent's regional organization, the African Union,
has proved essential.

The interconnected nature of the challenges we
face make international and regional cooperation not
only desirable but essential. Terrorism and violent
extremism affect us all, and we must continue our
joint efforts to fight them. That is an integral part of
the Security Council's responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. For the fight against
terrorism to have any chance of succeeding, it must
always be conducted with full respect for international
law, including humanitarian law and human rights,
and can never be used as an excuse for indiscriminate
warfare or the inhumane treatment of detainees.

As we continue to work to end the current crises,
we must improve our ability to prevent new conflicts
from developing, which means identifying and
addressing conflict risks and drivers early, so that
we can take early action to sustain peace and prevent
conflict before emerges. These drivers include youth
unemployment - more than half the population of the
region is under 25 years old- chronic underdevelopment
and the lack of economic opportunities. However, as
we agreed when we adopted resolution 2419 (2018),
on youth, peace and security, earlier this month (see S/PV.8277), young people can be a powerful force for
peace and prosperity. And women also have a powerful
role to play in building the region's future. There are
established links between gender inequality, political
instability and underdevelopment. The full and effective
participation of women at all levels is necessary to
achieve stability and sustainable development.

Indeed, we know all too well the drivers of
conflict, but that means we also know how to prevent
them. It includes building strong, unified, tolerant,
open and free societies, where respect for human rights
and legitimate and credible governance institutions
prevail. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
represents a framework for addressing the root causes
of conflict and is one of the most powerful tools we
have for economic and social development in the
Middle East and North Africa, as in every other region.

I started my remarks today recalling the cultural and
historical legacy that the Middle East and North African
region has given to the world. Today's challenges may
be testing the resolve of the international community
and the strength of our system for collective security,
but they are not insurmountable. Meeting them will
require a determined effort on the part of the countries
of the region, as well as a willingness to compromise
and an unwavering commitment to the principle on
which our international system is built. It is a shared
responsibility, not least for the Security Council, and
we have to shoulder it too. In the words of former
Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold, "only he
deserves power who every day justifies it".

