Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Miyet for his
informative briefing on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We believe that regular reports to the
Council, pursuant to Security Council resolutions on
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, help to ensure
a closer monitoring of the operations of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH).

We also deem it important to ensure that the
settlement process is stable and irreversible in order to
strengthen the multi-ethnic statehood of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the basis of democratic changes and
respect for the rights of all peoples of that country.

As is well known, the key to success here is full
and consistent respect for the Dayton Peace
Agreement. However, the basic responsibility for the
future of Bosnia and Herzegovina lies with the
Bosnians themselves. We hope that the new generation
of Bosnian politicians, who will take charge of the
country following the elections this fall, will be able to
energetically begin resolving the remaining tasks.
There are quite a lot of such tasks.

Unfortunately, we must say that implementation
of the provisions of the Dayton Agreement is
proceeding slowly. The common governmental
institutions in Bosnia are operating ineffectively.
Political change in the country is being hindered by
nationalist forces. Social tension is still growing, and
there has been no decline in inter-ethnic confrontation.

Recently, problems regarding the return of
refugees to Bosnia and Herzegovina have appeared to
be exacerbated. There have been a series of incidents
involving acts of violence. This disorder has shown
that there is an acute problem in providing alternative
housing for Bosnians returning to their homes. We
believe that a solution to this problem must be all-
encompassing.

We note that the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) is taking steps to
normalize the socio-political processes for developing
Bosnian statehood. Russia continues to support the
work of the United Nations Mission and of the
Stabilization Force (SFOR), as important elements in
the international effort to move the Bosnian settlement
forward. The United Nations Mission plays an
important role in coordinating the activities of all the
international organizations in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Thanks to its contribution, law and order is being
strengthened and the local police are becoming
increasingly professional and are being reorganized on
an inter-ethnic basis. The judicial system is being
reformed, and attempts are being made to combat
organized crime and corruption. A single multi-ethnic
border service has now been established and is
gradually taking over the control of all the entry points
on the borders of Bosnia and Herzegovina. At the same
time, UNMIBH still has to do a lot to neutralize the
taking of narrow ethnic approaches and also to combat
illegal activities in the police and judicial areas.

We believe that raising questions about the
establishment of a single defence system in Bosnia and
Herzegovina- and even more, of a single, common
Bosnian army - runs counter to the provisions of the
Dayton Agreement. Under that document, questions
involving defence lie exclusively within the
competence of the entities and can be shifted to
common Bosnian institutions only with the consent of
the entities.

We also confirm our position that having SFOR
contingents arresting persons indicted by the Tribunal
runs counter to SFOR's mandate. Unfortunately, it has
still not been possible to rid the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia of all elements of
politicization or to bring its activities into accordance
with its statute and the decisions of the Security
Council.

We would also like to confirm our deep
conviction that attempts under any pretext whatsoever
to isolate the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia from the
Balkan settlement processes are counterproductive.
They simply provoke new crises in the region, and they
run counter to the spirit of the Dayton Agreements, one
ofthe signatories to which is Yugoslavia.

Russia, for its part, will continue to make an
active and constructive contribution to developing the
peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina on the basis
of the strict implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreements. We believe that the work of UNMIBH
should continue to be directed towards this end.

