Mr. Akram (Pakistan): We are delighted to see
you, Sir, assume the presidency of the Security Council
at this critical moment for international peace and
security and, indeed, a critical moment for the United
Nations. I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Ambassador Stefan Tafrov, your
predecessor, for his skilful and outstanding leadership
of the Council last month. On this occasion, the
Pakistan delegation extends its high appreciation to Sir
Jeremy Greenstock, the Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), to the Vice-Chairmen of
the CTC and to its experts for their endeavours over the
past year. We wish them continued success in the
future.

The debate on the issue of threats to international
peace and security caused by terrorist attacks is
important and timely. The catastrophic terrorist attacks
of 11 September last year mobilized the international
community to launch a comprehensive campaign
against terrorism.

The Security Council has made a significant
contribution to that campaign, including through the
series of resolutions it has adopted - resolution 1368
(2001) calling on all States to work together to bring to
justice "the perpetrators, organizers and sponsors" of
the atrocities of 11 September; resolution 1373 (2001),
adopted almost a year ago this week, which aimed at
cutting off the supply lines - financial, military and
logistic - of the terrorists; resolution 1377 (2001)
calling on all States to eliminate the scourge of
terrorism; and 1390 (2002) targeting Al Qaeda and the
Taliban.

On the ground, an international coalition was
quickly constituted and has waged a successful war
against the Al Qaeda terrorist organization in
Afghanistan and elsewhere. Almost a year later, Al
Qaeda has been virtually destroyed and the
Government which harboured and protected those
terrorists ejected from power. The Bonn process,
supplemented by the Tokyo Conference, has opened the
way for the installation of a representative Government
in Kabul, led by President Hamid Karzai, and for the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of Afghanistan.

However, the war against terrorism in
Afghanistan is not yet fully won. Coalition forces are
still pursuing the remnants of Al Qaeda in the
mountains and valleys of Afghanistan. That final
mopping-up operation is likely to be painstaking and
time-consuming. In the meantime, the international
community, which has organized itself admirably in
Afghanistan under the guidance of the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, cannot afford to become complacent. Security
continues to be under threat in Afghanistan from a
variety of sources, including tribal and regional
rivalries and the quest for power and influence.
Pakistan continues to believe and to urge that the
international community should deploy additional
forces, especially in the regional centres, as a means of
consolidating peace and security in Afghanistan and
ensuring that the writ of President Karzai prevails over
the entire country. Failure to take timely action to
consolidate security in Afghanistan could prove to be
very costly in the future.

It is equally important to commence the process
of rehabilitation and reconstruction simultaneously
throughout Afghanistan under the auspices of the
Karzai Government. Apart from generating an
economic revival and creating jobs, it will also help to
extend the influence and authority of the Government
in Kabul to all Afghanistan.

Even as the international community acts to
consolidate peace and security and to revive economic
activity in Afghanistan, the need to support Pakistan in
its multiple endeavours to combat terrorism should not
be overlooked. As President Musharraf stated in the
2nd meeting of the fifty-seventh session of the General
Assembly, on 12 September:
"Pakistan is in the forefront of the fight
against terrorism. We have made major sacrifices
in this war. We have interdicted infiltration by Al
Qaeda into Pakistan. We have arrested and
deported foreign suspects found on our territory.
We are determined not to allow anyone to use our
soil for terrorist acts inside or outside Pakistan."

Pakistan continues to conduct extensive
operations on its western border involving a sizeable
number of its military and paramilitary forces to
interdict Al Qaeda infiltration, even as coalition forces
undertake simultaneous operations on the other side of
the Durand Line.

With equal vigour, Pakistan Government agencies
are engaged in an extensive operation to hunt down Al
Qaeda and other terrorists who may have infiltrated
into Pakistan. Some have been discovered in the border
regions, while others were found hiding in our cities.
This intelligence and police operation has proved to be
highly successful, resulting in the capture of some of
the top leadership of Al Qaeda. We are confident of
further and ultimate success in capturing any remaining
Al Qaeda members on the run.

It was expected that the terrorists, when cornered,
would seek retaliation and revenge. In the war against
terrorism, Pakistan has become not only the frontline
fighter but also the frontline target of the terrorists. To
draw publicity to their acts of vengeance and violence,
the terrorists have focused on attacking foreigners, as
well as members of Pakistan's Christian community.
We condemn and deplore those attacks and the
resulting loss of innocent lives. Yet the fact that the
terrorists are attacking the innocent and "soft targets"
is an indication that their capacities have been severely
eroded. Pakistan is determined to pursue the operation
until complete success is achieved in eliminating and
eradicating those terrorists.

It is unfortunate that in certain recent incidents of
terrorism in Pakistan, we have found some grounds to
suspect that there are external agencies other than Al
Qaeda who may have been responsible for those
terrorist acts.

Just this morning there was a condemnable attack
by gunmen against the girls' Islamic school in Lahore
and another attack on a Christian hospital in Bannu, in
north-western Pakistan. A young girl was injured in
Lahore. Fortunately, there were no injuries in the
Bannu attack.

The Government of Pakistan is also seeking to
clear the pond in which extremists and terrorists could
survive. Through the detailed reports submitted by
Pakistan to the CTC under resolution 1373 (2001), the
Security Council is aware of the extensive legislative,
administrative and operational measures which the
Pakistani Government has adopted to arrest and
eradicate all domestic manifestations of terrorism and
extremism in Pakistan.

Our campaign against terrorism and extremism is
part of the endeavour of President Musharraf's
Government to realize the vision of our founder,
Quaid-e-Azam Mohammad Ali Jinnah, for the
emergence of Pakistan as a modern, tolerant,
democratic Islamic State. President Musharraf's
Government has launched the country towards this
vision, introducing comprehensive socio-economic
reforms and restructuring our polity, inter alia, through
grassroots democracy, the empowerment of women and
an ambitious programme of human resources
development, including education.

As we move to the stage of completing the
process of democratic revival with the holding of
national and provincial assembly elections in Pakistan
on 10 October - six days away - it is our hope and
expectation that our friends in the international
community will continue their support for Pakistan's
comprehensive endeavour for rapid socio-economic
development and to realize thereby our people's
aspirations for peace, security and prosperity.

It must be in the knowledge of the Council that
Pakistan's ability to support the international struggle
against terrorism - and our aspirations for peace and
prosperity - could be significantly eroded by the
military threat against Pakistan from our eastern
neighbour. Misusing the rationale of the anti-terrorist
campaign, this neighbour has deployed one million
troops on Pakistan's border and along the Line of
Control in Kashmir. It has repeatedly threatened to use
force against Pakistan. It refuses mutual de-escalation
of forces; it refuses bilateral dialogue; it refuses third-
party mediation; it refuses the Secretary-General's
good offices; and it refuses to end its military
repression of the people of Jammu and Kashmir,
justifying this stance by denigrating this noble freedom
struggle as cross-border terrorism.

The Kashmiris are struggling to exercise their
right to self-determination, as promised to them by the
Security Council in a number of resolutions. Those
Security Council resolutions must also be faithfully
implemented.

If the war against terrorism is to be brought to a
successful conclusion, it is vital to ensure that it is in
no way misappropriated by interested parties who want
to suppress the fundamental right of peoples under
colonial and alien occupation or domination to struggle
for their right to self-determination and freedom. As
the President of Pakistan also stated in the General
Assembly,

"acts of terrorism by individuals or groups cannot
be the justification to outlaw the just struggle of a
people for self-determination and liberation from
colonial or foreign occupation, nor can it justify
State terrorism."

There is another, less recognized threat to the
successful conclusion of the anti-terrorist campaign -
the danger of unwittingly provoking a clash of
religions and cultures. Obviously, some quarters have a
vested interest in utilizing the war against terrorism as
a vehicle to spread hatred against Islam and Muslims.
Some of these people live close to us. But let us
remember: terrorism has a history; but it has no
religion or creed. In his address to the General
Assembly, President Musharraf also said:

"In a globalized world, religious and cultural
diversity should be a vehicle for complementary
creativity and dynamism, not the rationale for a
new ideological or political confrontation."

The veil of mutual suspicion and ignorance
between the West and Islam, which has become so
visible over the last year, can be lifted only through an
open, honest and sustained dialogue. The President of
Pakistan has proposed that, as a first step, the General
Assembly should adopt a declaration on religious and
cultural understanding, harmony and cooperation.

The attempt to equate Islam and Muslims with
terrorism is exacerbating discrimination against
Muslim minorities and peoples in various parts of the
world. Unless this trend is reversed, it could result in
another age-old manifestation of terrorism: organized
pogroms against minorities and suppressed peoples,
such as the one the world witnessed against the
Muslims of Gujarat earlier this year.

Even as we take practical and legal measures to
combat the phenomenon of terrorism, the international
community must initiate comprehensive and effective
steps to address the root causes of terrorism. Terrorism
often arises from political and economic injustice; from
foreign occupation and the repression of peoples; from
festering disputes and conflict among nations; and from
economic deprivation and poverty, which provides a
fertile field in which fanaticism flourishes. The efforts
of the Security Council to eliminate terrorist threats
must therefore embrace the endeavour to address these
root causes of terrorism, in particular through the
promotion of just and peaceful solutions to conflicts
and disputes and of prosperity for all peoples.

