Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
wish you every success.

I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2019/682) on the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL); Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing on the latest developments in my country;
and Mr. Schulz, Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
for his briefing on the work of the Committee.

Today's date of 4 September marks five full months
since the beginning ofthe aggression against the capital
of my country, in which one-third of the population of
Libya lives. That aggression has resulted in the deaths
of hundreds of Libyans, including civilians. That
indiscriminate attack has also led to the displacement
of tens of thousands of citizens and the destruction of
the capital's infrastructure, including the sole airport
used by all citizens from every part of Libya.

The war continues unabated. Unfortunately,
regional and international interests have taken
precedence over the interests of the Libyan people, who
yearn for a democratic and civilian State in which the
rule oflaw reigns. My delegation would like to express
its sincere appreciation for all the efforts of the United
Nations, the African Union and the European Union
to reach a solution and end that aggression. We also
reiterate that such efforts will fail without a unified
international initiative that engages all international
stakeholders involved in the Libyan issue. Any result or
outcome of such an initiative should be binding on all.
Anyone hesitating or obstructing such an agreement
must be held to account by the international community,
especially the Security Council, as such actions risk
destabilizing Libya and the unity of its institutions.

My delegation commends the latest report of the
Secretary-General, especially its positive reception
of the political initiative of the President of the
Presidency Council to end the current crisis. In that
regard, we welcome Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Salame's call for the convening
of an international conference on Libya in which all
international stakeholders having an interest in Libya
would participate.

We believe, however, that it is imperative to hold
a Libyan national meeting before such an international
conference, as had been planned prior to the attack on
the capital. That would enable us to develop a national
position that would represent the will of the Libyan
people and be supported later by the international
community, rather than vice versa. One of its goals
would be to reach a unified position to end the negative
interference of some countries. It would also send a
clear message to all parties with regard to the need to
reach an agreement that should speedily establish the
constitutional and legal steps required for the holding
of parliamentary and presidential elections within
specific time frames so as to end the present chaotic
state of affairs of the Libyan people. It would also end
their suffering caused by violations their basic rights,
owing to unjustified disagreements and wars.

The report of the Secretary-General touches upon
the reasons undermining the peaceful process aimed
at achieving the goal of holding a comprehensive
national conference. The Secretary-General attributes
the failure to hold the conference mainly to the war
launched against Tripoli on 4 April. My Government has
therefore called on the Security Council to act swiftly
to counter the blatant aggression and end the attack.
It should also hold the perpetrators accountable and
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
all of which have always called for a peaceful solution
as the only alternative to end this crisis.

Unfortunately, we have witnessed procrastination
within the Council. We could have saved the lives of
hundreds of young Libyans and migrants who have lost
their lives to indiscriminate shelling had the Council
assumed its responsibilities and implemented its
resolutions on Libya. Nevertheless, as a State Member
of the United Nations, my country remains hopeful
that the Council will speedily adopt urgently needed
measures to end the insidious aggression so that the
country can resume the political process and advance
along the path of peace, which is the only satisfactory
alternative for all Libyans, who continue to entertain
high hopes to that end.

The severe conditions resulting from war in
my country provide fertile ground for terrorist
organizations that do not differentiate between Libyans
in the eastern or the western part of the country. The
activities and actions of those organizations threaten
peace and security in Libya and throughout the entire
world, My Government condemns in the strongest
terms the latest terrorist attacks in Libya. The security
apparatus in the west of the country is working to
dismantle the organizations that are using the current
war circumstances to commit despicable crimes against
State institutions and civilians.

In this vein, we remind the Council that the war
on terrorism and its organizations is an international
struggle in which the Government of National Accord
and its allies are participating. Our anti-terrorism forces
are still combating terrorism in various hotspots all over
the country, in direct cooperation and coordination with
the United States of America. We call on the Council to
assist my country to eradicate the conditions that enable
terrorists to achieve their objectives and spread even
further, especially given the security vacuum created
by the latest attacks.

Turning to the reference in the Secretary-General's
latest report to the need to hold perpetrators accountable
for their crimes under international humanitarian law,
my country's delegation appeals once again to the
Council to form a fact-finding team to investigate the
crimes committed against civilians and health facilities,
as well as migrant detention centres. One of the team's
tasks would also be to determine who is responsible for
acts such as the indiscriminate shelling ofthe Al-Intisar
and Abu Salim neighbourhoods early in the war and the
detention centre for illegal migrants in Tajura on 2 July,
as well as the attack on the civilian field hospitals.
The latest such violation was the shelling of the Mitiga
civilian airport two days ago, which injured a number of
workers and traveling pilgrims and damaged a number
of civilian aircrafts. Those gross violations must be
investigated immediately. We therefore reiterate our
call on the International Criminal Court to expedite
its procedures and prosecute the perpetrators of those
attacks as war criminals.

My delegation would like to echo the call of the
Secretary-General, in his latest report, for States to
revisit policies that support the return of migrants to
Libyan shores. We would also like to stress the need
for international coordination in that regard, as the
responsibility to care for those migrants should not be
shouldered exclusively by Libya, as a transit country,
but rather by the international community, including the
countries oforigin and destination. Necessary assistance
should also be provided to those migrants so that they can
be repatriated and reunified with their families through
the adoption of an international mechanism to monitor
the implementation and financing of this operation. We
agree with the Secretary-General's assessment in his
report that Libya is not a safe refuge for migrants in the
light of the prevailing security problems due to political
disagreements and the war against the capital over the
past five months.

My delegation stresses that, just as it is the duty
of any country to maintain the safety and stability of
its people, it is the national duty of the internationally
recognized Government of National Accord to combat
the aggression against Tripoli. We reiterate our position
that an aggressor cannot be a partner in a democratic
civil State. Past experience shows that aggressors have
rejected State institutions and categorically rejected
the placing of the military under the control of a
civil authority. My Government reiterates its position
rejecting the call for a ceasefire based on the status
quo, which would put the aggressor on an equal footing
with the victims of the aggression. We totally reject
that scenario.

My Government also stresses that it will spare no
effort to counter the aggression to the best of its ability
until it defeats the aggressor. We will start a new phase
unlike previous phases that the country has seen since
2011. We will all work together as Libyans to build a
strong State free of armed groups or authoritarianism.

In conclusion, we would like to thank Ms. Marwa
Mohamed for her briefing and commend her for
informing the Council ofthe violations to which Libyan
women are subject, including abduction and killings.
In that connection, we stress that in the current
political circumstances, such violations, sadly, affect
everyone - men and women. In order to address this
issue in particular and protect human rights in general,
we need the support of the international community for
the efforts of the Government of National Accord until
we reach a political solution leading to the formation of
a strong Government that has control over all Libyan
territory and can address all such violations and hold
their perpetrators accountable.

Since Ms. Mohamed is Libyan and defends human
rights, especially those of women in Libya, she ought
to have delivered her statement in Arabic so that all
Libyans - men and women - would have been able to
directly follow her words.

