Mr. Leon Gonzalez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. In our national capacity, we would like to
make a few comments about the important topic that we
are considering today.

The Middle East has occupied the attention of
the international community, in particular due to the
events that have taken place in that region recently.
Nonetheless, we cannot forget that the region has been
marked by instability and insecurity, driven primarily
by what we consider to be the main political problem
in the Middle East - the systematic aggression of
Israel, the occupying Power, against Palestine. The
illegal Israeli occupation of Palestinian and other Arab
territories remains the main obstacle to peace and
the achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive
solution in the region of the Middle East.

The Security Council must play its due role in
maintaing international peace and security and adopt
practical, specific measures to compel Israel to end to
its abuse against the Palestinian people. Israel's conduct
deliberately violates United Nations resolutions,
threatens regional and international peace and security,
and violates the human rights of an entire people. There
will be no peace in the Middle East as long as that
aggression continues and the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people are no taken into account.

The General Assembly took an historic decision
when its member States, in a majority decision
(resolution 67/ 19), granted Palestine observer status in
the United Nations. Cuba supported that decision in
line with its historic position of support for the cause
of the Palestinian people in defence of their rights. The
Cuban delegation reiterates its support for the admission
of Palestine as a full-fledged State Member of the
United Nations. The Security Council must consider
and approve without further delay the request for its
recognition as a State Member of the United Nations,
presented by Palestine in 2011.

We are encouraged by the news of the resumption
of negotiations between Israel and Palestine, but we
must continue to support the Palestinian people in
their legitimate and just struggle for self-determination
and the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Cuba demands
that Israel comply with international law and end its
occupation of all Arab territories, and reiterates its
position in favour of a just and lasting peace for all of
the peoples in the Middle East.

The Palestinian people's suffering has worsened
under the growing number of Israeli settlements, the
difficult and agonizing reality of Palestinian prisoners,
and the deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
the besieged Gaza Strip. The living conditions of its
inhabitants have further declined under the ongoing
unjust blockade of that area. Only the end of the
settlement policy, the release of Palestinian prisoners
and the lifting of the blockade on the Gaza Strip will
make it possible to implement a significant political
process that would bring peace to the region. Cuba will
continue to support the Palestinian people in their just
struggle for self-determination.

Cuba pays particular attention to the situation
in Syria and its international repercussions. Cuba
condemns any use of chemical weapons and other
weapons ofmass destruction, and is firmly committed to
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction, and to strict compliance
with its provisions. Cuba supports the establishment
of a a zone free of nuclear and other weapons of mass
destruction, including chemical weapons, in the Middle
East.

In that context, we welcome the decision of the
Syrian Arab Republic to join the Chemical Weapons
Convention and its willingness to implement it
immediately on a provisional basis, including before
the entry into force of the Convention for that country.
Likewise, we welcome the agreements achieved on the
destruction of Syria's arsenal of chemical weapons. We
also support efforts to achieve a political solution to
the conflict that respects the sovereignty, independence
and integrity of Syria and the self-determination of its
people.

We flatly reject military intervention as a solution
to the very serious conflict, and we are opposed to the
use of force against Syria. We share the concern over
the loss of innocent lives in Syria and in any part of
the world. We also condemn all acts of violence in that
country against civilians and innocents. We reject the
resort to the supposed protection of human lives as a
pretext for foreign intervention, be it direct or through
the support of illegal armed groups, including the use
of mercenaries that only sow destruction and escalate
the number of deaths.

The Security Council's obligation is to foster
peace, not violence. It is to avoid destabilization
and not to contribute to the financing, arming and
training of those who aim to destabilize. It is to protect
innocent people and not to use or manipulate them for
geopolitical purposes. That is also the responsibility of
the Organization as a whole. Cuba is opposed to the
calls of those who promote regime change in Syria
and opt for the use of force and violence, instead of
contributing to dialogue and to negotiation between all
the parties. We also reject the complicity of the mass
media, which are accustomed to distorting reality
and are not accountable for the consequences of their
actions.

We reiterate our call to preserve the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria and the
right to the self-determination of its people, without
foreign intervention or interference of any kind, and we
urge the promotion of a political solution to the conflict
through diplomatic means without any more bloodshed.

