Let me begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his briefing. Taking note of the report of the Secretary- General (S/2020/308) on the progress in implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), I would like to emphasize the following points. We commend UNISFA's leadership and personnel for their efforts aimed at preserving peace and stability in Abyei. I take this opportunity to once again assure the Security Council of my Government's support for the mission so that it may carry out its mandate and functions in an effective and efficient manner. The Sudan reaffirms its commitment to all agreements signed with the Republic of South Sudan and their terms of reference, foremost of which is the agreement between the Government of Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement on temporary arrangements for the administration and security of the Abyei Area, which was signed on 20 June 2011, and the cooperation agreement between the Sudan and South Sudan of 27 September 2012. It is to be noted that the 20 June 2011 agreement remains the principal basis for negotiations on the final status of Abyei. Following a meeting last January between the President of South Sudan and the Deputy Chairman of the Sovereign Council of the Sudan, the two countries agreed to establish a joint mechanism to protect civilians in Abyei. A couple of weeks later, the Joint Political and Security Mechanism, which comprises high-level representatives from the two countries, met in Juba and was briefed by the Force Commander of UNISFA. The Joint Mechanism agreed on a set of arrangements designed to avoid any relapse or escalation between the communities. The Mechanism also agreed to refer the following issues to the leadership of the two countries: the increase in the number of joint police forces, the appointment of a civilian deputy head of mission, and the use and operation of the Athony airstrip. The Joint Mechanism was supposed to have held a follow-up meeting in Khartoum on 13 April 2020, but it was postponed owing to the outbreak of coronavirus disease. In conclusion, the new political order in the Sudan offers a major positive paradigm shift in the relations between our country and the brotherly South Sudan. Building on that paradigm shift and on the constructive outcome of the meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism, these two neighbouring countries will be able to prevent escalations of tensions or violence, resolve any communal clashes and achieve a lasting and amicable solution to the final status issue of Abyei in accordance with the agreed terms.
