Let me start by thanking Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing and commend the devoted efforts of humanitarian workers in Syria. As one of the largest humanitarian organizations worldwide, the Turkish Red Crescent Society has been among the first to respond to the emerging needs of Syrian people. This week, terrorists targeted a Turkish Red Crescent convoy in Al-Bab, killing one and injuring another. We strongly condemn that heinous terrorist attack, which is a blatant violation of international humanitarian law and constitutes a crime, according to the Geneva Conventions. We will hold the perpetrators accountable. Syria is one of the most dangerous places on Earth, not only for Syrian civilians but also for all humanitarian aid workers. Last week, the Council discussed the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on peace and security (see S/2020/897). A serious outbreak could happen at any time in Syria. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs indicates that during the past two months, the pandemic across Syria has rapidly evolved. Given the limited testing in the country, it is likely that the majority of the cases are undetected and that the actual number of cases may far exceed official figures. Syria is a country with a highly vulnerable population and a devastated health system. There is also a shortage of personal protective equipment. Under the pressure of a regime that kills its own people, it is not surprising that these front-line workers are being exposed to the pandemic without any means of protection. The high number of confirmed cases among doctors and nurses indicates the gravity of the situation. In the north-west, COVID-19 continues to have a multiplier effect vis- a-vis the already dire humanitarian situation. Together with the United Nations, we strive to channel medical aid via the cross-border mechanism to the more than 4 million people living in the area. Since the adoption of the resolution 2533 (2020), we have ensured the safe passage of 718 trucks full of humanitarian assistance through the Bab Al-Hawa border gate. Around 3 million people in the north-west are highly vulnerable and rely on humanitarian assistance to meet their basic needs, such as shelter, food and water. The failure of the Security Council to re-authorize the Bab Al-Salam crossing point in July continues to create various challenges and has put millions of lives at risk. Itis obvious that the limited cross-border delivery will have grave repercussions on the health situation, which is already deteriorating at a large scale. We call on the Security Council to uphold its responsibility and immediately consider re-authorizing the Bab Al-Salam gate for cross-border humanitarian operations. As to the disruption challenges regarding the Allouk water station in the north- east, we continue our efforts, in cooperation with the United Nations and relevant countries, to find a durable solution. Let me repeat once again that the sustainability of the water system and the provision of water to Al-Hasakah at full capacity depends on the uninterrupted supply of electrical power to the station. The Kurdish Workers Party/Kurdish People's Protection Units has regularly and deliberately disrupted electricity to the water station for almost a year. As of today, electric supply to the region corresponds only to 29 per cent of the actual needs. Those with influence on the disrupters should take necessary actions. The Al-Assad regime started 2020 with an indiscriminate military campaign that targeted densely populated areas in Idlib, such as homes, hospitals and schools. We saw the worst humanitarian disaster that Syria has seen in nine years of conflict. Now the regime is trying, at each and every single meeting of the Security Council, to divert attention from the enormous destruction, suffering and displacement it has inflicted on its own people. We should not forget about the innocent victims who are still waiting for justice to be served. We should not forget about the brave Syrian people who risked their lives in not surrendering to Al-Assad. Last week, after months, the Council was finally able to meet in an open format to shed light on the appalling crimes committed by the regime with chemical weapons (see S/2020/902). We should not forget the devastating humanitarian consequences of the use of chemical weapons and how the courageous Syrian doctors saved countless lives in underground hospitals. Let us also not forget the millions of Syrians who escaped the mass murderer in Damascus by taking refuge in neighbouring countries. My country is hosting one fifth of the pre-war population of Syria and is strictly implementing the principle of non-refoulement. We continue to mobilize all our resources for the well-being of these people. It is with deep regret that we are witnessing the use of the COVID-19 pandemic in our neighbourhood as a pretext for abandoning or pushing back hundreds of migrants at sea. We continue to conduct rescue operations in order to save these people from death. Let me remind Council members that, under these precarious circumstances, the situation of refugees and migrants requires our close attention more than ever. We all have to abide by our international obligations. Turkey will continue to stand by the Syrian people and seek accountability for the blatant violations of international law and international humanitarian law by the Syrian regime. As to the statement of the previous speaker, he does not represent the Syrian people and does not deserve a reply from me.
