Mr. De Gucht (Belgium) (spoke in French): The
position of Belgium and the European Union is a long-
standing one. Settlement activities, including in East
Jerusalem, are illegal under international law and
threaten the viability of the peace process.

Belgium believes it important that the Security
Council assume its responsibility with regard to all
items on its agenda. That is why we supported the
principle of holding a meeting. However, it would be
counterproductive to restrict discussion to a single
issue. As the agenda item for this morning's meeting
indicates - "The situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question" - the Council
must address all aspects of this issue and the role of all
parties, including Hamas and its allies, in order to
contribute usefully to the peace process.

The bilateral negotiations jointly launched by the
Israelis and the Palestinians in Annapolis with the
support of the international community and regional
actors are at the heart of the peace process today. Those
are the first in-depth negotiations in eight years. They
must lead to a peace agreement in order to establish in
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip an independent and
viable Palestinian State. Such a State should also be
able to guarantee coexistence in peace and mutual
security to Israel and its citizens.

Those negotiations alone are not enough to
provide the Israeli and Palestinian peoples the peace
dividends they have awaited for more than 60 years. As
the European Union and its Quartet partners have
reiterated, as part of that dialogue, the parties must also
demonstrate tangible progress and send clear political
signals. At stake is the credibility of the process and
those involved in it.

It is for that reason that the European Union and
the Quartet call for adherence to the Road Map. The
Palestinians must expedite the establishment of
security structures worthy of a State governed by the
rule of law. Those institutions must enjoy the
confidence of Palestinian citizens, as well as that of
their future Israeli neighbours in the face of terrorist
threats. The Israelis must put in place an immediate
freeze on settlement activity and dismantle the outposts
established since March 2001. By affecting in advance
the outcome of negotiations, those activities pose a
constant threat to mutual confidence between the
parties.

That is also the reason for the active participation
of Belgium and its European partners in the success of
conferences and international meetings held in Paris,
London, Berlin and, this week, in New York. At all
those meetings, the European Union, together with its
international partners, reaffirmed its support for the
necessary economic, political and security reform
efforts of the Palestinian Authority, which needs to be
maintained by all the international e but also
regional - actors.

Recent economic and security progress in the
West Bank, especially in Jenin and Nablus, have
illustrated the advantage of Prime Minister Fayyad's
involvement in carrying out crucial reform as well as
the positive impact of enhanced cooperation with
Israeli authorities. I encourage all actors to intensify
their efforts in that regard. The Israelis should speed up
the lifting of restrictions on movement in the West
Bank. The Palestinians should continue to take control
of their destiny in order to provide the future
Palestinian State the economic and security
foundations that are crucial to its establishment.

In the context of a future Palestinian State, we
cannot forget the fate of the 1.5 million Palestinians in
the Gaza Strip. I would like to welcome the overall
observance of the truce and the effect it has had on the
people concerned in Gaza and southern Israel.
However, the truce cannot be end in itself, but should
constitute a step towards normalization in the Gaza
Strip - and not just in terms of security but also in
humanitarian, economic and political terms. It should
also lead at last to the release of Corporal Shalit.

With a view to such normalization, I unreservedly
condemn the campaign of violence and intimidation
being waged by Hamas to gain absolute control over
the Gaza Strip. The Palestinian Authority continues to
be the sole legitimate institution for all Palestinians,
and the only institution acceptable to the international
community. In that regard, Belgium supports the
mediation of Egypt and the Arab League to achieve the
reunification of all the Palestinian territory under the
authority of President Abbas.

