Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to sincerely thank Sweden for
organizing this debate on the issue of children. The
debate takes place within the context of the principles
and commitments adopted during the international
conference in Paris in February 2007 and will enable us
to pursue international mobilization in order to protect
and prevent children from being illegally recruited and
sent to battle, and will renew our determination to take
action to ensure a better life for children worldwide.

In today's conflicts, children are unfortunately
the primary victims. They are victims when they
are directly affected or separated from their loved
ones; when their education is in jeopardy or they are
recruited into armed forces as combatants; when they
are abducted from schools, on the street or from their
homes; when they are forced into slavery or sexually
exploited. The whole world watches in anger and outrage
as children are abducted in waves as a systematic
tactic of war to terrorize, subject and humiliate entire
communities. Children kidnapped during conflicts are
thrown into violence and horror. Their abduction is
often a precursor to more intense violence used against
them. They are separated from their loved ones, robbed
of their childhood and often treated in the most savage
way. Many are used as combatants, sexual slaves,
spies, traffickers, transporters of ammunition. Some
are drugged before being sent to battle, on suicide
missions or forced to commit atrocities against their
own communities.
While today's debate has mobilized all stakeholders
in the international community, we must recognize
that the efforts made thus far to put an end to violence
against children and prevent their participation or
their use in armed conflicts, are insufficient. The
efforts of the international community would benefit
from a multifaceted and strategic approach that not
only addresses ongoing conflicts but also focuses on
prevention. Moreover, we need a pragmatic approach
that combines both incentives and more restrictive
measures, particularly in terms of accountability and
the fight against impunity.

Like today's debate, calls to action are undoubtedly
useful as key tools to monitor the situation and to share
information and reports. They are essential measures
to prevent and eliminate the recruitment of children
in times of conflict. In that context, many concrete
actions will have to be envisaged in the framework of
our collective action.

First, we must advocate a two-fold preventive
approach aimed initially at preventing conflicts and,
when they do occur, at limiting their effects on children.

Second, we must prevent conflict by strengthening
democracy, good governance, sustainable development
and respect for the rule of law and human rights.

Third, we must take legal, political and institutional
measures to prevent and eliminate violence
against children.

Fourth, Governments should ratify and implement
relevant international treaties and incorporate them into
national legislation. They must endorse the Principles
and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed
Forces or Armed Groups and the Paris Commitments
to protect children from unlawful recruitment or use by
armed forces or armed groups.

Fifth, children's programmes should pay special
attention to those at greatest risk of being recruited into
the armed forces, particularly children separated from
their families or without families.

Sixth, effective age-determination mechanisms
must be put in place to prevent the recruitment of minors.
That requires keeping rigorous birth records - an
essential condition to eliminating the phenomenon of
child soldiers or locating their parents for reunification.

Seventh, we must guarantee access to education for
children as a special protective measure to prevent their
recruitment, especially for children living in refugee
camps or internally displaced children.

Eight, parties to conflicts must reach written
agreements in which they commit to respect a minimum
age for recruitment into armed forces.

Ninth, the fight against impunity plays a key role
in the pursuit of child protection. Parties who recruit
children under the legal age must be prosecuted.
Crimes against children in armed conflicts should be
considered crimes against humanity because children
are the future of their respective nations and the future
of humankind.

Morocco has consistently engaged in international
efforts to end the participation of children in armed
conflicts and has acceded to all international
instruments relating to the rights of the child. It was
among the first countries to sign and ratify the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, as
well as the Paris Commitments.

