At the outset, I would like to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-Secretary- General and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for her briefing on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). I would also like to thank Mr. Fernando Arias, Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), for his presence at today's meeting and for the update he provided. As a committed advocate of multilateralism and international law, Viet Nam fully supports the implementation of the Chemical Weapon Convention (CWC), including the role and work of the OPCW entrusted to it under the Convention. Respecting and fully implementing the Convention is undoubtedly of the utmost importance, as we all aspire to a world free of chemical weapons. I welcome the participation of the Permanent Representatives of Syria, Iran and Turkey in today's meeting. As our briefers mentioned today, there has been continuing engagement between the OPCW and Syria over the past few years. We take note of the eighty- sixth monthly report of the OPCW Director-General (see S/2020/1152, annex) and of the efforts to continue the work of the OPCW Technical Secretariat in Syria despite the logistical challenges caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic. The clarification of outstanding issues remains crucial to putting an end to this long-standing matter. After an undesirable period in which little progress was made, we welcome the fact that three outstanding issues related to Syria's initial declaration were closed following the twenty-third round of consultations between the Declaration Assessment Team and the Syrian National Authority. It is our hope that the two sides will be able to settle the remaining 19 issues in a constructive spirit. We call on the relevant parties to step up their efforts and enhance dialogue and cooperation in a constructive and non-politicized manner. That is the only viable way to address all of the remaining gaps and work for the full implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). Regarding the alleged uses of chemical weapons in Syria, we share the international community's concern about the reports on those incidents. Our delegation strongly believes that investigations into any possible use of chemical weapons should focus on the goal of establishing irrefutable facts and evidence. To achieve that, investigations must be carried out in a comprehensive, conclusive, objective and impartial manner, based on verified information and without any politicization. In seeking a solution to this issue, we note with regret that there is a profound divergence among various parties. Viet Nam would therefore like to stress the vital importance of unity on this topic, both among States parties to the CWC and among the members of the Security Council. We share the same goal of ridding the world of chemical weapons everywhere. We must work together. Viet Nam will continue to actively participate in the work of the Conference of the States Parties to the CWC and to closely follow the discussions of the OPCW Executive Council, including on this subject. In conclusion, I would like to stress Viet Nam's consistent policy of supporting the complete disarmament and non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including chemical weapons. We categorically condemn the use of chemical weapons in any form, by anyone, anywhere, under any circumstances and for any reason. It is a flagrant violation of international law and has disastrous effects on civilians and their living environment. We reiterate our view that the only path to ending the current crisis in Syria is through a comprehensive political settlement, in full accordance with the principles of international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
