The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

First of all, we would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Alexander Zouev, Ambassador
Irina Schoulgin Nyoni, and Mr. Chid Liberty for their
valuable briefings.

After 14 years of civil war, today Liberia stands as
an example of peacebuilding. Peru salutes the people
and the authorities of that country for such an important
achievement. We also emphasize the importance of the
backing and support of the international community,
the Peacebuilding Commission and such regional and
subregional organizations as the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States. Liberia
is also an example of how a United Nations mission
can support a country's efforts to achieve sustainable
peace. In welcoming the successful closure of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) after
15 years on the ground, we would like to highlight
the work carried out by all of its personnel under the
leadership of Mr. Farid Zarfif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Liberia.

Peru expresses its satisfaction at having been able
to contribute to the consolidation of peace in Liberia.
Since UNMIL's inception and for 10 years, we have had
military personnel deployed in the field, supporting the
Liberian efforts. In order to meet the challenges that
the construction of sustainable peace presents in this
new phase of the Liberian process, we would like to
underline the importance of continuing to advance in
the following three areas.

The first is national reconciliation. We consider
it important to accelerate the implementation of the
peacebuilding plan. We encourage the authorities to
adopt a legal framework that promotes reconciliation
and inclusion. We emphasize that the participation of
women and youth is key to building sustainable peace.

The second area is human rights. We are concerned
by persistent human rights violations, mainly against
women and children. We therefore welcome the
establishment in Liberia of an Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, which
we are confident will help to reverse that situation.

The third area is institutional reform. We consider
it important to continue working on the construction
of democratic institutions, increase social cohesion,
guarantee access to justice, strengthen respect for
human rights, expand the presence of the State
throughout the territory and promote the development
of the country. In that regard, we welcome the pro-poor
agenda that the current Government of Liberia has
designed within the framework of the peacebuilding
plan and the Sustainable Development Goals of the
2030 Agenda. We also welcome the programmes
for Liberian youth promoted by the United Nations
Development Programme.

In conclusion, we would like to recall that Liberia
is the first African country in which a woman was
elected president. We encourage that the example of
Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf be followed in the region
and in the world, and that women assume leading roles
in the public life of their countries and communities.
We also want to welcome the commitment expressed
by the Government of President George Weah to
continue working in favour of peace and development
in his country, with a special emphasis on the fight
against poverty.

We are convinced that the United Nations country
team, together with regional organizations and other
international partners, will continue to support Liberia's
efforts to strengthen its democratic institutional
framework and promote national reconciliation,
sustainable development and human rights.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Liberia.

