Mr. Al-Shafi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate and for giving us the opportunity to
participate in the consideration of an issue arising from
the primary purpose of the United Nations Charter. I
also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
John Holmes for the importance that they attach to the
issue.

Many colleagues have mentioned that the
Security Council has reached a milestone this year in
the process of addressing the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, namely, the tenth
anniversary of the Council's first consideration of this
topic through the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999).
This milestone may be an opportunity to
comprehensively review the efforts to strengthen the
protection of civilians. Those efforts include the
establishment of the Security Council Expert Group on
the Protection of Civilians and the development of
plans to address all forms of violence, including
murder, mutilation and sexual violence, and to include
protection activities in the mandates of peacekeeping
missions.

However, the substance of those Security Council
resolutions and presidential statements has not been
implemented as envisaged and desired. The main
problem is the ongoing reluctance of many parties to
armed conflict to fully comply with their legal
obligations to protect civilians. One reason is the
culture of impunity, which we must address through
zero tolerance as one of the main factors influencing
the policies of warring parties towards civilians.
A fundamental challenge to promoting the
protection of civilians is foreign occupation. One
cannot talk about the protection of civilians under
foreign military occupation without addressing the root

causes of their suffering and lack of security. Another
challenge that must be addressed is the exposure of
towns and villages in which military operations take
place to the effects of such operations. Yet another
challenge is that of civilians and international relief
workers being killed or abducted by rebel elements in
many conflicts.

Thus, enhancing the protection of civilians is not
solely a humanitarian mission, but one that requires
efforts in several areas. First and foremost, the
necessary laws must be enacted to protect civilians in
armed conflict without discrimination and selectivity,
in accordance with international law, in particular
international humanitarian and international human
rights law.

Our region has witnessed and continues to
witness a number of conflicts in which civilian lives
are put at risk. The most significant of those is the
Palestinian issue, which has threatened the security and
safety of civilians for six decades. Despite
developments on the political track of the peace
process to resolve the crisis, civilians are increasingly
vulnerable as a result of the growing disregard by the
Israeli authorities for the protection of the Palestinian
population living under its military occupation.

That disregard has risen to the level at which
civilians were directly targeted during the military
aggression against the Gaza Strip last year and early
this year. The report of the United Nations Fact-
Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/64/490, annex), mandated by the Human Rights Council,
details serious and clear violations of international
humanitarian and international human rights law,
specifically the Geneva Conventions and in particular
the Fourth Geneva Convention, which includes
provisions on the protection of civilians under foreign
occupation.

What concerns us here is that those acts clearly
violate Security Council resolutions and presidential
statements on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The report underscores that the Government
of Israel admitted to deliberately destroying Hamas
infrastructure, which in fact belongs to the 1.5 million
Gaza residents who are already suffering under the
protracted siege that has precipitated the worst and
harshest humanitarian situation. The welfare of
civilians in Gaza continues to be directly affected as a
result of the obstruction of humanitarian access to the
Strip and of basic commodities and construction
materials to rebuild the infrastructure destroyed in the
attack.

The obstruction of humanitarian operations by the
occupying Power has hampered education in the Gaza
Strip. We call on the Security Council to duly prioritize
the issue of the right to education in areas affected by
armed conflict and foreign occupation and to include
that topic in future Council deliberations. We appeal to
the Council to pay due attention to the
recommendations of the Fact-Finding Mission and the
report of the Board of Inquiry established by the
Secretary-General to investigate the targeting of United
Nations premises in Gaza by the Israeli army
(S/2009/250). The targeting of civilians by a regular
army equipped with the most sophisticated precision
weapons in the world, in full view of the Security
Council and without any response from it, undermines
the basis of the Council's credibility in addressing the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The State of Qatar attaches great importance to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict and
condemns all targeting of civilians in conflicts and
under foreign occupation and their exposure to death
and injury. It also condemns terrorist acts and reprisals
against civilians and civilian targets, including
hospitals and schools. During the attack on the Gaza
Strip, Qatar was one of the first nations to call for the
cessation of those practices and their investigation. It
was also one of the first countries to strive to mobilize
financial support to assist the civilian population
affected by the hostilities.

We reiterate our call on the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibilities and obligations to protect
civilians in armed conflict, including foreign
occupation, and to demand respect for its resolutions
and the instruments of international law that provide
the legal basis for the protection of civilians. We must
always keep in mind that respect for international law
is the true basis for a world of peace and stability.

