Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
for his briefing to the Council, the second on the
situation in the Middle East in just over a week.

As we have heard, the Israelis and the
Palestinians continue to hold high-level bilateral
negotiations. Mr. Olmert and President Abbas met
again as recently as 27 January. We see those regular
contacts as a demonstration of the political
determination of the two leaders. That is invaluable,
especially when events on the ground threaten to derail
the peace process. We commend both men for their
political leadership and encourage them and their
Governments to continue.

We in the international community have a
responsibility to do whatever we can to support the
Israeli-Palestinian process, a process that has the
agreed goal of a viable Palestinian State living side by
side with Israel, with both countries enjoying peace
and security. I am not sure whether debates such as
this, which generate more heat than light, are a useful
contribution to that process. But for our part, the
British Government will continue to offer political and
practical support to both the Israelis and Palestinians
involved. One example of that is the United Kingdom's
co-sponsorship of the private investors' conference to
be held later this year in Bethlehem, as part of our
commitment to work with others to help develop a
Palestinian economy supported by the private sector.

We cannot be sanguine. Annapolis launched the
peace process, and now we must make continuous,
steady progress to our goal. It is not evident that the
parties are yet achieving that.

The situation in Gaza continues to be of serious
concern to my delegation. The Security Council held
extensive discussions on that over the past week,
during which I made clear the United Kingdom's
concern and my Government's position. We condemn
the near daily rocket attacks out of Gaza, targeted at
Israeli civilians, and we recognize that Israel has a
right to self-defence against such attacks. But the
closing of all crossings and restriction of the supply of
fuel, food and other goods in order to create suffering
among the civilian population is not the right response.
We welcome the decision of the Israeli Government to
resume fuel and food supplies to Gaza, and the
Palestinians must address Israel's security concerns
and put an end to the launching of rocket and mortar
attacks from Gaza against Israel.
I would like to express my Government's concern
over the situation at Rafah and our support for the
Egyptian Government's response. We welcome Prime
Minister Fayyad's proposal that the Palestinian
Authority take control of the Palestinian side of the
Gaza crossings. I encourage all concerned to work, as a
matter of urgency, for the normal operation of the
crossings. We in the European Union have made clear
that we stand ready to play our part at Rafah once
conditions allow.

On Lebanon, I would like to recall the press
statement that you, Sir, issued yesterday on behalf of
members of the Council. The United Kingdom is
alarmed by the deteriorating security situation in
Lebanon. We have witnessed the roadside bombs that
killed Brigadier General Francois al-Hajj and Captain
Wissam Eid. We witnessed the roadside attacks against
cars belonging to the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the United States embassy, and
the Katyusha rockets that were fired from southern
Lebanon into northern Israel. We condemn all such
terrorist attacks. We were also disturbed by the civil
unrest on 27 January, in which a number of
demonstrators were killed.

It remains essential that political divisions be
reconciled and that the election of a president be
allowed to proceed without outside interference. We
welcome the recent efforts of the League of Arab States
and we look to all those with influence to use it
responsibly and for the common good of all Lebanese.

The United Nations has an important role to play
in achieving the just, comprehensive and lasting peace
in the Middle East that we all seek - first, as a
member of the Quartet; secondly, through UNIFIL and
other United Nations operations; thirdly, as a provider
of humanitarian aid through the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East; and fourthly, as a facilitator of progress. The
United Nations voice should be heard, and the Security
Council should play its part. To do that, we must
ensure that our discussion adds value and is seen to
support progress towards our common goal: a
comprehensive peace in the region.

