Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I am honoured to
address the Security Council on behalf of the member
States ofthe Organization ofIslamic Cooperation (OIC),
for which the Palestinian question has been and remains
an issue of foremost concern. It demands priority
collective action, including by the Security Council,
in accordance with international law, the Charter and
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, and the
fundamental principles of justice and humankind.

This open debate is being held at a critical juncture
for the Palestinian cause, which is experiencing
unprecedented and existential challenges, particularly
owing to the absence of any serious political and legal
actions by this body to enforce its standing resolutions
aimed at ending Israel's illegal, decades-long foreign
occupation and its violations of the human rights
of the Palestinian people. The absence of serious
accountability and action has deepened the political
impasse, exacerbated the humanitarian suffering of the
Palestinian people, and created an unsustainable and
highly volatile situation.

The OIC cautions that the current political
stalemate is neither acceptable nor viable. We believe
that the Security Council should not remain an
observer while this already fragile situation continues
to deteriorate and further destabilize as Israel persists
with its unlawful and destructive occupation policies,
which are undermining the contiguity and viability of
the State of Palestine and jeopardizing the prospects
for realizing the two-State solution based on the pre-
1967 borders, let alone the fact that Israel's policies
and measures constitute flagrant violations of United
Nations resolutions and Palestinians' legitimate rights
and in many cases amount to war crimes.

The Palestinian question remains a litmus test
for our collective resolve to help restore confidence
in international law, the international system and the
potential to realize peace and justice. The multilateral
engagement of the international community, as per the
relevant resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
is needed now more than ever to salvage the two-State
solution and revive the deadlocked peace process, with
a View to achieving a comprehensive solution based on
the internationally agreed parameters, including United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab
Peace Initiative.

The OIC has repeatedly drawn the international
community's attention to Israel's colonial policies in
occupied East Jerusalem, which continue to illegally
alter the character, status and demographic composition
of the city and isolate it from its natural Palestinian
environs. By the same token, the frequent assaults at
Al-Aqsa Mosque and upon Muslim worshippers by
Israeli police and settlers continue to aggravate tensions,
threatening far-reaching and devastating consequences
that would further undermine peace prospects and risk
making Jerusalem the capital of hatred, fanaticism and
violence instead of the capital of tolerance, coexistence
and peace that it must be.

Meanwhile, atrocities and civilian causalities
tragically continue to mount as a result of an ongoing
brutal Israeli military offensive against the Palestinian
people on the besieged Gaza Strip. Attacks on
peaceful protesters, including children, continue to
be perpetrated before the eyes of the international
community. We reiterate our call on the Council to act
responsibly to address the crisis and demand the lifting
of the illegal Israeli blockade. It is urgent that action be
taken to uphold its obligation to ensure the protection
of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in East Jerusalem and the besieged
Gaza Strip.

It is painful to observe millions of Palestinian
refugees enduring decades of displacement and
injustice as Israel continues its denial oftheir legitimate
rights. Their situation is tragically worsening as the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) experiences
an unprecedented funding crisis that is putting at
risk the Agency's indispensable humanitarian and
development assistance for the refugees, including
its vital education, health, relief and social services
programmes, causing deep anxiety and worry and
threatening further instability.

We assert, in that regard, that support for UNRWA
at this difficult juncture on the part of all international
actors is imperative to conveying a message of hope
and collective political commitment to the rights and
aspirations of Palestine refugees, so as to ensure that
their growing needs are adequately met and their right
to return, consistent with the relevant resolutions, in
particular General Assembly resolution 194 (III), is
preserved and respected.

On behalf of the OIC, I reiterate once again our
collective call on the international community to render
further support for the resilience of the Palestinian
people and to act forthwith on the basis of our clear
political, legal and moral obligations to redress their
plight and enable them to achieve their rights and
legitimate national aspirations, including to self-
determination and the independence of their sovereign
and viable State of Palestine, within the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

