Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing. I also thank Ms. Amina Khoulani and
Dr. Hala for their moving testimony. We can only be
inspired by their courage and dedication.

As we have already stressed many times, and will
not cease from doing, there is no military solution
to the conflict in Syria. A political solution through
dialogue is the only way to achieve a stable and lasting
peace. Such dialogue requires trust among the parties
to the conflict. Creating such trust will therefore
remain impossible in the absence of a horizon ofjustice
and accountability.

In that regard, we continue to fully support the
Special Envoy in his pursuit of undertaking concrete
actions and confidence-building measures for the
benefit of detainees, abductees and disappeared. We
have taken note of the prisoner exchanges in recent
months. The road ahead, however, remains long, as
highlighted by Ms. DiCarlo and many of my colleagues
who spoke before me.

Ms. Khoulani and Dr. Hala just joined their
voices to those of the thousands of Syrians whose
close relatives have been arbitrarily detained in
inhumane circumstances, most of whom by the Syrian
Government. They also echoed the thousands upon
thousands of Syrians who continue to wait for a sign of
life from their loved ones. Human rights, international
humanitarian law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions impose clear obligations, which are being
violated daily. Failure to comply with those obligations
cannot be allowed to continue unanswered.

Justice must be done. We have established tools to
that end. Belgium continues to support the work of the
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 and the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.

Tens of thousands of people have been arbitrarily
and illegally detained. They are detained without
respect for their human rights, due process or access to
a lawyer or their families, in inhumane conditions and
while subjected to torture and sexual and gender-based
violence, to name only a few examples. Women and
children are disproportionately affected, All the parties
to the conflict must ensure respect for the dignity and
physical and psychological integrity of detainees.

We call on all Member States to use their influence
on the parties to the conflict to promote the release
of those arbitrarily and illegally detained. We call
on all parties to exchange information concerning
their detainees. We call for the United Nations to be
provided with free and unconditional access to all
places of detention. Victims and their families have
the right to justice and reparations, which also means
that the Syrian authorities provide them with the
necessary documentation for that purpose, including
duly completed death certificates.

Many families are living in uncertainty with
regard to the fate of their loved ones. The impact
of disappearances on individuals, families and
communities is one of the most devastating and lasting
consequences of armed conflict. We are convinced that
reconciliation and peace efforts will be put in jeopardy
if entire families are left completely in the dark with
regard to the fate of their loved ones, with no prospect
of reparations, while impunity for the disappearances
is allowed to prevail. We recall resolution 2474 (2019),
which was recently adopted by the Council. Families
have a right to information that must be respected by all
parties to the conflict.

In our role as members of the Security Council, the
fate of persons detained, abducted or reported missing
must call us to action. Uncertainty and the search
for answers can last for several generations, thereby
marking the history of entire communities and risking
the creation of new conflicts. Instead of sowing the
seeds of discord, let us plant the seeds for achieving a
just, stable and lasting peace.

