Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We are grateful to
Special Envoy De Mistura for his continued efforts
and commitment to the political resolution of the
Syrian conflict.

We regret the fact that the latest round of
intra-Syrian talks in Geneva did not bring much
progress. A breakthrough did not happen because the
main ingredient for a sustainable solution - trust - is
missing . The lack of trust is poisoning the current
environment and dooms the Syrian people to more
suffering. We are appalled by the reports that the Syrian
regime is now using cremation to hide mass murders at
Sednaya prison, where thousands are believed to have
been executed.

The general idea of de-escalation zones is welcome;
however, the devil is always in the details. Thus far,
we are short of them. Still, we support all efforts that
genuinely seek to de-escalate violence in Syria and
guarantee sustainable humanitarian access. However,
any talk on de-escalation zones is meaningless without
a credible enforcement mechanism. Forgive me for
being frank, but we really do not see how this ceasefire/
de-escalation is any different from the previous
initiatives that ultimately failed. The general idea does
not seem to be new - we witness a short period of
calm followed by another wave of escalation, when
the regime feels prepared for a new major offensive
at a time and location of its choosing. We have yet to
hear what the real tools are to prevent such a scenario
from recurring.

Another problem is the Syrian regime's commitment
to fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS), which is clearly lacking now. In the meantime,
the regime and its allies are using the de-escalation
agreement to shift focus to the east, trying to seize
ground from anti-ISIS rebel forces in Al-Badia. How
else would one interpret the numerous attacks by the
pro-regime forces on multiple fronts against the Free
Syrian Army (FSA), which is waging a relentless
war on ISIS? Here are the words of Tlass Salameh, a
commander of one of the FSA units that is leading the
fight against ISIS:

"The regime is trying to cut us off from our
front line with ISIS because they want to be the
ones to move from the southern desert up towards
eastern Syria and Deir ez-Zor. Imagine that - they
have ISIS behind them and instead they are bombing
us, the ones fighting ISIS there."

If anything, it only proves yet again that the regime
is sticking to its long-standing strategy ofusing military
force to eliminate the Syrian opposition instead of
ISIS. Indeed, the fight against ISIS has always been
secondary to the regime and its allies. Why is that?
Perhaps Damascus wants to leave the international
community with a difficult choice: Al-Assad or ISIS. It
is therefore imperative that the Council make absolutely
sure that the de-escalation zones are not used as yet
another tool of the regime and its allies to regroup
forces and prepare for an assault.

Finally, we remain convinced that unless serious
pressure is applied on Damascus and an accountability
mechanism is established in Syria, we will not see any
progress on the political track.

