Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I would like to thank the
French presidency for organizing this open debate, and
the Secretary-General and the Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba,
for their briefings.
The situation of children continues to be adversely
affected by prevailing security and humanitarian
challenges. We share the concern noted by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2017/821) regarding
the scale and severity of the violations that continue to
be committed against children in situations of conflict.
Unfortunately, the changing and complex nature of
conflicts has multiplied the challenges in that regard.
Daunting acts and Violations, such as the widespread
recruitment and use of children, mass abductions,
torture and sexual Violence, attacks on schools and
hospitals, and the prevention of humanitarian access
have unfortunately become patterns of behaviour in
conflicts. Such acts continue to have an immense and
disproportionate impact on children.

Regrettably, the international community has not
been able to prevent the deaths of, and injuries sustained
by, thousands of children during attacks and air strikes,
which are often conducted indiscriminately on schools,
hospitals, market places and internally-displaced-
persons camps. Moreover, the increasing involvement
of non-State armed groups and terrorist organizations in
violating the basic rights of children is also a source of
concern. Crimes committed by terrorist organizations,
such as Da'esh and Boko Haram, must be underlined in
that regard. Furthermore, other terrorist organizations,
such as the Kurdistan Workers' Party, the Democratic
Union Party and the Kurdish People's Protection Units,
continue to recruit young boys and girls, even those

under the age of 15, to carry out terrorist attacks. Those
children are driven to their deaths by the leaders of
those heinous terrorist organizations.

The international community must display joint
and robust political determination and concerted action
to address the situation of children in conflicts. With
that understanding, Turkey continues to support the
well-being of Children in various emergency, conflict
and post-conflict situations through its comprehensive
humanitarian and development assistance programmes.

Moreover, Turkey has seen the severe impact of
conflicts on children vividly in its region, especially in
the eyes of the millions of displaced children. Let me
share some striking figures in that regard. Turkey hosts
3.3 million displaced people who have fled to Turkey
from the devastation in their countries, including
3.1 million Syrians. We are exerting every effort
to overcome the growing needs of Syrian children,
especially in the fields of education and health care.
There are approximately 835,000 school-age Syrian
children in Turkey, 508,000 of whom are able to attend
school. The schooling ratio has increased twofold, and
reached around 60 per cent in 2017, thanks to a robust
campaign that was launched to bring those children
back to school.

However, that is not enough. The establishment of
new schools and the employment of new teachers are
urgently needed. The education of Syrian children is of
crucial importance, since they will be the ones to rebuild
their country. We once again call on the international
community to act in conformity with the principle of
responsibility and burden-sharing in that regard.

I would like to conclude by underscoring that
Turkey's unwavering support for all regional and
international efforts related to the protection of children
will continue.

