Mr. Khare: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the situation in Darfur.
The Council has before it the Secretary-General's most
recent report (S/2011/244) on the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), as well as a separate report on the Darfur-
based political process, which was requested in the
Council's presidential statement of 9 February
(S/PRST/2OIl/3).

I would like to begin my remarks today with the
latest developments in Darfur, followed by updates on
the negotiations in Doha. I will then highlight some of
the key issues related to the launch of the Darfur-based
political process, including the enabling environment.

Following clashes between forces of the
Government of the Sudan and the armed movements in
January and February, there was a decrease in
hostilities in March. While the situation remains
relatively quiet, there is reason for concern,
particularly in North and South Darfur.
2

On 8 April, the commanders of the Justice and
Equality Movement (JEM), the Sudan Liberation Army
(SLA)-Minni Minawi faction and the SLA-Abdul
Wahid faction issued a joint statement claiming that
they had been attacked by the Sudanese Armed Forces
(SAF) in Muzbat, 63 kilometres north-east of Umm
Baru, in North Darfur.

On 13 April, a UNAMID patrol sent to the area to
verify the reports was stopped at Turba by unidentified
armed men in four vehicles, who prevented the patrol
from proceeding further. The commander identified the
group as belonging to a JEM/SLA-Minni Minawi
coalition that had returned to the area to reclaim it
from the Sudanese Armed Forces. He alleged that
coalition forces were in control of Farawiya, Muzbat
and Gurbura.

On 14 April, a UNAMID verification patrol to
Farawiya was informed by local civilians that no
movement of armed groups had been observed in the
area, but that there had been overflights by the
Sudanese Armed Forces. It is UNAMID's assessment,
on the basis of currently available information, that
these areas around Umm Baru remain under
Government control.

UNAMID has received reports of an SAF
build-up in north-western North Darfur. The
Government has indicated that this is in response to the
current instability in Libya, its concerns over the
proliferation of arms in the area and the likelihood of
rebel movements across the border areas.

On 15 April, UNAMID received information
about a build-up of SAF and SLA-Minni Minawi
forces in the areas of Marla, Sania Afandu, Adob,
Labado and Muhajeria. UNAMID verification patrols
have confirmed the presence of both forces in those
areas. The Mission is continuing to closely monitor
these developments in North and South Darfur.

With regard to the security of UNAMID and
humanitarian personnel, on 5 April a UNAMID patrol
was ambushed by armed elements in Kutum, in North
Darfur. A UNAMID police adviser from Sierra Leone
unfortunately made the ultimate sacrifice. One of the
perpetrators was killed in the ensuing firefight. The
Government subsequently apprehended one suspect,
and the Mission is working with the authorities to
ensure a full investigation, accountability and justice
on this matter.
11-30524

On 11 April, a group of persons suspected of
belonging to the National Intelligence and Security
Service entered the Kalma internally displaced persons
camp and took away a resident, who is also a national
staff member of the non-governmental organization
(NGO) International Medical Corps. In response,
internally displaced youth held hostage another
national staff member of the International Medical
Corps, seven staff members of the national NGO Jebel
Marra and four national staff members of the
international NGO American Refugee Committee. Two
days later, on 13 April, the 12 aid workers were released
unharmed following the timely intervention of
UNAMID and the humanitarian country team.
Humanitarian activities were subsequently restarted
partially by NGO staff present in the Kalma camp. The
location of the resident of the Kalma camp remains
unknown. The National Intelligence and Security
Service in South Darfur denies its involvement in this
incident.

During his visit to Nyala on 18 April, Joint Special
Representative Gambari assured humanitarian workers
that UNAMID would make every effort to facilitate
their earliest possible full return to the camp.

On 20 April, following negotiations undertaken by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
UNAMID and those NGOs responsible for delivering
humanitarian assistance in Kalma camp with the sheikhs
and the youth group responsible for the hostage-taking,
it was agreed that full services would resume. Clinics in
the camp remain open and April food distribution was
completed today.

It has been 98 days since three crew members of
the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service were
abducted in Um Shalaya, West Darfur, on 13 January.
The United Nations continues to work with the
Government to secure their safe release.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report, the
clashes in January and February led to the displacement
of the population in some areas of North and South
Darfur. The numbers contained in the report are
contested by the Government, which feels that they are
inflated. These numbers include primary, secondary and
temporary displacement. A joint working group of
representatives from the Government, the United
Nations and humanitarian partners has been set up to
review the calculation of the new displacements, agree
11-30524
on a common figure and review the response to the most
pressing humanitarian needs of these displaced persons.

With regard to access, as noted in the Secretary-
General's report, between 1 January and 31 March the
Mission conducted 10,619 patrols, of which 18 were
impeded by the Government and one by the SLA-Abdul
Wahid faction. To update that figure, between 1 and
16 April the Mission conducted 2,542 patrols and faced
10 movement restrictions. Nine of these 10 restrictions
were due to SAF and the National Intelligence and
Security Service preventing UNAMID patrols from
reaching Kutum and Tabit in North Darfur; Kalma, Abu
Matariq, Kass, Balil and El Deain in South Darfur; and
Tine in West Darfur, citing either lack of prior
notification or ongoing military activities. On one
occasion, in the case of the patrol to Muzbat mentioned
earlier, armed elements prevented the patrol from
proceeding.

From 1 January to 31 March, the Government
refused 95 of 5,846 flight clearance requests submitted
by the Mission, mainly during and because of ongoing
military operations. This included 14 occasions of denial
of the use of tactical helicopters out of 152 requests
made. The Government granted immediate clearance for
the use of tactical helicopters and other aircraft in the
case of the 5 April attack on the UNAMID convoy in
Kutum, which I mentioned earlier.

In a positive development, and following close
follow-up with national authorities, UNAMID access to
Jebel Marra has increased, with four patrols and
assessment missions and over 500 kilograms of relief
aid reaching the area in March. In recent meetings
between Joint Special Representative Gambari and the
leadership of SLA-Abdul Wahid, it was agreed that the
rebel group would facilitate humanitarian access. The
establishment of a UNAMID team site in Jebel Marra
was also discussed. Multiple missions to Jebel Marra are
scheduled to take place from 27 April to 11 May, during
which UNAMID and United Nations agencies plan to
deliver humanitarian aid, including medical supplies,
and to pursue with the SLA-Abdul Wahid commanders
arrangements to ensure greater humanitarian access and
the establishment of a static UNAMID presence in the
area.

Following a working-level tripartite meeting on
31 March in Khartoum, the Government indicated that it
was in the process of approving 600 of the 1,261
outstanding visa requests. The Government has also
3
indicated its readiness to review the remaining requests.
Since that time, 306 visas have been issued, almost half
of them for military personnel. As of today, 20 April, the
number of pending visas stood at 1,117. UNAMID, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
Department of Field Support continue to work closely
with the Government on this issue.

While there are a number of difficulties and
challenges on the ground, UNAMID and the
Government continue to consult closely on all issues of
concern to peace and stability in the region. In this
regard, the Joint Special Representative has discussed
with the Government its intent to hold the referendum.
The Government has indicated that, should an
agreement be reached through the Doha negotiations,
such an agreement would supersede the Darfur Peace
Agreement, under which it is proceeding with the
holding of the referendum. Joint Special Representative
Gambari will continue to consult closely with the
Government on these issues.

I would now like to provide an update on the
Darfur negotiations taking place in Doha since the
issuance of the Secretary-General's report on UNAMID
and the Darfur political process.

The peace process has entered a crucial phase,
with the three parties who are signatories to the
framework agreements - the Government of the Sudan,
the Justice and Equality Movement and the Liberation
and Justice Movement (LJM) - present and fully
engaged in the negotiations in Doha. On 24 February,
the mediation presented to the three parties six proposed
texts covering, first, wealth-sharing; secondly, power-
sharing; thirdly, the return and compensation of refugees
and internally displaced persons; fourthly, justice and
reconciliation; fifthly, human rights and fundamental
freedoms; and sixthly, security arrangements.

It is the mediation's intent to submit to the parties
by 27 April - a week from now - a draft
comprehensive agreement for their final consideration.
In that regard, on 18 April, the mediation requested the
Government of the Sudan, the Liberation and Justice
Movement and the Justice and Equality Movement to
continue to work together with a view to submitting to it
all final comments on the six chapters of a
comprehensive peace agreement thus far provided to the
parties. A seventh chapter on mechanisms necessary for
the implementation of the agreement will be provided to
the parties in the coming days.
The positions of the LJM. and the Government of
the Sudan on the texts are nearly reconcilable. The
Justice and Equality Movement, however, has made a
number of fundamental comments and suggestions. We
appreciate the full support of the international
community for the mediation, including its interventions
with the parties, to impress on them the need to seize
this opportunity for a comprehensive peace. We call on
the international community to send a clear message to
the JEM. that it must fully engage on the basis of the
draft provided to it and reach a comprehensive
agreement in the time frame established by the
mediation.

With regard to Minni Minawi, it will be recalled
that he has disassociated himself from the Darfur Peace
Agreement and continues to engage in hostilities on the
ground. Abdul Wahid also continues to remain outside
the negotiation process, despite significant attempts to
bring him into it. The full support of the international
community continues to be required to reconcile Minni
Minawi and Abdul Wahid with the negotiation process.

The mediation has indicated that, given the time
necessary to finalize the draft comprehensive agreement
and to organize the logistical requirements of the All
Darfur Stakeholders Conference, the Conference will
now be held from 18 to 23 May. As indicated in the
Secretary-General's report, the Conference will bring
together the Government of the Sudan, the armed
movements, Darfiiri civil society, including internally
displaced persons and refugees, Sudanese political
parties and others, in order to reach a consensus on the
provisions contained in the proposed comprehensive
agreement and thus achieve popular endorsement of the
proposed resolution to the conflict. The Conference will
also gather the mediation's international partners to
provide international support to the endorsed resolution.
The intent is to provide an opportunity to build support
among all stakeholders and to allow the United Nations
and the African Union (AU) to work proactively towards
bringing all parties, including the armed movements, to
a harmonized approach to achieving peace. UNAMID
and the mediation are working closely on the selection
and transportation of participants from Darfur to Doha
for the Stakeholders Conference. UNAMID is also
following up on these issues closely with the
Government.

As the Council is aware, the launch of the Darfur-
based political process is envisaged as a means of
furthering popular support for the outcome, and the
implementation of the outcome, of the negotiations in
Doha. While there remain different views on the
sequencing of the political process and the peace
negotiations taking place in Doha, we continue to
believe that all efforts should be made to reach an
agreement through the All Darfur Stakeholders
Conference with a view to ensuring that the Darfur
political process is a forum for discussion and buy-in at
the local level and to enhancing aspects of the
agreement of importance to local communities in Darfur.

As emphasized by the African Union Peace and
Security Council, the Darfur-based political process
must take place in an environment that will guarantee its
credibility by ensuring, first, the civil and political rights
of participants such that they can exercise their views
without fear of retribution; secondly, the freedom of
speech and assembly to permit open consultations;
thirdly, the freedom of movement of participants and
UNAMID; and fourthly, proportional participation
among Darfurians. The 18 February meeting of the Joint
Special Representative and Special Envoys further
defined these conditions to include freedom from
harassment, arbitrary arrest and intimidation, and
freedom from interference by the Government or armed
movements.

The intention of the Government to lift emergency
law will go a long way towards fulfilling these
conditions. The United Nations welcomes the
Govemment's announcement and looks forward to its
implementation. In a recent meeting with the Joint
Special Representative, the Government recommitted
itself to ensuring the creation of an enabling
environment and working with UNAMID and the AU
High-Level Implementation Panel towards this end. In
this connection, further work needs to be undertaken on
the mechanism to monitor the situation on the ground to
ensure that the political and civil rights of the
participants in the Darfur-based political process are
protected. UNAMID and the AU High-Level
Implementation Panel will continue to work with the
Government towards this end as negotiations in Doha
proceed.

Should the current road map towards a
comprehensive peace need to be revisited after the All
Darfur Stakeholders Conference, the Secretary-General
will review the situation with African Union
Chairperson Jean Ping and other stakeholders and
provide the appropriate recommendations to the Security
Council.
