The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
China.

First of all, I thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for his comprehensive briefing. We
welcome the international Conference on Afghanistan
held in Paris in June and the National Development
Strategy formulated by the Afghan Government. We
support the continued central role played by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in coordinating the international community's
assistance to Afghanistan in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1806 (2008).

The Government of Afghanistan currently faces
many grave challenges. In particular, the continued
deterioration in the security situation, the increase in
violence and terrorist attacks and the heavy civilian
casualties caused by the conflict have aroused grave
concern on the part of the international community. In
that connection, I should like to emphasize the
following points.

First, the international community must make a
great effort to help Afghanistan resolve its security
problems. Essentially, the security issue requires the
Government and the people of Afghanistan to make
their own efforts. The international community should
allocate greater resources to helping the country
accelerate the build-up of its army and police force and
to strengthening its capacity to independently maintain
national security and social stability. We urge all ethnic
groups and parties in Afghanistan to act in the long-
term interests of the country and its people, to continue
to foster and practice the culture of reconciliation and
to preserve and enhance the authority of the central
Government. We urge the international forces to take
every possible preventive measure and to do their
utmost to avoid civilian casualties resulting from
military action.

Secondly, during the period ahead, the
international community should focus on ensuring the
smooth holding of presidential elections in
Afghanistan, for which voter registration recently
began. In the coming months, UNAMA and the
International Security Assistance Force should make it
a priority to focus on providing services for the general
elections and, in particular, on ensuring a secure
environment for those elections.

Thirdly, the achievement of long-term peace and
stability in Afghanistan will depend essentially on
economic development and improvements in the
standard of living. The recent drought and high food
prices have further aggravated the humanitarian crisis
in Afghanistan, which poses a huge threat to the
country's social security and stability. The international
community must honour its commitment to providing
assistance and assisting the Government, step by step,
in implementing the National Development Strategy.

As a friendly neighbour, China attaches great
importance to stability and development in
Afghanistan. We are prepared to continue assisting the
country to the best of our ability.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on the representative of India.

