Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month and on wisely
conducting its work. We wish you success. I want
also to congratulate your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of the United States, on her efforts
during her presidency of the Council throughout the
month of September. I assure you of my country's
delegation full cooperation.

At the outset, I am pleased once again to thank the
delegation of the United States for leading the efforts
that today enabled the Council to adopt resolution 2438
(2018) to extend the support provided by the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) to
the operational activities of the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM) for six months.
I also thank all members of the Security Council for the
spirit of cooperation and consensus they showed in the
adoption of the resolution.

Furthermore, I reiterate the commitment of the
Sudan to cooperate with UNISFA so as to enable it to
fulfil its mandate established by resolution 1990 (2011)
and its subsequent resolutions. We are also committed
to activating the JBVMM. in order to fully carry out
its functions and thereby contribute to strengthening
security and stability on the border between the two
countries. In that regard, I recall that the Sudan has
been working to activate that important mechanism
since its inception, in 2012, and has never obstructed
its work, as attested to by the Council.

My Government underlines its commitment to all
the agreements concluded with our sister nation the
Republic of South Sudan, in particular the Agreement
on Temporary Arrangements for the Administration
and Security of the Abyei Area, concluded on 20 June
2011, and the cooperation agreement between the two
countries of 27 September 2012. I take this opportunity
to highlight the centrality of the June 2011 Agreement,
which is the basis for all Abyei-related arrangements,
including deployment of UNISFA. The two parties,
namely, the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement, which was later
succeeded by the Government of South Sudan in July
2011, agreed that that Agreement would remain valid
until the final status of the Abyei Area had been
established. Both parties also agreed not to alter the
mandate of UNISFA in any way without the approval of
the three parties, namely, the Sudan, South Sudan and
Ethiopia, the latter being the only troop-contributing
country to UNISFA. In that respect, we hope that the
Council will adopt a draft resolution in November that
respects the letter and spirit ofthe June 2011 Agreement.

We also call on local, regional and international
partners to redouble their efforts and work together
to strengthen and consolidate security and stability
in Abyei region. We also call on them as well to
disassociate from anything that might undermine this
positive trend and to avoid any measure or decision that
is not adequately thought out.
I also note the importance of considering the issue
of Abyei within a broader framework that encompasses
the relations between the Sudan and South Sudan. In
that regard, my country's delegation would like to
express its hope and aspiration that the most recent
positive developments in the relations between the
two countries, as well as the Sudan's hosting of peace
negotiations pertaining to South Sudan within the
framework of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, will contribute to further cooperation
between the two countries so as to implement all
the agreements concluded between them and fully
invigorate the work of J BVMM.

In conclusion, I reiterate my thanks to all our
partners, whose efforts are contributing to facilitate
the work of UNISFA, in particular the Government
of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia,
the African Union Peace and Security Council, the
African Union Commission, the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sudan and South Sudan; as
well as the Secretariat and the entire staff of UNISFA.
We recall the Sudan's commitment to cooperating with
UNISFA so that it can smoothly complete all its tasks
in accordance with the provisions of resolution 1990
(2011).

