Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I take the floor to explain
Rwanda's vote on resolution 2136 (2014), which was
just adopted unanimously.

I want first of all to commend France, the penholder
for this important resolution, for its determination and
patience in finding a consensus on the text. I want
especially to thank the French Ambassador and his
colleagues in his delegation. I also thank Jordan, the
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004), for the way it has conducted the
business of the Committee in a challenging period. It
is not easy to be the Chairman of that Committee and
at the same time to preside over the Security Council.
I also thank other Council members for their valuable
contributions aimed at ensuring that the resolution will
be an additional tool for lasting peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Rwanda voted in favour of the resolution because
we believe that a sanctions regime for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is of the utmost importance
in fighting the armed groups that are still active in
the country, especially the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda, recalled today by the Council as

"a group under United Nations sanctions whose
leaders and members include perpetrators of
the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda,
during which Hutu and others who opposed the
genocide were also killed, and have continued to
promote and commit ethnically based and other
killings in Rwanda and in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo" (resolution 2136 (2014), thirteenth
preambalar paragraph).

We share the Council's deep concern at reports
indicating collaboration between this genocidal group
and, unfortunately, the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo. We call on the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to abide by
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and
stress the need for the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism
to urgently investigate this matter.

Although resolution 2136 (2014) takes note of the
final report of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo (S/2014/42), Rwanda rejected the
report. We did so because the report lacks objectivity,
transparency, material evidence and credible sources.
We deplore the flawed methodology used by an
unaccountable and unprofessional Group of Experts
allowing itselfthe right to accuse a whole nation without
a shred of evidence. However, we support the extension
of the Group of Experts' mandate for an additional year
because we believe that the Group could assist the 1533
Committee in monitoring the sanctions regime for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I take this opportunity to reiterate my Government's
call on the Council to demand that the members of the
Group of Experts behave in a more neutral, impartial
and professional manner for the sake of regional and
international peace. We reiterate our deep regret over
the way the current Group of Experts is conducting
its activities. It should be made clear that the use of a
United Nations sanctioned and funded mechanism to
launch deliberate attacks against States Member of the
United Nations by making grave, unsubstantiated and
damaging accusations without any credible evidence
is totally unacceptable. Such offensive allegations may
actually undermine the ongoing efforts focused on
forward-looking solutions.

Let me conclude by once again reiterating Rwanda's
unwavering commitment to supporting the work of the
Group of Experts, which, if conducted within the strict
mandate of the Council and by well-intentioned people,
could contribute to addressing the root causes of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
thereby bringing stability to the region. Any failure
to clearly understand and report objectively on the
dynamics in the region would continue to undermine
ongoing peace efforts. In that regard, Rwanda
remains committed to finding a lasting solution to the
recurring crises in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, bilaterally or through the mechanisms of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.

