Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Being this low on
the list of speakers at an open briefing, I think it would
be inhumane of me to subject the Council to a long
prepared statement, particularly as the Permanent
Representative of Belgium will be speaking later on
behalf of the European Union. But I want to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Hedi Annabi, for his
very useful briefing, which has come at a very
appropriate time given the imminence of the Secretary-
General's visit to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the appointment of Mr. Ngongi, whom we
wish extremely well.

I also think that there is general consensus about
the tone of what we are looking at here, and that there
is guarded optimism - but with real problems
remaining in a few areas. I think there is also general
consensus about what those areas are. I will not recite
them again; other speakers have done so. But I just
want to pick out a couple of points and ask a couple of
questions.

First, like others, I think that the preparatory
meeting for the national dialogue that took place in
Gaborone has been a considerable success, and of
considerable significance. I think congratulations are
due to the Congolese political parties, to Congolese
civil society and, of course, to the facilitator on a very
successful first meeting. I think, as Mr. Annabi has
said, the fact that agreement was reached on political
prisoners is a very good sign. I would like to take this
opportunity to encourage all sides to move forward on
that issue. If we could come to closure on that, it would
be a very significant gesture of good will.

It is obviously good, too, that a date has been set
for the first meeting in Addis Ababa. But it is clear -
not least from what happened in Gaborone, which was
a matter of considerable organizational complexity, just
to get the initial phase on the road - that setting up
things in Addis Ababa is going to require a
considerable administrative effort. I think it would be
very good if we could keep a close eye on this, and
particularly if the Secretariat could keep a close eye on
it. I think that if the facilitator's office indicates -
either when we see Sir Ketumile Masire or
subsequently - that additional help is needed, it would
be very good if that appeal were not lost on the
Secretariat. I would be very interested to hear the
comments of the Assistant Secretary-General on that
point.

Like others, we too remain concerned about
Kisangani. We do see the need for early progress and
early action towards demilitarization by the
Rassemblement congolais pour la de'mocratie
(RCD-G).

I would now like to talk briefly about
disarmament, demobilization durable solutions,
reintegration and repatriation, which I think is now
known in the Mission area as D-three or D-cubed.
That, at least, is easier to say. So I will say it. It is
clearly important that the D-three programme move
forward, and that it move forward as fast as possible
and without necessarily waiting for the third phase of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

I entirely understand, agree with and take the
point that the Assistant Secretary-General has made
about the need for a political framework. But at the
same time, I think that we should be sensitive to the
fact that in some areas it may be inappropriate to
expect the parties to do everything themselves.

We hope that the Secretariat and MONUC will be
as proactive as they can and will make use of
opportunities that may arise to assist the D-three
process as they do arise, for example in Kamina.
I would be very interested to hear anything that
Mr. Annabi may want to tell us today about progress in
planning by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for D-three, because, clearly, we all need to
be prepared to make the D-three effort a success.
Without early movement on D-three - and I address
myself here to the parties~ there is a risk that the
peace process may collapse.

We also need to resolve quickly the issue of the
appointment of the United Nations humanitarian
coordinator. It is vital that this role should be filled
immediately if the United Nations is going to be able to
provide speedy and targeted humanitarian assistance. I
hope that that message will be taken away from this
Council meeting today. That appointment needs to be
made soon.

I was also concerned to hear what Mr. Annabi had
to say about the restrictions on access to humanitarian
workers in some areas. We naturally hope that those
difficulties will be remedied immediately.

Finally, Ambassador Strommen of Norway raised
concerns about the treatment of children, and I would
like to conclude my statement by saying that we
strongly share those concerns. It is very important,
particularly in the light of Carol Bellamy's visit, that
all international norms with regard to children should
be respected and implemented.

