The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.

I wish to start by warmly thanking Mr. Said
Djinnit, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region, for his very informative briefing,
as usual. I would like once again, on behalf of France,
to convey our deep gratitude to him for his exemplary
commitment, which is worthy of the highest praise. I
would also like to wish his successor, Mr. Huang Xia,
every success and assure him of our full support.

The time is ripe, at the end of his mandate, to take
stock realistically of the progress made and of what
remains to be done in order to find a way towards
lasting peace. Six years after the signing of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, in
Addis Ababa, strong political will is being mustered at
the heart of the region, in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, born of the expectations of the Congolese
people. This should serve as an example, because to use
an expression that is fully reflective of the efforts made
by Mr. Djinnit, destinies there are interlinked - those
of the DRC and its neighbours, of the Great Lakes
region and our own.

Our dear friend Said endeavoured to generate
political momentum through shuttle diplomacy
among the capitals of the region, with support from
ad hoc regional mechanisms and the relevant regional
institutions. He has contributed to underscoring the
relevance of the multilateral framework to overcoming
existing challenges, which, in this region in particular,
cannot be addressed in isolation.

Since Brazzaville, in October 2017, the Regional
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework has been the focus of attention
at the highest levels of capitals of the region. Since
Kampala, in October 2018, partners have had the ability
to share their assessments on the state of the region and
its development.

As I said last October, the Addis Ababa Framework
agreement remains a key instrument for building
confidence among the countries of the region. This
inclusive agreement seeks to harmonize the efforts of
all stakeholders concerned: the countries of the region,
the relevant regional institutions and external partners.
It sets out a long-term vision encompassing all possible
pathways towards human and economic development in
this very promising region.

However, in order to pool efforts and work
together with the same goal, it is important to have the
appropriate forums and tools. True to that aspiration,
France reiterates its commitment to pursuing a high-
quality dialogue among all stakeholders in the Great
Lakes region, in line with the spirit of the Framework
agreement. It trusts in the ability of the future Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General to ensure that this
dialogue is an ongoing one and is as effective as possible.

The Framework should serve as a catalyst towards
action. However, it is not yet functioning at a level
that would allow it to make full use of its considerable
potential. France shares the concerns of the Secretary-
General regarding persisting tensions between certain
signatories. These tensions are exacerbated by the
threat posed by armed groups and by the harm caused
primarily to communities living in the affected areas
as a result of the ongoing illegal exploitation and
trafficking of natural resources. However, as has been
noted, the recent repatriation of certain members of
the Forces Democratiques de Liberation du Rwanda
and the Mouvement du 23 mars shows that surrenders
are possible when they are accompanied by mutual
guarantees of social and economic reintegration.

Moreover, new threats have emerged in the region
that require joint responses. Here I am referring to
the Ebola epidemic, the radicalization of youth and
environmental damage related to the illicit exploitation
of natural resources. Appropriate means to collectively
respond to these challenges are not always available,
although some progress has been made. Here we would
refer in particular to the lack of regional legal and
technical capacity to support the customs authorities,
the police and judicial cooperation in combating
trafficking and impunity.

The relationship between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and its regional environment is at the
heart of the Framework agreement process. Political
alternation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the wish expressed by President Tshilombo Tshisekedi
during his regional tour to pursue closer relations
with his neighbours is a sign of normalizing relations
between the countries of the Great Lakes region, which
is favourable to development. France welcomes this
resolve and calls on all countries in the region to come
together in this spirit around a revitalized regional road
map that could lead to fresh modalities for interaction
between neighbours and make it possible to collectively
address the remaining challenges.

The solution to regional tensions requires not
only a sustained political dialogue among the leaders
of the region but also an improvement in the shared
management of natural resources. The concerted
development of the mining sector would be especially
beneficial for all concerned, enabling the region to
clean up its export channels and cut off revenues for
the armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In that regard, France welcomes the
action that the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region has taken, particularly with regard to
strengthening the traceability of mineral supply chains,
and calls on States that have not yet done so to adopt
its legislative and regulatory provisions on certificates
of origin for minerals. France would like to support the
region in that area and will therefore host the Global
Conference of the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative in June.

France reaffirms the importance it attaches to the
Great Lakes region and its solidarity with the countries
concerned, and will continue to honour the commitment
it made in 2013. We share the common goal of forging
long-term regional stability, and we are ready to work
with all stakeholders in the region to achieve that goal
and overcome the challenges involved.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

