Mrs. Pierre-Louis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I
am grateful to you, Madam President, for giving me
the floor once again so that I can thank Council
members and the other representatives who have made
statements during this open debate. I was deeply
moved by all that I heard in support of Haiti. When I
return to my country I shall convey to the President,
the Government, the parliament and the people of Haiti
the unreserved support voiced by the Security Council
and all the friends of Haiti who took the floor this
evening.

All those who participated in this important open
debate spoke of the following points. First, the country
has made significant progress thanks to the presence of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the efforts of the international
community - but also thanks to the efforts of the
Haitian people. However, grave problems continue to
threaten the stability and security that was restored two
years ago. These include poverty, unemployment, the
lack of opportunities for young people, the situation
faced by children, human and environmental
vulnerability, institutional weakness, international
crime, lack of investment and low productivity. Great
investment is therefore needed in all those areas. In
that sphere, the international community must keep its
promises and enable Haiti to implement its
socio-economic programme.

Without question, the Government must build its
capacities. It must continue the fight against
corruption; it must entrench the process of good
governance and provide leadership in seeking political
and social commitments that will determine Haiti's
future on the path to progress and modernity for the
benefit of the entire population.

Haiti welcomes the appointment of President
Clinton as the Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's
Special Envoy for Haiti. We welcome the role and
09-50519
solidarity of the Group of Friends of Haiti, of all
fraternal countries in the Latin American and
Caribbean area and of the countries of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), which have stated their
solidarity with us.

In particular, we thank Mr. Annabi for his
leadership as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Haiti. When MINUSTAH first deployed in
Haiti, there were fewer than 500 police officers in the
country. Today, the national police numbers more than
10,000. Everyone who visits the country acknowledges
that visible and tangible security progress has been
made. We are working to build a State based on the
rule of law and to strengthen security and stability, in
the hope that in the not-too-distant future the
Government will regain full sovereignty and carry out
its key function of ensuring the safety and security of
people and goods, linked with equitable and
sustainable development that respects life, the public
interest and the common good - which are at the heart
of development.

We are counting on you here in this Chamber, and
you can count on us.

