Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, let me thank the Ivorian presidency of the Security
Council for convening today's meeting and welcome
in particular the presence of Mr. Mike Pompeo,
Secretary of State of the United States of America. I
also thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, and Mr. Serge Christiane,
Charge' d'affaires ad interim of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations. I would like
to warmly thank our Dutch colleague Ambassador
Karel van Oosterom, Permanent Representative of the
Netherlands, and his team for their work this year as
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015).

The past year has shown that our work is not finished
with regard to the regime on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery.
It has also shown how it is now more important than ever
that we maintain our constant collective mobilization
in strengthening it. Today's meeting on resolution 2231
(2015) is therefore very timely, since it concerns one
of the most significant non-proliferation achievements
of recent years. That resolution was supported by all
the permanent members of the Security Council and
unanimously adopted; it was brought to fruition both
by the perseverance of the international community
and by the leadership role of the Council. And it sealed
the major agreement reached in Vienna after years
of negotiations. In other words, it is a resolution that
embodies the unity of the international community, the
Security Council and all its members, especially its
permanent members.

However, the paths of the States parties to the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) have diverged
since 2015 and, as the Secretary-General does in his
report (S/2018/1089), we have expressed our regret and
concern about the implications of the United States
withdrawal and the reimposition of American sanctions.
Yet we all share the same objective - to prevent Iran
from acquiring nuclear weapons and to ensure, through
strict international monitoring, the peaceful ends of its
programme. That is what made it possible put in place
the JCPOA for 10 years, to which there is no credible
alternative today. The collapse of that agreement would
mark a serious step backwards, for which we would all
pay the price.

While we have seen a serious crisis of confidence
this year, the agreement remains in place and is
working - Iran continues to comply with its nuclear
obligations, as confirmed to us for the thirteenth
consecutive time by the International Atomic Energy
Agency. We welcome that fact. The situation must be
strengthened through respect for all our commitments,
which applies to all United Nations Members, not only
the parties to the Plan. No external developments should
affect the implementation of those commitments. In
that regard, France will actively continue to support the
agreement as long as Iran strictly and fully respects its
nuclear obligations and makes efforts to preserve the
economic benefits of the JCPOA.

France commends the rigorous work of the
Secretariat through its balanced report, prepared
in full compliance with its mandate. Our collective
commitments do not stop at the JCPOA, and Iran
must comply with all the provisions of resolution 2231
(2015). However, the report identifies several elements
of Iranian actions that are not in conformity with
those provisions, which gives us cause for concern. In
conjunction with Germany and the United Kingdom,
France has expressed its concern on several occasions
concerning ballistic missiles. I would recall that the
missiles in question are technically designed to be
capable of carrying nuclear weapons, and it is that type
of activity, which runs counter to resolution 2231 (2015),
that we have collectively called on Iran not to carry out.
The issue of ballistic transfers to State and non-State
actors, in particular the Secretariat's conclusions on
ballistic missiles fired by the Houthis, is also a great
source of concern for France. Whether in Yemen or
in the Syrian theatre, such actions violate resolution
1540 (2004), which is also an essential element of the
international non-proliferation architecture.

Let us be clear: for the sake of regional stability
and international security, Iran must immediately cease
all destabilizing activities. We have already expressed
our concern on that issue, including directly to the
Iranian authorities. Each of us must clearly convey
that message, and France, for its part, will continue its
robust dialogue with Iran.

In conclusion, I would like to echo the Secretary-
General's appeal to all States, whether or not they
are parties to the Plan, to ensure the continuity of
the JCPOA as a pillar of international and regional
peace and security. Rest assured that France, which
has worked tirelessly to make the agreement robust
and endow it with rigorous verification mechanisms,
remains fully committed to that goal. Only in that way
can we together draw up a long-term strategy in the
region, which cannot be reduced to a policy of pressure
and sanctions. Such a strategy must also include a
firm and frank dialogue with the Iranians about our
concerns. That is the only way that the international
community can lay the foundation for a new agreement
on a framework for Iranian nuclear power beyond 2025-
2030, Iranian ballistic activity and regional stability.
There is no other way to achieve lasting stability in
the region and ensure that Iran never acquires nuclear
weapons.

