Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by welcoming the President of
Timor-Leste, His Excellency Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta.
His serene but firm defence of human rights - which,
among other things, earned him the Nobel Peace
Prize - have been a source of inspiration to many of
us.

Similarly, we appreciate the information provided
by Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste and Head of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT). We commend her leadership and efforts in
support of that country.

The year 2012 is very important, as it marks the
tenth anniversary of the restoration of Timor-Leste's
independence. The achievements made in that brief
time deserve recognition, and we are glad to share this
historic moment with that country. We congratulate
President Ramos-Horta on his leadership and for the
progress made in his country. We also thank bilateral
donors and the international security forces for their
continuing commitment to peace and stability in
Timor-Leste.
We are aware that the consolidation of democracy
and the building of a system of governance are a long-
term process. Although there are many challenges to

overcome, the political, economic and security
situation in Timor-Leste bears witness to the goodwill
and resilience of the Timorese. The Security Council is
following closely the electoral process, and it is
encouraging that so far steady progress has been made,
which will ensure a peaceful and credible political
process.

We know that the support of the international
community will still be needed after UNMIT's
withdrawal, particularly to consolidate Timor-Leste
institutions that are still in the process of formation,
such as the police, a sector in which the United Nations
has heavily invested. In that regard, we welcome the
Joint Transition Plan signed by the Government of
Timor-Leste and UNMIT. Its effective implementation
will ensure a smooth transition.

We are encouraged by Timor-Leste's increasing
incorporation into the international community. An
example is its efforts to join the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, which we hope will be
successful. This will undoubtedly be a platform that
will benefit not only the Timorese but also the
international community as a whole.

Guatemala believes that the continued presence
of the United Nations after the withdrawal of UNMIT
must be consistent with the situation on the ground and
respect the priorities of the Government to be elected
in the coming months.

Timor-Leste is endowed with sufficient natural
resources. The proper management of those resources
will be essential to its sustainable development.
Greater investment will be required in areas including
education, youth employment, health and agriculture.
We echo the call made by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haq, who urged national institutions
to resolutely combat corruption and to send a clear
message that such practices will not be tolerated.

We would like to acknowledge the important role
that the United Nations has played in Timor-Leste
since 1999. The United Nations has become a better
institution, as a result not only of the work done there,
but also of the lessons learned from that country. Its
evolution has thus been a shared success.

In that same vein, I wish also to recall the
memory of the late Sergio Vieira de Mello, one of the
pioneers of the United Nations presence in Timor-
Leste.

Allow me to conclude by thanking President Jose

Ramos-Horta for his encouraging presentation. It is

true that Timor-Leste is a Security Council success

story, but, more important, it is a success story for the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste.

