Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I express my appreciation for
the briefing delivered by Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, which
has provided us with a comprehensive overview of the
latest events in South Sudan.

I reiterate once again Uruguay's profound concern
about the crisis affecting South Sudan, whose political
leaders are primarily responsible for the situation there.
We must never lose sight of the horrendous suffering
that the South Sudanese have had to undergo for far
too long. The personal ambitions of the country's main
political leaders, who have put their ambitions to wield
or obtain positions of power before the needs of their
people, are at the root cause of that protracted crisis.

The Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
conducted its most recent plenary meeting last Monday,
20 November. At that meeting, the Chairperson of the
Commission, Mr. Festus Mogae, enumerated a list of
requirements essential to achieving the revitalization
of the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan of August 2015.
Uruguay agrees in its entirety with Mr. Mogae's
statement, and I take the liberty of presenting several
of those requirements, which must be implemented
without delay.

First, there is the need to establish a complete
and permanent cessation of hostilities, which must be
inclusive of all armed groups. Secondly, an inclusive,
transparent and political process with guarantees
that unites all South Sudanese parties is necessary.
Thirdly, a plan of action is needed to address the
serious humanitarian situation, which must provide
unrestricted access to humanitarian actors so that they
can help the people most in need.

We eagerly await the upcoming high-level
revitalization forum - aimed at revitalizing the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan of August 2015 - under
the auspices of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), which represents a unique
opportunity to restart the political process in South
Sudan and pave the way for the holding of democratic
elections at the end of the transition period. We reiterate
that it will be fundamental for all stakeholders involved
to find a solution to the conflict, in particular the United
Nations and the African Union, and to support that
initiative and speak with a single voice, while, at the
same time, expressing a firm and unequivocal message
to the parties with regard to the importance that this
opportunity represents in terms of making progress in
finding a solution to the conflict and restore longed-for
peace to the country's people.

Lastly, we regret to learn that the 30-day report
of the Secretary-General presented by Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to the Security Council (see S/PV.8071)
once again gives an account of all kinds of restrictions
imposed on the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) by the Government, at a time when the
Regional Protection Force, which was approved by the
Council more than a year ago, remains far from being
100 per cent operational, despite the recent progress
that Ms. Keita just mentioned.

To reiterate what we have said previously, States
cannot unilaterally prevent the normal functioning of
a mission. Moreover, it is incumbent upon the Security
Council to demand and obtain from host States full
respect and fulfilment of the terms of status-of-forces
agreements, which provide guarantees for protecting
personnel that countries voluntarily contribute to
peacekeeping operations. In that regard, we underscore
the informative forum recently organized by UNMISS
for members of the Legislative Assembly of South
Sudan, which presented information on the importance
of respect for the status-of-forces agreement between
the United Nations and the Government of the Republic
of South Sudan concerning the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan. We hope that that event helped to raise
awareness among political actors of South Sudan.

At this juncture, it is clear that getting the two
political parties to abandon speculation aimed at
maintaining power, which seems to be their primary
concern, will be key to achieving the peace and stability
that the country needs.

