Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU). The acceding country Croatia; the candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
European Free Trade Association country Norway,
member of the European Economic Area, as well
as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

Like others, I would first like to thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/2012/703) and
Special Representative Jan Kubis for his briefing and
for the remarkable work that he does under continuing
difficult circumstances. I would also like to thank His
Excellency Foreign Minister Mr. Zalmai Rassoul for
his statement and his presence here today.

The international conferences held in Bonn last
year and in Kabul and Tokyo earlier this year, as well as
the summit in Chicago, have reaffirmed the partnership
between the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community for that country's long-term
security, economic growth and development. The
conferences set out the way forward for Afghanistan
to progressively assume responsibility for all aspects of
policy and to achieve its development and governance
goals.

In this three-monthly statement, we would like
to first focus on the latter two goals, highlighting the
outcome of the Tokyo Conference. Secondly, in View
of the upcoming senior officials meeting, organized
by the Government of Afghanistan in New York on
24 September, we want to briefly address regional
cooperation. The Tokyo Conference resulted in
an agreed mechanism for achieving Afghanistan's
development and governance goals, namely, the Mutual
Accountability Framework. With others, we believe
that mutual accountability is of paramount importance
in View of the unprecedented financial support pledged
by the international community to Afghanistan.

On our side, we are giving more than €1 billion in
development assistance to Afghanistan per year. The
EU commitment to Afghanistan is long term, that is,
for the transition and beyond. For the period from 2014
to 2020, the European Union will continue to prioritize
and to enhance support to Afghanistan. We remain
committed to increasing the levels of coordination of
that support and to ensuring its alignment with the
Government of Afghanistan's priorities, as set out in the
national priority programmes. We are also committed
to helping Afghans develop the ability to provide their
own security. As such, we maintain a strong support to
the development of a civilian police force through the
European Union Police Mission.

For its part, the Government of Afghanistan has
committed to achieving five key development and
governance goals: first, representational democracy
and equitable elections; secondly, governance, the
rule of law and human rights; thirdly, the integrity of
public finances and commercial banking; fourthly,
government revenues, budget execution and subnational
governance; and, fifthly, inclusive and sustained growth
and development. The European Union welcomes and
supports the renewed progress in those critical areas.

The international community's ability to sustain
support for Afghanistan depends on the Afghan
Government making real and tangible progress in those
areas, as set out in the Tokyo Framework. That not only
will increase support for continued aid to Afghanistan,
but also is essential for the capacity of the country to
absorb the exceptional aid levels that the international
community has committed to providing. It will ensure
that the Afghan people experience the benefits of that
aid.

In that regard, we look forward to the finalization
of the national priority programmes, in particular the
national priority programme on law and justice for
all. That programme will be essential in convincing
all Afghan citizens, in particular women, children and
minorities, that the Government of Afghanistan is able
to deliver justice and that the rule of law will protect
their rights. It will also increase the investor confidence
necessary to achieve sustained economic growth.

The added delays in designing that support and
reform programme are a source of concern due to
the programme's key role in delivering the Tokyo
Framework commitments. The European Union's
continued support to that sector depends on a swift
finalization of that programme. In that regard, we hope
the recent changes to the Government of Afghanistan
will lead to the finalization of all national priority
programmes, as well as the consolidation of the Afghan
National Security Forces.

As part ofits long-term commitment to Afghanistan,
the European Union actively supports regional
cooperation among Afghanistan's neighbours, both
at the political and the project levels. Since 2004, we
have contributed more than €65 million to development
projects directly aimed at Afghanistan's capacity to
benefit from a stronger involvement in the region. I can
confirm that we have every intention to stay engaged in
that important field in the years to come.

The cooperation of the countries in the region
is certainly a key to achieving more stability and
prosperity. Like others, we were encouraged by the
progress achieved by the countries of the region in
defining and agreeing on seven concrete confidence-
building measures at the June Kabul Heart of Asia
Ministerial Conference. All of those are very important.
As the European Union, we, as supporters, committed
ourselves to cooperating closely with the Heart of Asia
countries on three confidence-building measures,
namely on disaster management, counter narcotics
and commercial opportunities. We now hope for swift
progress in implementation. Together with the Heart of
Asia countries, we will now ensure an active follow-up
to identify viable projects for cooperation.

It is important to build on the momentum achieved
and to focus efforts on implementation. However, it is
clear, in our view, that confidence-building measures
should be intended to support what we hope will be a
growing political process, not to substitute for it.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate our full
support for the essential role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan as we move beyond
the transition. Its work will be of key importance in
supporting the preparations for the upcoming elections,
monitoring the human rights and humanitarian
situation, and making coordination bodies, such as the
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board, work more
effectively.

The aim of our overall strategy in Afghanistan
remains clear 4 to support Afghanistan on its path
towards becoming a more peaceful, democratic and
prosperous society.

