Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We in Russia are gravely concerned at the
sharp political tension, the disruption of economic
activity and the deteriorating security situation in the
Central African Republic following the attempted coup
by opposition forces in late May. We are further
concerned at the close relationship between the crisis in
the Central African Republic and the situation in the
neighbouring Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Russia believes that the political crisis that arose
out of the attempted coup should be dealt with as soon
as possible, and that efforts to consolidate peace, to
attain national reconciliation and to strengthen the
democratic mechanisms of power in the Central
African Republic should be supported. In that
connection, we welcome the work being done by the
United Nations Peace-building Support Office in the
Central African Republic (BONUCA) to help efforts to
consolidate the peace process and to attract
international support for the country's recovery.

We call on the Central African Republic
authorities to adhere strictly to democratic standards
and norms as they investigate the circumstances of the
attempted coup. The events of late May and early June
must not be allowed to deepen inter-ethnic division in
the Central African Republic. The refugees who left the
country because of fears of ethnic persecution must be
enabled to return home without fearing for their safety.

We agree with the main point of the Secretary-
General's report relating to the need for urgent steps to
establish a constructive dialogue in the Central African
Republic between the country's authorities and the
opposition. We are convinced that the absence of such
dialogue, against the backdrop of social tension and a
very difficult economic situation, could have the most
dangerous consequences for the future of post-conflict
recovery in the Central African Republic, and could
lead to a situation in which the results of the
international community's efforts over the past few
years would be lost and reduced to naught. We
therefore appeal to the people of the Central African
Republic, who bear primary responsibility for
consolidating the peace process, to demonstrate
political will and far-sightedness in the interest of
national reconciliation and of the recovery of their
country. Only with that approach can we expect the
international community's efforts in the Central
African Republic to yield good results.

In that light, we agree with the general thrust of
the recommendations set out in the report of the
Secretary-General: to encourage political dialogue and
national reconciliation and to restore the State and
economic institutions of the Central African Republic
so that they can function properly. But we believe too
that a Security Council decision on this matter must
come after the budgetary implications of restructuring
the United Nations Peace-building Support Office in
the Central African Republic are submitted to the
Council and after a review of the Office's mandate.

