Mr. Fowler (Canada): I thank you, Mr. President, for
the kind words you addressed to me.

We are grateful to you, Sir, for allowing the Security
Council to mark its sorrow at the passing of the Amir of
Bahrain, Shaikh Isa Bin Salman Al-Khalifa. Canadians
deeply regret the loss of such a visionary and effective
leader, and we will miss his stable management and
pervasive influence in a part of the world that has known
far too much turmoil.

(spoke in French)

We would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Sierra Leone, Mr. Francis
Okelo, and the personnel of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) for their good work
under the most trying and difficult of circumstances.

Canada fully supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation that UNOMSIL's mandate be extended
for a further three months, until 13 June 1999, that the
number of military observers be increased from eight to
fourteen, and that the Mission's human rights unit be
strengthened. UNOMSIL should return to Sierra Leone to
carry out its mandate as soon as the security situation
permits.

Canada remains extremely concerned at the grave
security and humanitarian situation in Sierra Leone. We
are appalled by the unspeakable atrocities committed by
rebel forces against the civilian population, especially
those committed against women and children. We
condemn in the strongest possible terms human rights
abuses perpetrated by the rebels, including torture,
amputation, rape, mutilation and the forcible recruitment
of children as combatants. We call upon all parties
concerned to observe international norms and standards,
in particular for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, and to ensure full and unhindered access for
humanitarian assistance to affected populations. We also
call for an end to violence and for the establishment of
dialogue for the restoration of lasting peace and stability
in Sierra Leone.

(spoke in English)

Canada hopes that an acceptable level of human
security will soon be established in Sierra Leone so that
efforts may begin to rebuild a capacity within the
Government and civil society to manage conflict without
recourse to violence. Canada welcomes President
Kabbah's recent decision to allow the leader of the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF), Foday Sankoh, to
meet with rebel leaders in the hope that this will lead to
negotiations between the rebels and the Government of
Sierra Leone on a peaceful settlement of the conflict.

 

We welcome assurances that alleged human rights
abuses by pro-Government forces will be properly
investigated, and we call on all parties to adhere to
international human rights standards. Canada supports the
efforts of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) to protect the
legitimate, democratically elected Government of Sierra
Leone, and commends the force for repelling the rebels
from Freetown. We also recognize the tremendous
sacrifices being made by the troop-contributing countries of
ECOMOG. In this regard, and in response to the Secretary-
General's appeal for support to ECOMOG, Canada recently
announced a Can $1 million contribution in support of the
peacekeepers and the Government of Sierra Leone in their
efforts to re-establish security in that country.
We are also pleased to announce the appointment of
a special envoy for Sierra Leone, Mr. David Pratt, a
Member of the Canadian Parliament. Mr. Pratt's first task
will be to determine what further assistance Canada might
provide in support of efforts to rebuild peace and stability
in Sierra Leone and otherwise to assist the people of that
country.

