The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Ban
for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait.

At the outset, I thank Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for his valuable briefing and assure him that
the State of Kuwait fully supports him in his efforts
to improve the mechanisms of the United Nations and
enhance their efficiency with a View to reducing the
risks and threats confronting our world today. We
especially support his call for a surge in diplomacy
and the enhancement of conflict prevention and
mediation measures as part of his reforms of the pillars
of peace and security to render them more coherent
and comprehensive.

I also thank The Elders for their presence with
us today, for we will surely benefit from the wisdom
and expertise that they have acquired over decades of
hard work in various decision-making positions as they
have striven to improve the lives of millions of people
around the world. Among them we have an advocate for
women's rights, human rights and a former President of
her country. We also have a former Secretary-General
of the United Nations, who succeeded in putting in
place the goals for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. We also have a leader who was able to make
peace and end 50 years of conflict in his own country,
for which he was awarded a Nobel Peace Prize. I
welcome Ms. Mary Robinson, Mr. Ban Ki-moon and
Mr. Juan Manuel Santos Calderon, and I would like to
thank Ms. Robinson and Mr. Ban Ki-moon for their
valuable and enlightening briefings on our topic today.

We begin today's meeting on conflict prevention
and mediation, under the agenda item of the maintenance
ofinternational peace and security, by quoting the first
paragraph of Article 1 of the Charter of the United
Nations, which sets out the purposes of the United
Nations as follows.

"To maintain international peace and security,
and to that end: to take effective collective
measures for the prevention and removal of threats
to the peace, and for the suppression of acts of
aggression or other breaches of the peace, and to
bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity
with the principles of justice and international law,
adjustment or settlement of international disputes
or situations which might lead to a breach of
the peace."

The State of Kuwait has called this meeting today
to provide the Council with an opportunity to evaluate
its role in conflict prevention and mediation and to look
at ways to strengthen that role with a view to addressing
security, political and humanitarian crises in their early
stages before they escalate, get complicated and become
threats to international peace and security. In the past
few years, the frequency of the crises confronting our
world has increased. They have become more complex
and intertwined than ever before, but it is certain
that we could have addressed some of them earlier
and prevented their escalation had we used the tools
available to the Council in an effective way.

The Charter of the United Nations provides us
with many tools that encourage conflict resolution by
peaceful means, especially Chapter VI, which puts
steps in place for resolving any dispute between parties
through negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration and judicial settlement, or by resorting to
regional agencies and organizations as well as other
peaceful means of their choice. Chapter VI also
stresses the importance of the preventive role of the
Security Council. It gives the Council the right to call
on parties to conflicts to resolve their disputes by the
aforementioned means and to investigate any dispute
or situation that might lead to international friction or
give rise to a dispute, in order to determine whether its
continuation is likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security.

In Chapter VIII, the Charter encourages the peaceful
resolution of local conflicts through arrangements with
regional and subregional organizations, as they have
historical knowledge of such conflicts and geographic
proximity to them. In that regard, I would like to
commend the important cooperation between the
Security Council and the African Union in addressing a
number of the issues confronting the African continent.
Tomorrow, as part of our efforts to form a similar
model of cooperation, Kuwait will hold a meeting on
cooperation between the Security Council and the
League of Arab States. We believe that it is timely,
given the turmoil and instability that a number of Arab
countries are currently facing.

As part of our discussion today, we should highlight
the important role of the Secretary-General, based on
Article 99 of the Charter, which confers on the Secretary-
General an inherent right and responsibility to play a
role in preventing conflicts through his good offices or
those ofhis Special Envoys and Special Representatives
in any conflict zone. The Secretary-General has made
mediation a priority, and we commend the fact that he has
established a High-level Advisory Board on Mediation
as a tool for conflict prevention, which we should all
support, as it will unquestionably save us a great deal of
trouble, sorrow, pain and resources, including financial
resources. Billions of dollars are spent every year to
contain crises through peacekeeping operations or to
address their consequences and implications, including
on the humanitarian front.

The challenges that many mediation efforts
confront are local, regional and international, and
sometimes all of them at once. Mediation efforts
must therefore be comprehensive and deal with the
root causes of conflicts and their various political,
security, development, economic and social aspects.
They must also address the issues of living conditions,
good governance and respect for human rights, among
other things, and must therefore work fast to ensure
that disputes do not escalate. Different views must be
taken into account, and work must be done behind the
scenes to gain the trust of all the parties to a conflict
by adopting an honest, neutral and clear approach,
free of private agendas, with a view to achieving
a comprehensive and sustainable resolution of the
conflict. I want to commend the Secretary-General and
his Special Envoys and Representatives and their teams
for their efforts to resolve conflicts around the world,
often without media attention.

The accumulated experience and lessons learned
are sufficient to enable the Security Council to take
innovative measures and steps in helping to maintaining
international peace and security, and certainly there is
nothing preventing the Council from taking innovative
initiatives and measures for conflict prevention and
mediation. In the concept note circulated to Council
members (S/2019/456, annex) we have identified
some steps that could support conflict prevention and
mediation efforts, including sending a small delegation
of Council members to undertake mediation efforts
between parties to conflicts, a practice that the Security
Council has adopted in the past. Field visits by the
Council to conflict zones could cover prevention and
mediation. The Council could also benefit further from
meetings held in various formats to discuss matters that
could threaten international peace and security. Besides
that, it has traditional tools such as peacekeeping
operations and sanctions imposed on individuals and
entities at its disposal, and those could be used in
a more efficient manner to achieve the purposes of
preventive diplomacy.

After reviewing these preventive tools in the
Security Council, I cannot help wondering how many
crises the Council could have avoided, prevented or
de-escalated had it used the tools available to it in
accordance with the Charter and actively pursued
preventive diplomacy. A more difficult question is
how many human lives and resources could have
been saved had we ignored political calculations and
narrow interests and instead focused on assuming
our responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security, including by activating these preventive
tools. The Council's success in using those tools
depends on the unity and consensus of its members. We
have witnessed many conflicts in which the Security
Council was unable to reach solutions because of the
differing views of Council members and the use of the
veto. Perhaps the most important issues where we have
seen a division between the members of the Council
and the use of the veto are the Palestinian question and
the Syrian crisis.

The unity ofthe Security Council, especially among
the five permanent members, is important to ensuring
that the Council can carry out its functions and take
decisions in an effective and decisive way. Confronting
political, security and humanitarian challenges in our
world today requires all of us to work together within
the context of multilateralism. Those international
challenges need international solutions.

Because Kuwait is a small State and the smallest
member of the Security Council today in terms of
surface area, preventive diplomacy is a main pillar
of its foreign policy. We believe that dialogue is the
best way to resolve conflicts based on the rules of
international law and the principles and purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations. We also believe that
underdevelopment and economic and social challenges
are the root causes of many conflicts around the world.
That is why the State of Kuwait engages in humanitarian
and development diplomacy to improve the living
conditions of millions of peoples throughout the world
and to contribute to achieving stability for communities
and countries. I assure all Council members that the
State of Kuwait will remain just as they have known
it - a supporter of peace as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council and even outside the Council,
through our diplomacy based on preventive measures,
conflict prevention and the resolution of conflicts by
peaceful means.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the other members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

