The President (interpretation from Spanish): At the
outset of this meeting, I should like, on behalf of the
Security Council, to extend deep sympathy to the
Government and people of Japan in connection with the
great tragedy it has experienced as a result of the major
earthquake that has occurred in Western Japan. I am sure
that I speak for all members of the Council in expressing
profound shock and sorrow at the great loss of human life
and extensive material damage suffered by Japan. I would
request the representative of Japan to convey to his
Government our grief and sincere condolences.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
An Agenda for Peace

Supplement to an Agenda for Peace: position paper
of the Secretary-General on the occasion of the
fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations
(S/1995/1)

The President (interpretation from Spanish): At this
meeting, the Security Council begins consideration of
document S/l995/1. It wishes to have the reaction of its
members as well as the views of Member States of the
United Nations in general. Bearing in mind today's debate,
the Security Council will decide how best to continue
consideration of this document.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Australia,
Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Egypt,
Hungary, India, Ireland, Japan, Latvia, Libyan Arab
J amahiriya, Malaysia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Pakistan, Poland, Romania, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Sri
Lanka, Turkey and Ukraine, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Butler
(Australia), Mr. Reyn (Belgium), Mr. Valle (Brazil),
Mr. Pashovski (Bulgaria), Mr. Fowler (Canada),
Mr. Anderfo Garcia (Colombia), Mr. Elaraby
(Egypt), Mr. Nathon (Hungary), Mr. Sreenivasan
(India), Mr. Hayes (Ireland), Mr. Maruyama
(Japan), Mr. Baumanis (Latvia), Mr. Muntasser
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Razali (Malaysia),
Mr. Biegman (Netherlands), Mr. Keating (New Zealand), Mr. Bjorn Lian (Norway), Mr. Marker
(Pakistan), Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland), Mr. Chirila
(Romania), Mr. Bangura (Sierra Leone), Mr. Turk
(Slovenia), Mr. Rodrigo (Sri Lanka), Mr. Batu
(Turkey) and Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.


