Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like first of all to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mariano Fernandez for introducing
the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2012/128). The report, it must be said, supports and
adds to the observations made by members of the
Security Council during the Council's mission to Haiti
in February.

After the devastating earthquake that struck Haiti
in January 2010, the entire world wondered how the
country would ever be able to recover. Fortunately,
with the will and the determination of the people of
Haiti and the support of the international community,
the reconstruction of the country is on the right track.
The measures that the Government is implementing in
many areas to bring about the welfare of its people are
aimed at that goal. They involve, inter alia, free
schooling, the rehousing of those who lost their homes

in the disaster, and the establishment of a national
programme to fight against hunger and malnutrition.
We also note the adoption of other measures in the
justice sector, in particular, such as the revision of the
criminal code, the appointment of additional judges to
the Court of Cassation and the announcement of the
establishment of the Superior Council of the Judiciary.
Those measures are likely to reassert the authority of
the State and enable the Haitian people to flourish,
which is something that my country welcomes.

However, a feeling of satisfaction does not dispel
our concern with regard to political, security and
humanitarian problems that remain in the country.
Politically, differences run deep, and the political will
to resolve them appears to be lacking. The problems no
doubt feed into the instability characterized recently by
the resignation of Prime Minister Garry Conille, just
four months after his appointment. Moreover, the lack
of consensus, which is very perceptible between the
executive and legislative branches, remains a source of
major concern. These differences in viewpoints do not
inspire confidence and are likely to undermine the
efforts of the international community.

It is important that the authorities and all those
involved in politics in Haiti work to find consensus on
the major issues that divide them. In that regard, Togo
wishes to invite them to follow the road of dialogue
and compromise, overcome partisan differences and
keep firmly on course for reconstruction and
development in a climate of brotherhood, solidarity
and shared responsibility.

With regard to security, which has always been a
major challenge for the Governments of Haiti, it is
encouraging to note that there has been some
improvement. Violence of a political nature has shown
a clear drop, and crime rates for murder, rape and
kidnapping have also declined considerably. My
country commends the efforts being made in that area
and urges the Haitian authorities to continue to pursue
them. However, the perceptible improvement would
not have been possible without the help of
MINUSTAH, which has sought to train the National
Police while providing support in the fight against
organized gangs. We congratulate MINUSTAH for that
cooperation and urge that it be pursued.
In the humanitarian sphere, concerns continue
with regard to the still very high number of internally
displaced persons living in camps, where there has
been a decline in water and sanitation services due to a
lack of funding. The shortage of financing is likely to
deal a severe blow to that major programme for
helping people, since the State does not yet have
sufficient means to respond and cholera has still not
been eradicated.

The overall situation in Haiti today requires that
the international community continue its efforts. This
is the right place to welcome the role played by the
United Nations, in particular MINUSTAH, in the
country before and in the hours immediately after the
earthquake. Its involvement in many reconstruction,
security and rule of law programmes must be
commended because it renews hope in a country where
fear, fatalism and uncertainty had taken hold in
people's hearts and minds.

Looking at the progressive drawdown of the
MINUSTAH surge after the earthquake, it is extremely
urgent, as the report mentions, for the Haitian
Government to take over the process of reconstruction
and development. However, the road to reconstruction
in Haiti seems to be a long one. In that regard, efforts
undertaken by the country's authorities should remain
supported by those from international organizations,
donors and bilateral actors.

Helping Haiti to rebuild itself means bringing
peace to the country and the entire region. Even if
there is a role for the international community to play,
it is first and foremost the Haitians themselves who
must work to build a stable and prosperous State in
their country. That is why we continue to say that now
is not the time for divisiveness or for settling political
accounts. Quite the opposite, Haitians must roll up
their sleeves, and the authorities must establish a
policy of dialogue and national reconciliation so that
all citizens, both in the country and abroad, may take
part in the reconstruction of their country.

