Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): A little more than
four years ago in this very Chamber, a member of the
Security Council proudly declared,

"the use of chemical weapons by any party will
be carefully investigated by the Security Council,
which will stand ready to take action under Chapter
VII of the Charter" (S/PV. 7038, p.4).

"By any party" were wise words indeed. Does anyone
know who uttered those words four years ago? Are
there any guesses? It was the Russian Foreign Minister,
Mr. Sergey Lavrov. Today, those words have lost all
meaning. They ring hollow in this Chamber today,
drowned out by Russia's veto - its ninth on Syria in
six years.

Today, we should have been extending the
investigation that Minister Lavrov called for, allowing
the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) another year to
conduct its vital work. Instead, because ofRussia alone,
that investigation is destined to come to a premature
and unnecessary conclusion next month. Unless Russia
changes its mind, as I hope it does, the report of the
Joint Investigative Mechanism on Khan Shaykhun will
be its last, despite the continuing evidence from the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
of other cases of chemical weapons use in Syria.

I have often expressed my disappointment at
Russia's actions on Syria in this Chamber. I have often
expressed my frustration at their refusal to allow the
Security Council to respond to the most heinous crimes
committed in Syria, but today all I will ask is, why?
Why has Russia alone stopped an investigation whose
work is not yet complete? Why has Russia brought an
end to a Mechanism that it initiated and we all created
and mandated when there are still questions to answer
about sarin in Al-Latamneh. Russia called for the
formation of the JIM; it negotiated its terms and it
agreed its mission. Yet, when faced with the prospect
of the JIM. revealing the truth, why has Russia alone
chosen to shoot the messenger?

It seems that, not content with spuriously
questioning the JIM's methods and conclusions, Russia
has now sought to silence them. Instead of respecting
the professional and impartial work of the JIM, whose
tireless efforts I pay tribute to today, Russia alone has
chosen to abuse its veto to support a regime that has no
regard for international treaties, no regard for the most
basic rules of war, no regard for its own people.

We have worked hard together to build the
international norms and conventions that have long
prevented the use of chemical weapons. For decades
it seemed as though the international community had
reduced these weapons to a historical footnote from the
First World War - no longer used, no longer a part ofa

modern humane society. But now, what kind of message
does this veto send to those who might consider using
such weapons? What kind of message does it send to
groups like Da'esh, the very groups that Russia says it
is committed to defeating?

We have heard a lot about breaking the unity of
the Security Council. It is not the 11 members of the
Security Council who voted in favour of draft resolution
S/20l7/884 who are breaking the unity. It is not the 11
members of the Security Council who did not support
the Russian procedural shenanigans this morning who
are breaking the Security Council's unity. It is Russia,
which is protecting the Syrian regime, that has broken
the Security Council's unity.

The United Kingdom cannot and will not let
Russia's actions today erode the norms that we have
worked so hard to create. Russia's action will not stop
us from working with our partners to find justice for
the victims of chemical weapons and we will not let
up in our efforts to prevent the use of these weapons
by anyone anywhere. The work of the JIM. will not go
to waste. We have its findings; we have its reports and,
whatever Russia's actions today,

"the use of chemical weapons by any party will
be carefully investigated by the Security Council,
which will stand ready to take action under Chapter
VII of the Charter" (S/PV. 7038, p.4),

to quote Minister Lavrov again. We owe it to the victims
to ensure justice.

