Ms. Sison (United States of America): When we
consider the history of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, we far too often have witnessed scenes of
unspeakable violence and human cruelty. The United
Nations and the wider international community have
worked tirelessly for years to help bring peace to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We commend
the efforts of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) to protect Civilians and
support implementation of the 31 December agreement.
The MONUSCO peacekeeping mission has the very
challenging task of helping keep people safe, and
we remain committed to ensuring that it is able to
effectively fulfil its mandate.

But an essential step to ensuring that history
does not once again repeat itself in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is to help the Congolese people
complete a transition of power and make their voices
heard through a credible, peaceful and inclusive
presidential election this year. Election delays cannot
continue. The international community must step up
and apply more pressure, not only on President Kabila
and his Government but also on the Independent
National Electoral Commission. The Commission
must immediately publish an electoral calendar, and
specifically the date for the presidential election.

The United States has already demonstrated that it
will take action against those who delay and obstruct
the implementation of the 31 December agreement
and preparations for credible, peaceful and inclusive
presidential elections. We are ready to take additional
action to sanction those who stand in the way of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's first democratic
transition of power. The Security Council should also
consider targeted sanctions to reduce the violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and help pressure
all stakeholders to play a more constructive role in
moving the country forward. Those responsible for
undermining the peace and security of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and democratic institutions must
be held accountable. Thus far, stakeholders have felt
few consequences for perpetuating instability.

The alternative to supporting a democratic
transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
return to violence, which is what we are seeing today in
the Kasai regions. This return to horrific violence is an
outcome that no one on the Council should want to see,
but in the past few months approximately 1.3 million
Congolese have been displaced, having fled violence
in the Kasais, including nearly 30,000 who are now
refugees in neighbouring Angola.

Just five days ago, the Council heard the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, Adama Dieng, and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Virginia Gamba, relay the sickening reports
coming out of the Kasai regions. We were told that
the conflict is "spreading and intensifying", and that
hundreds, if not thousands, of children had been
forcibly recruited to join the ranks of militant groups.
We have seen videos of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo military summarily executing civilians,
many of whom are children. We have heard reports of
Government personnel executing children as young as
five years-old, as well as reports of widespread sexual
violence committed by the forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. There is no doubt about who
is perpetrating violence in the Kasai regions and what
their motives are.
At the same time, in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo there have been violent clashes,
and around the country we have seen a surge in prison
breaks. Those events, while not necessarily linked,
reflect a lack of State authority or, as some have
suggested, more deliberate efforts on the part of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to advance the strategy of chaos.

There is no time to delay. We urge the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ensure the
rapid start and completion of voter registration in the
Kasais. We also welcome the efforts of MONUSCO to
help support voter registration in the Kasais, in line
with its mandate.

For the United States, our bottom line is clear.
The United States supports holding elections on time,
per the terms of the 31 December agreement of 2016.
There is a narrow window of opportunity for all of us
to press the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to stay true to its commitments. All of us
need to seize this chance now. We already know what
mass violence and horror look like in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We cannot let history repeat
itself.

