Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Republic of Chad for its leadership of the
Security Council during this month. I would also like to
thank Council members for the adoption of resolution
2189 (2014), which is of vital importance to ongoing
stabilization efforts and to the future of Afghanistan.
I also thank Ambassador Quinlan and his team at the
Permanent Mission of Australia for their hard work and
able facilitation of the resolution, as well as for their
dedication as the penholder on Afghanistan.

This resolution has been adopted as the mission
of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
ends and a new phase in Afghanistan's history begins.
In just 19 days, Afghan National Defense and Security
Forces (ANDSF) will assume full responsibility for
the security of the country as the transition process
comes to a close on December 31. The adoption of this
resolution is a clear indication of the continuing support
of the Council and the international community for the
efforts of the Afghan people and the Government of
Afghanistan to bring peace, stability, democracy and
prosperity to the country throughout the transformation
decade.

At this crucial juncture in our history, this resolution
signifies the necessity of enduring and long-term
support for Afghanistan. As the transformation decade
begins, we are grateful to our NATO and international
partners for their commitment to train, advise and assist
the ANDSF after the completion of the ISAF mission.
No doubt, there are challenges ahead. Al-Qaida and the
Taliban continue to launch brutal terror attacks. Just
yesterday, a suicide bomber attacked a French school in
Kabul, killing civilians and injuring 15. A few weeks
ago, a suicide bomber attacked a crowd watching a
volleyball match in Paktika province, killing over
50 people and wounding more than 60 others. Those
are but a few examples ofa series of horrific attacks on
civilians in Kabul and around the country.

In the face of those challenges, the new President
and the national unity Government of Afghanistan look
forward to strengthening cooperation with our NATO,
regional and international partners. We understand
that peace and stability cannot be achieved through
security measures alone. To that end, the Government
of Afghanistan is embarking upon an ambitious reform
agenda aimed at bringing peace and prosperity to the
country.

I would like to take this opportunity to express the
Government of Afghanistan's profound gratitude to the
NATO and partner countries and their international
forces, who have sacrificed their blood and treasure to
support Afghanistan in its fight to advance peace and
security in the country. With the ongoing support of our
international partners, including through the Resolute
Support Mission, and the vigorous work of the new
Government of Afghanistan, their efforts will not have
been in vain.

