Mr. Griffiths: We meet at an important time.
It has been two years - two years too long - since
the Yemeni people had the chance for a negotiated
end to this war. Today, therefore, as we meet we have
the chance to weigh the opportunities for peace and, I
hope, to begin the difficult and uncertain journey away
from war.

Earlier this week I had the privilege to meet with
a man who has lived the mission of peace and of
reconciliation. I am referring to His Highness the Amir
of Kuwait. I cannot easily remember someone who has
so successfully confronted the challenge of war and
then of peace, which he succeeded at, and who has so
clearly shown us how to move from one to the other.
He speaks so movingly of the process by which his
country was rescued, including by the Coalition, and
then formed a constructive relationship with Iraq.

Recently, and despite all our efforts, the pace of the
war has increased. We meet at a time when the focus of
the war is the battle for Al-Hudaydah. What military
people tell me about Al-Hudaydah is that it has become
the centre of gravity of the war. The Red Sea now is also
a theatre of war. We have tried to find a way to avoid a
battle for the city and the port of Al-Hudaydah, and we
are still trying. But even though the requirements for
such an arrangement are not yet met, it is to be noted
that our efforts, with the Council's unified support,
have managed to narrow the gap between the two sides
in ways that nobody expected.

What is clear to me now is that this issue - the
resolution to the specific crisis in Al-Hudaydah - has
a better chance of being resolved within the context of
a comprehensive political settlement. What does that
mean for us today? I think it means that it is time long
past for us, together, to call for an early resumption of
the political process, which has lasted two years since
the last round in Kuwait. My principal message and
request to the Council today is that we urge the parties
to resolve this conflict through negotiation rather than
through military means, which is a sentiment that
members of the Council have consistently expressed in
recent months.

After having consulted with the parties, I plan
therefore to invite them to Geneva on 6 September for
a first round of consultations. These consultations will
provide the opportunity for the parties, among other
things, to discuss the framework for negotiations and
to agree on relevant confidence-building measures and
specific plans for moving the process forward. I ask for
the Council's support in this. In that connection, our
engagements with women's groups, as well as southern
stakeholders, are crucial to the success of future
consultations. As is set out in resolution 2216 (2015), I
would aim for as inclusive a process as possible.

I did not come lightly to this decision. I have
based this on the advice given to me by Yemenis
from all quarters in the months since assuming my
responsibilities. I have engaged primarily with the
parties, but also with civil society. I am especially
grateful for my meetings with Yemeni women as I
continue to consult with them on elements of the peace
process. Their voices unsurprisingly and consistently
remind us that Yemeni families bear the brunt of this
conflict and want it to be done with.
I know from that engagement that a political
solution to this war, in line with the relevant resolutions
of the Council, the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative
and the national dialogue outcome, is available, as
I have said before to the Council. We know what can
work. We have heard it from all sides. We have talked
to all of them, and we have studied the experience of
past efforts to resolve this conflict. As the Amir was
reminding me the other day, 100 days in Kuwait is an
enormously valuable guide for us.

An end to this war cannot come too soon for the
people of Yemen. As our humanitarian colleagues are
quick to remind us - and I am sure John Ging will do
so - if we do not succeed together in putting an end to
it, there will be millions more Yemenis depending on
the assistance of our humanitarian agencies. I am very
conscious, as we all are, that each day costs lives that
we might have saved, and that people could have been
alive who are not today had we acted earlier.

I would like to speak for a moment about what
is happening in Yemen. On Al-Hudaydah, as already
mentioned, we have made progress, particularly with
regards to a United Nations role in the port, which
was agreed with me by the leadership of Ansar Allah
some weeks ago. This does not mean, however, that the
gap is closed. The gap is not closed. We will continue
our efforts to find a peaceful solution in that regard.
This progress is due to the serious cooperation I have
received from all sides as well as the Security Council's
active support.

I continue to enjoy the close cooperation and
support of the Government of Yemen and its leadership,
which is always an important engaging primary
partner, as well as the leadership of the coalition. I
have also had a series of constructive and positive
meetings with the senior leadership of Ansar Allah.
These relationships are absolutely key to any potential
success we may expect in the endeavour of reaching
a political settlement. The nurturing of relationships
is the primary task of somebody in my position. Let
us therefore not throw away what we have achieved
on Al-Hudaydah. I am determined to build on it in our
consultations. As I have been reminded, let us not allow
progress or the absence of it on Al-Hudaydah deter us
from our primary focus, which is on the search for a
political solution to this conflict.

I am concerned that Al-Hudaydah could be a
flashpoint. I take seriously any offer of de-escalation,
regardless of its magnitude, including the unilateral
offer from Ansar Allah to stop all attacks on shipping.
Many of us would not have wanted those attacks to have
happened at all. My concern is to avoid any action with
dire humanitarian consequences, in particular those
by my Office that may undermine the resumption of
the political process in September. I therefore call on
the parties, perhaps with the support of the Security
Council, to create an environment conducive - and I
use these words carefully - a conducive environment
to allow for this to happen.

On other matters, I am greatly encouraged by
the common desire of the parties to have the many
thousands of prisoners of war released. My Office has
been hard at work on this issue. On each occasion that
I have met with President Mansour Hadi Mansour, he
has particularly urged us to take a lead on this issue,
which I think is a tribute to his humanity. I know that
we all want to see forward movement in this area as
soon as possible.

I would like to conclude by summing up my
requests to the Security Council. First, I would ask
for support for my effort to begin consultations in
September in Geneva. Secondly, I would like support
for de-escalation in AlHudaydah a and to keep the
Red Sea out of the conflict. Thirdly, I ask for support
for those measures - I have mentioned one, the release
of prisoners, but there are many others - that bring
hope back to the people of Yemen. It is the people of
Yemen who will ensure that we have a good chance
of making the political negotiations work. Without
their involvement, interests, advocacy and support,
we will not make it. They need encouragement to
believe that this can happen. Fourthly, I would ask
Council members, as I know they will, to join me
in recognizing the extraordinary courage of the
international humanitarian organizations working in
the country. I have had the privilege in my frequent
Visits to Yemen of witnessing first hand their courage,
diligence, reliability, independence and impartiality. It
is an exceptional privilege for all ofus to be colleagues.

Finally, through you, Madam President, I would
like to thank the Security Council for the extraordinary
level of support that it has provided to my efforts. It
makes an enormous difference to have a united and
eloquent Council asserting the principles of the United
Nations. The Council's continued unity is, by any
standards, the key to the resolution of this conflict.

