Mrs. Albright (United States of America): Although
the military action in Croatia has preoccupied us in recent
days, we must not forget the tragedy and outrages
perpetrated earlier in Bosnia against the eastern enclaves of
Srebrenica and Zepa. We must not forget those Bosnian
Serb attacks, because the magnitude of the suffering they
caused was enormous, even in the grim context of the
former Yugoslavia. As many as 13,000 men, women and
children were driven from their homes and forced to seek
refuge in already heavily burdened cities under Government
control, some even across the border in Serbia.

We must not forget Srebrenica and Zepa because these
are areas for which this Council assumed a special
responsibility. These were United Nations-protected safe
areas. These were areas where we hoped our authority and
legitimacy, as the voice of the international community,
would offer protection from violence and attack. Tragically,
the authority of this Council and the good opinion of the
world appear to mean little to the leadership of the Bosnian
Serbs.

We must not forget what happened in Srebrenica and
Zepa, because the story of what happened there is not over.
It certainly has not been fully told, and innocent lives
remain at stake.

Some 10,000 civilians from Srebrenica and around
3,000 from Zepa are missing and unaccounted for. Some
may be in hiding. Some may be in detention. Some are
most certainly dead. We have a responsibility to
investigate, to find out what we can and to see that those
in hiding are granted safe passage, that those in detention
are well treated or released, that the names of those who
died or who were killed are made known to their families
and that those responsible for illegal and outrageous
activities are brought to justice.

We must not forget what happened in Srebrenica and
Zepa, because there are strong grounds to believe,
especially with respect to Srebrenica, that the Pale Serbs
beat, raped and murdered many of those fleeing the
violence. These dead were not killed in the heat of battle,
they were not killed in self-defence and they were not
killed by accident; they were systematically slaughtered
on the instructions of the Bosnian Serb leadership.

We know this from the credible accounts of refugees
who witnessed these crimes, including persons
interviewed by our Government. And we know it from
sensitive information shared earlier today with members
of this Council, unique information obtained by the
United States. The combination of these eyewitness
accounts and our intelligence data provides compelling
evidence of barbarous and systematic murder by the
Bosnian Serbs.

The resolution we have adopted today demands that
the Bosnian Serbs give immediate access to persons
displaced from Srebrenica and Zepa who are in the areas
under Bosnian Serb control. The resolution demands
further that access be granted to persons detained against
their will, requires that the rights of persons detained be
respected, and reiterates that those who commit violations
of international humanitarian law will be held
accountable - as individuals - for those acts.

Representatives from the appropriate international
organizations are ready now - today - to travel to the
areas of Bosnia and Herzegovina where those displaced
by the violence in Srebrenica and Zepa are most likely to
be. This resolution makes it clear that the Bosnian Serbs
have a responsibility to permit them safe passage and to
allow them to do their jobs.

 

The United States Government strongly supports this
resolution. It is important that we focus international
attention on the plight of the refugee population from
Srebrenica and Zepa. We do not know all that has
happened to them, but we do know that we all have a
responsibility to find out.

We cannot allow ourselves, nor can we allow others,
simply to shrug off the crimes committed in the aftermath
of Srebrenica as an inevitable side-effect of ethnic conflict.
We cannot accept rape or beatings or the murder of
civilians as legitimate tactics of war. I am reminded of the
words of the poet Archibald MacLeish, who wrote in 1940
of the world's passive response to the rise of fascism:

"Murder is not absolved of immorality by committing
murder. Murder is absolved of immorality by bringing
men to think that murder is not evil. This only the
perversion of the mind can bring about. And the
perversion of the mind is only possible when those
who should be heard in its defence are silent".
Establishing the truth about what has happened in
Srebrenica and throughout the Balkans war is essential not
only to justice, but to peace. Responsibility for the atrocities
committed does not rest with the Serbs or any other people
as a group: it rests with the individuals who ordered and
committed the crimes. And true reconciliation will not be
possible in this region until the perception of collective
guilt is expunged and personal responsibility is assigned.

