Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Madam President,
as this is the first time my delegation takes the floor
during your presidency of the Security Council in
the month of February 2014, allow me the pleasure of
commending your work and to say how pleased my
country, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, is
to see the friendly country of Lithuania leading the
Council's deliberations this month. I also thank you for
giving me this opportunity to take the floor before the
Council at this meeting focused on the promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

My country aspires to peace and stability. We
make a valuable contribution to promoting the rule of
law through our active participation in the major legal
instruments of the United Nations system. We are
therefore among those courageous States Members of
the United Nations that have formally made declarations
of acceptance of the compulsory jurisdiction of the
International Court of Justice. For more than a decade
now, having positively added to its docket a number
of matters, we have been one of the main appellants
before the Court. Along those lines, we also remain a
model of cooperation with the International Criminal
Court, which was established to combat impunity for
crimes whose gravity has long outraged humankind's
collective consciousness.

With respect to the Great Lakes region, to which
my country belongs, it must be emphasized that respect
for the rule of law is a democratic value that plays no
part in the ambitions of those who seek, through actions
or deeds, to reignite hotbeds of tension. The remnants
of the negative forces that have long appeared on the
updated lists of persons under sanctions by the United
Nations, the European Union and the Government of
the United States of America who still remain in the
region should understand that they will not enjoy
impunity. Sooner or later, they will have to answer
to justice for their actions. We urge those countries
harbouring them to assist in arresting and transferring
them before the competent judicial bodies, including
before the International Criminal Court.

Moreover, as noted by one African Head of
State, we will not achieve peace simply by avoiding
confrontation. Peace represents humankind's mental
health, the satisfaction of seeing justice overcome
injustice.

Experience has shown that peace accords will
succeed only in the light of respect for the rule of law.
That requires strengthened confidence in police, justice
and corrections sectors. Nevertheless, it is universally
acknowledged that upholding the rule of law is
fundamental in ensuring lasting peace after conflict.
In other words, peacekeeping efforts must lead to
improved police, justice and corrections services, as
well as the institutions to which they are accountable.

In a welcome development, all major peacekeeping
operations and many special political missions have
for some time now been called upon to work with
host countries in strengthening the rule of law. In that
respect, most United Nations peacekeeping operations
now include a specialized human rights team.

Although, inprinciple, UnitedNations peacekeeping
operations are deployed to support the implementation
ofa ceasefire or peace agreement, they are often called
upon to play an active role in peacekeeping efforts
and to participate in the early stages of peacebuilding.
Today, the Organization's multifaceted peacekeeping
operations facilitate political processes, protect
civilians, assist in the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants, support
preparations for elections, defend and protect human
rights and help to re-establish the rule of law. They may
use force if necessary in order to fulfil their mandates
or protect civilians.

The establishment of the Intervention Brigade
within the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is part of that effort. The Intervention Brigade is
responsible for neutralizing armed groups in order to
help reduce the threat they pose to the State's authority
and the security of civilians residing in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as for
preparing the ground for stabilization activities.

To ensure the establishment of the rule of law
in a country emerging from conflict, national and
local capacities must be enhanced at the start of a
peacekeeping operation. Respect for the primacy of the
law is essential to stregthening peace and justice and
ending impunity.

As part of the process of reaching peace agreements,
political negotiations should lay the foundations for a
justice system that is able to address the burdensome
legacy of the serious violations of human rights that
took place during years of war and to prevent their
recurrence in future.

In practice, that approach involves genuine
synergies between the democratic requirements of
re-establishing the rule of law and the need to restore
and to build peace.

In a context profoundly marked by the needs
associated with re-establishing the rule of law and
peacebuilding, the importance of a spirit of dialogue
and reconciliation often become imperatives that
cannot be avoided. However, we must avoid creating a
situation wherein meeting the demands of dialogue and
reconciliation becomes a boon for the insurgents.

We must ensure that the spread of armed violence
does not become a way to settle political conflicts and
social grievances. Such Violence, prompted by a reward
for insurrection, has often led to failure in the process of
re-establishing the rule oflaw and peacebuilding in areas
of conflict. In practice, the mandates of peacekeeping
operations need to be more clear and precise when
it comes to issues related to the rule of law. It up to
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to see to
it that the rule of law, human rights and transitional
justice mechanisms are integrated in the strategic and
operational planning of peacekeeping operations. In
that context, we must ensure that host countries enjoy
comprehensive and integrated assistance in the field of
the rule of law from the establishment ofa peacekeeping
operation.

In conclusion, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains convinced that peace and justice
complement each other. Our experience has shown
the irreplaceable role of justice as a factor for social
harmony, national reconciliation, peace, security and
stability. We have understood that respect for the rule
of law and for human rights cannot prevail in a society
when the perpetrators of crimes are not brought to
justice. Similarly, peace cannot be consolidated in a
society beset by impunity.

