Mr. Zackheos (Cyprus): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Cyprus Government. We have
also aligned ourselves with the statement delivered by
Spain on behalf of the European Union.

The Government and the people of Cyprus
express their profound concern and sorrow at the
worsening situation in the Middle East and condemn
Violence and any actions resulting in innocent victims,
be they Israelis or Palestinians.

We express full sympathy and solidarity with
President Yasser Arafat, whom we consider the
legitimate leader and representative of the Palestinian
people, and we call upon the Israeli troops to withdraw
immediately from Ramallah and the rest of the
Palestinian territories. We also call for an immediate
ceasefire and for resumption of dialogue in order to
rescue the peace process. In that respect, we join the
entire international community in calling for the
immediate and full implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002).

We urge Israel to desist from actions the thrust of
which is the collective punishment and humiliation of
the Palestinian population and to avoid a
disproportionate response to violence. We condemn the
extrajudicial executions of Palestinians, which are
illegal under international law. We also believe that
actions against medical and humanitarian institutions
and personnel are absolutely unacceptable. We call for
full adherence to international law and international
humanitarian law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention. In that regard, we express our opposition
to illegal Israeli settlement activities.

We are particularly alarmed at reports of an
impending operation against Palestinians who have
sought refuge in the Church of the Nativity. We urge
the resolution of this issue in such a way as to respect
the sanctity of that most important religious site. The
same goes for all other religious sites which have
unfortunately fallen Victim to attack and unwarranted
destruction due to the hostilities. We call on Israel, as
the occupying Power, to abide by its international
obligations and to exercise maximum restraint.

Let me also underline that we strongly condemn
any and all forms of terrorism, for which there is no
justification, and we support the right of Israel and all
other States of the region to live in peace and security.

The Cyprus Government will support any
international initiative or effort aimed at preventing the
conflict from escalating further, and we urge those who
have the power to do so to assist in achieving an
immediate ceasefire and the return of the parties to the
negotiating table. In that respect, we will support an
increased and urgent role by the "quartet", and we call
for the parties to cooperate fully with Special Envoy
Zinni and others towards the implementation of the
Tenet work plan and the Mitchell report's
recommendations. We fully support the establishment
of a third-party monitoring mechanism.

We also welcome the declaration adopted at the
recent Arab League meeting in Beirut, and we reiterate
our support for a just and lasting settlement of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). We support a
solution that will put an end to the occupation of Arab
lands and to the plight of the Palestinian people,
ensuring the fulfilment of their legitimate rights,
including their right to an independent State. The
solution of the Middle East problem will bring stability
to this sensitive region of the world, will ensure normal
relations and the safety and security of all countries of
the region, and will put an end to violence,
strengthening the forces of moderation and
cooperation.

Finally, allow me to reiterate the unwavering
support of Cyprus for the pursuit of peace in the
region. The Government and the people of Cyprus,
who traditionally have strong bonds of friendship with
both the Palestinian and Israeli peoples, stand ready to
play a constructive role towards the achievement of
this goal. It is in this context that my Government has
offered to host, later this month, in Nicosia, the next
meeting of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, which we
hope will contribute in its own way to building the
necessary bridges of understanding between the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples.

