Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): We begin by joining the members of the Council in welcoming all our briefers today and extend our gratitude to them for their informative briefings. We note the presence of the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines continues to stand steadfast in its advocacy of and adherence to the immutable principles of international law. These arethe foundational truths upon which our international community is built and within which small States like ours are able to exist. To deviate from these principles would be an assault on the rights and privileges of all States, and we deplore any action to this effect. We express our concern about the current situation in the Donbas region. International law cannot be sporadically applied or set aside in the pursuit of convenient or expedient solutions. Its application must be equal. To that end, we underscore the relevant international principles as the guiding tools in the resolution of the crisis, including the Minsk agreements. Recently, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines emphasized its support for the Minsk agreements, as we expressed our hope for the full implementation under the auspices of the Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group. The tenets outlined in the Minsk agreements are necessary for lasting peace. We highlight the importance of the ceasefire in achieving that and deplore all violations of this measure. The ceasefire remains an indispensable component of the agreements. We take this opportunity to recognize recent efforts that have been made, particularly as they relate to confidence-building measures. Trust between and among relevant parties is crucial to strengthening our dialogue and achieving a sustainable solution. Continued prisoner exchanges must be encouraged, as should efforts towards identifying further areas of disengagement. We are also encouraged by the fact that the Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine (SMM) of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has recorded fewer ceasefire violations in some areas. We welcome the work of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, which continues to observe security across the region and report on the situation. In order to facilitate the Mission in the discharge of its mandate, we emphasize the need for safe and secure access for its staff on the ground, including unrestricted movement of SMM personnel. In conclusion, we emphasize our support for the Special Monitoring Mission and the framework established by the Minsk agreements, and stress the need for the unconditional implementation by both parties of the provisions therein.
