Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): It is a great
pleasure for me to address the Security Council in the
presence of His Excellency President Faustin Archange
Touadera, whom I welcome to the Chamber. His
presence here provides us with a unique opportunity
not only to update the Council on the progress made,
but also to take a moment to reflect on the challenges we
face and the solutions we should envision as partners.

If we recall the situation almost a year ago, the
presidential and legislative elections were taking place.
They marked an important milestone in the country's
history following a prolonged crisis that brought the
Central African Republic to the edge of the abyss. Much
progress has been made in the country over the past
12 months thank to the tireless efforts of the President
himself and the Government and the people of the
Central African Republic. That progress is especially
reflected in improved security in the capital, the
adoption of a number of crucial reforms and accelerated
efforts to advance security sector reform, establish
the rule of law and bolster the fight against impunity.
We must acknowledge that this progress is promising.
Nonetheless, there are still formidable challenges. That
is why we must remain more firmly committeed than
ever to this issue.

Since my briefing to the Council on 15 February (see S/PV.7884), the political and operational engagement
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) has made it possible for important
progress to be made, that is, restoring State authority
in the strategically important city of Bambari, thereby
demonstrating the extent to which the peacekeeping
operation can be a critical tool to support change in the
country. MINUSCA used its air assets twice to prevent
the advances of the Front populaire pour la renaissance
de la Centrafrique (FPRC), which was directly
threatening the civilian population, and successfully
facilitated the departure from Bambari of the leader of
the Union pour la paix en Centrafrique, Mr. Ali Darassa,
and of other armed group commanders. MINUSCA
also apprehended, on 26 February, three leaders of the
FPRC-led coalition in Bambari, who have since been
formally charged by the national judicial authorities on
a number of counts.

MINUSCA did what was necessary to restore
security in Bambari and to fend off efforts by the
armed groups who were trying to take the town by
force. MINUSCA's presence is also intended to pave
the way for the stabilization of the town over the long
term and to restore State authority. A detachment of
31 gendarmes arrived in Bambari on 9 March, and
three magistrates were in place the following day. The
United Nations system is also supporting a series of
coordinated short- and medium-term plans to promote
community dialogue and social cohesion, revive the
local economy and improve access to education and
health care.

As President Touadera stated earlier, the operation
in Bambari yielded a political dividend in that both
the FPRC and the anti-Balaka faction led by Maxime
Mokom have now agreed to designate representatives to
the advisory follow-up committee on the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation (DDRR)
process, led by the President. All 14 of the main armed
groups have now joined the Committee, whose first
meeting, I believe, is scheduled for 23 March. That
would have not been possible without the tireless efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of MINUSCA.

The progress that has been achieved is significant,
but it should not obscure the fact that neither military
force alone nor DDRR programmes will resolve
the armed group problem that plagues the country.
Successful disarmament requires that all groups
wholeheartedly commit themselves and that a broad
agreement that responds, first and foremost, to the
aspirations of the population and the armed groups is
put in place. Past experiences in the Central African
Republic and in other contexts demonstrate that we
must not give up on our efforts. We must persist, and
our efforts must be accompanied by financial support.
In that respect, allow me to express my appreciation
for the announcement by World Bank Vice-President
for the Africa Region, Mr. Makhtar Diop, together with
President Touadera , that the World Bank would to
provide $30 million for the national DDRR programme.
This must all be carried out.

I would also like to underscore the importance
of President Touaderas determination to step up the
dialogue with the armed groups, while at the same
time ensuring that the voices of the population, and in
particular the victims of the conflict, are heard. The
subregion, which has stood by the Central African
Republic since the crisis erupted in 2012, has a critical
role to play in support of the dialogue efforts. That is
why the Secretary-General has publically expressed
his support for the African initiative for a peace and
reconciliation agreement between the Government and
all armed groups. We welcome the commitment of all
members of the African initiative and we hope that it
strengthens President Touadera's efforts in connection
with the armed groups, while respecting the outcomes
and recommendations of the Bangui Forum, including
by addressing in a mutually supportive way the
imperatives for justice and reconciliation in full respect
of the strong and legitimate expectations of the Central
African people.

The Government of President Touadera has
demonstrated its support for the establishment of the
special criminal court to ensure that impunity does not
prevail for the most serious crimes. We are aware of
the consequences that the culture of impunity has had
in the past in his country. That must all be brought to
an end. The appointment of a special prosecutor of the
court, the current accelerating rate in the recruitment
process for national magistrates and judicial police, the
adoption of a strategy to protect victims and witnesses
and the support of Council members for the court are all
important so that transitional justice efforts are given
the means to finally address the deplorable legacy of
human rights abuses.

The international community's solidarity with the
Central African people was demonstrated through the
pledging of over $2.2 billion at the Brussels Conference
in November. More than ever, I urge the countries that
demonstrated such generosity to keep their promises
so that development projects can finally begin
and accelerate.

We should also not forget the serious humanitarian
situation that the country is facing. More than 2 million
Central Africans, more than half the total population,
are in need of assistance, particularly food assistance.
I believe that number represents the highest ratio in the
world today, and we cannot ignore it. In that regard,
too, we need donors to make good on their generous
pledges so that we can do everything possible to
support the efforts of the Central African authorities to
facilitate the return of displaced persons and refugees
to their homes.

In conclusion,withregardto the visionthat President
Touadera has just outlined to the Security Council, I
would like to reiterate that he has the continued support
of the United Nations and MINUSCA, and in Bambari
we have been able to prove that. I believe that in its
entire history the Central African Republic has rarely, if
ever, received such a level of support and commitment.
We therefore count on the President more than ever
to ensure that all the priorities outlined in the Mutual
Engagement Framework and the National Recovery
and Peacebuilding Plan are fully implemented, with
a view to transforming the daily lives of all Central
Africans. It is also essential that the rest ofthe country's
institutions work in concert with the Government
to advance those commitments in a spirit that must
be guided by the country's interests. More than ever,
it is time for national unity if we are to overcome all
these challenges.

The gains that have been made in the Central
African Republic over the past three years, in particular
over the past 12 months, have shown that United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa can make a real
difference. When our operations have good leadership
and the right capabilities, they can play an irreplaceable
role - in support of national efforts and together with
international partners - in promoting and supporting
the reforms that are essential to a lasting solution to
a conflict and to stability. Since the beginning of the
crisis, the Council has provided indispensable support
to the Central African Republic. Now it is time to
consolidate our achievements and make practical
progress in stabilizing the country - and the region,
since everything is connected - and for that we need
major political support from the Council and robust
support and sufficient resources for MINUSCA.
Because, and let us say it out loud, if the situation
continues to develop as positively as it has been
recently, MINUSCA will not have to prolong its stay
in the Central African Republic. While we cannot deny
that the road will still be long and sometimes difficult,
I am firmly convinced that, with the commitment of the
Central African Republic and the sustained assistance
of the international community, the country will be
able to succeed in closing this sad chapter in its history
and move resolutely towards a promising future.

