Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Pedersen for being here today. The
United States congratulates him on his appointment
and welcomes him to the Security Council for his first
briefing as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria. We look forward to working with him to find a
political solution to the Syrian conflict through the full
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). The United
States is unwavering in its commitment to achieving a
peaceful political settlement to the Syrian conflict in
line with resolution 2254 (2015).

I amjoined today by the Secretary of State's Special
Representative for Syria Engagement, my good friend
Ambassador Jim Jeffrey, to underscore the United
States determination and sense of urgency towards
implementing the blue print of resolution 2254 (2015)
for a political transition in Syria, which still remains
stalled by the Russian Federation and its supporters,
although the Council unanimously adopted it three
years ago.

The United States supports the Special Envoy's

efforts to convene a legitimate, credible and balanced
constitutional committee. We remain prepared to
support the formation of a constitutional committee
once the United Nations is satisfied that the membership,
composition and rules of procedure are balanced. We
once again affirm that the committee must be balanced
in its inclusion of civil society, opposition and regime
representatives if it is to meet the credibility criteria.
The United States welcomes Special Envoy Pedersen's
plans to explore other potential initiatives within the
four-baskets framework, including constitutional
reform and the need for credible preparations for United
Nations-administered free and fair elections.

In addition, it is clear that violence must stop in
order for a political solution to take hold. One of the
best ways that the Council can support Special Envoy
Pedersen's efforts on the political track is to ensure the
creation of a stable security environment not just in
Idlib, but throughout Syria. That, of course, will require
the Al-Assad regime and its allies to uphold the calls of
resolution 2254 (2015) for a comprehensive nationwide
ceasefire. Therefore, it is vital that Security Council
members redouble our efforts towards our shared
goal of de-escalating the military conflict in Syria in
order to create a safe and calm environment, alongside
a political process that honours the will of the Syrian
people. To that end, the United States strongly urges
the parties to maintain the Turkish/Russian-brokered
ceasefire agreement in Idlib. We are deeply concerned
about both the increase in air strikes and other military
activity in Idlib.

Terrorism cannot be used as a pretext for targeting
civilians. The United States urges the parties to the
Idlib ceasefire to ensure the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure in Idlib governorate in
accordance with international humanitarian law. As we
have repeatedly stressed since its inception, the Turkish/
Russian-brokered ceasefire is essential for protecting
the nearly 3 million civilians residing in Idlib. Syrians
have experienced significant reductions of air strikes
and civilian deaths since the ceasefire went into effect
in September 2018. Once again, to repeat what we have
said in the Council for many months, any major military
operation in Idlib would be a reckless escalation of the
conflict and would result in a humanitarian catastrophe
far beyond what we have witnessed during previous
regime assaults on eastern Ghouta, Aleppo and Homs.
The international community should find ways to
de-escalate the conflict, including by maintaining the
Idlib, ceasefire in order to save lives and provide space
for the political process.

Resolution 2254 (2015) also calls on the parties to
release arbitrarily detained individuals, particularly
women and children. Efforts to release detainees,
including abductees and missing persons, held by
the Al-Assad regime and Syrian political opposition
groups, have been insufficient under the auspices of the
Astana guarantors. Progress on the release of detainees
and missing persons is an important step towards
building the trust and confidence necessary to achieve
a political solution, and it is a vital component of a
political solution under resolution 2254 (2015).

Next month will be the eighth anniversary of the
beginning of the Syrian conflict. The United States
believes that a political solution in Syria can be arrived
at only through the full implementation of resolution
2254 (2015). We will continue to support the efforts
of the United Nations and Special Envoy Pedersen to
achieve that goal.

