Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by
recognizing the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali. We
thank him for being with us today.

Let me also thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his useful briefing to the Council today.

We welcome the progress that has been made
in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali in recent months. This
includes the establishment of Operational Coordination
Mechanisms in Kidal and Timbuktu and the Prime
Minister's visit to the northern and central regions.
It is now crucial that the implementation of the
peace agreement be intensified and that the current
momentum be maintained through the presidential
election campaign. It is also imperative that the
eventual winner of the presidential election continue to
prioritize the peace process.

Inclusivity is an essential prerequisite for building
a sustainable peace in any country. That is also true
in Mali. As stated in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/541), little progress has been made in ensuring
women's meaningful engagement in the peace process.
We must step up our efforts in this regard, and we call
on all parties to urgently address this shortfall.

We are concerned by the lack of trust between the
Government and opposition parties, highlighted most
recently by violent clashes sparked by demonstrations.
It is crucial that political actors and parties put aside
their differences and work towards the holding of
inclusive, transparent and credible elections, for the
good of all Malians.

The continued deterioration of the situation in
central Mali, leading to an unprecedented number of
civilian casualties, remains of great concern. We are
particularly worried by serious allegations of human
rights abuses and violations in the context of counter-
terrorism operations being carried out by the Malian
armed forces. We call on the Government to step
up protection efforts in the region and to conduct
investigations of alleged abuses and violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.
Restoring trust in the Government and building the
legitimacy of State functions in the region, including by
providing basic social services, is essential. It will also
be important to take local dynamics into account and
address the fundamental causes of instability, including
conflicts over resources and land, inequalities,
exclusion and climate change.

Turning to the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), we welcome the conclusions
of the independent strategic review, as presented in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/541). It makes
important recommendations on how to better align
the Mission's objectives and strategic vision with
the realities on the ground and key provisions of the
Peace Agreement, including those on decentralization,
security-sector reform and reconciliation. The Peace
Agreement is the only possible path to peace and
stability in Mali, and supporting its implementation
should remain the Mission's priority. For that reason,
we support the idea of enhancing MINUSMA's
political role as well as developing a pact for peace,
which would link assistance to existing benchmarks
and timelines, including progress on governance and
institutional reforms.

We agree that the United Nations presence in Mali
needs greater strategic coherence, since, along with
integrated planning within the Mission, it remains
essential to fulfilling the objectives ofa common vision
in support of the peace process and stabilization. It is
clear that we must reinvigorate the United Nations
efforts, together with those of the Malian authorities,
to address the situation in central Mali. We support the
recommendation of formulating a fully integrated plan
that takes the multidimensional nature of the challenges
in the region into account. Finally, it is important to
ensure that the Mission's key civilian components, not
least in the area of human rights, are safeguarded. In
the light of the heavy security presence on the ground,
monitoring and reporting on such issues is essential.

The situation in Mali has implications for the wider
region. It is therefore important to ensure that the
implementation of the Peace Agreement can proceed
more rapidly and that peaceful, fair and transparent
elections will be held in July. The United Nations has
an important role to play in support of the national
efforts and will continue to have our full support.

