Mr. Galvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Like many
States Members of the Organization, Chile follows the
issue of the working methods of the Security Council
with special interest, convinced that transparency
and inclusiveness will help to strengthen the capacity
and legitimacy of this main organ, and consequently
of the United Nations. This interest is reflected in our
participation in the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, whose statement, delivered by the
representative of Switzerland, we endorse.

We appreciate this open debate organized by
Azerbaijan, the fourth consecutive annual open debate
on the subject. Clearly, it helps to consolidate a practice
that, trust us, will continue in the future.

The transparency and inclusiveness of the Council's
work are the objectives that should guide our review
of the working methods. We welcome the adoption of
presidential note S/2013/515, under the presidency of
Argentina, and the commitments contained therein
to use and enhance the tools and mechanisms of
transparency and better coordination with other bodies
of the Organization.

The practice of holding the largest possible number
of open and public meetings, informal interactive
dialogues and Arria Formula meetings contributes both
to the legitimacy of the Council's work and to its quality,
since the Council can benefit from understanding the
diversity of positions and visions of the States Members
of the United Nations. We believe that there is still
room to make better use of visions presented in these
instances, for example through a programme of work
that allows the Council to know these positions prior to
undertaking negotiations and adopting documents on
the matters in question.

We emphasize the complementarity of the work of
regional and subregional organizations with that carried
out by the United Nations, and Council in particular.
In this regard, we note the high-level open debate on
this matter held on 6 August (see S/PV.7015), which, in
addition to the participation of senior officials from our
region, included briefings by the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States and the Union of South
American Nations. The Council should continue to
deepen its consultations and cooperation with relevant
regional and subregional organizations, in line with
the distribution of functions under Chapter VIII of the
Charter.

Note S/2013/515 also addresses coordination with
other organs of the Organization, including in the
field of peacebuilding. This matter is of particular
relevance to the need to strengthen coherence and avoid
duplication among different organs. Strengthening
the joint work with the Peacebuilding Commission,
including the participation of its Chair and the chairs of
the different configurations, as appropriate, in meetings
of the Council is an important step.

We believe that the Working Group on

Peacekeeping Operations could expand its scope to
address peacebuilding, establishing links with relevant
stakeholders in that domain. The consideration of
specific peacebuilding situations would take place only
when the Working Group deemed it necessary. That
measure would allow for the establishment of a working
relationship between the bodies that address these two
closely linked topics, while making progress in what is
required in the course of reviewing the Peacebuilding
Commission with regard to establishing a more fluid
and informal dialogue with the Security Council.
Further, it could allow us to explore strengthening the
interaction with the Economic and Social Council's ad
hoc groups that are relevant to the work of this Council.

A fundamental element for achieving greater
inclusiveness and transparency is the availability of
and easy access to the Council's documentation. We
recognize the progress made in that area through the
content made available on the Council's web page.
This includes background information on the monthly
programme of work and the repertoire of practice. We
value the efforts of the Secretariat in that area.

We believe that the Security Council should continue
to use all the means at its disposal to gather information
related to the implementation of its resolutions. In the
briefings of commissions and bodies of inquiry created
by the United Nations to look into situations on the
agenda, we urge the Council to explore mechanisms
that allow for a strengthening of interactivity, giving
priority to the opportunity to gather greater background
information on matters being addressed.

Finally, I should like recall the statement made by
the President of Chile in the recent general debate of
the General Assembly (see A/68/PV.5), in which he
joined the calls for the countries that have the veto right
to abstain from using it in situations of crimes against
humanity, war crimes, genocide or ethnic cleansing. He
also proposed leaving behind the logic of vetoes and
replacing it with a logic of special quorums, so that
the most relevant decisions, which inevitably affect
us all, will be adopted with resounding, broad and
representative majorities of the community of nations.

