Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I too wish to
thank Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs; Mr. Antonio Guterres, United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; Ms. Ertharin
Cousin, Executive Director of the United Nations World
Food Programme; and Ms. Angelina Jolie Pitt, Special
Envoy of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, for their briefings.

The situation in Syria is unfortunately continuing
to deteriorate seriously despite the numerous alarm
calls sounded by humanitarian actors and the messages
sent to the parties to the conflict through the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. We are powerless
witnesses, almost on a daily basis, to scenes of
bombardments and mortar attacks against civilians,
including women and children, with disregard for
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

It is time for all the parties to assume their
responsibilities and contain the devastating
consequences of their actions -soon five years of
murderous conflict - in particular the suffering
inflicted on the people, killing, injuring and besieging
millions, and creating millions ofrefugees and displaced
persons. In addition to these human and humanitarian
disasters, there has been significant destruction of vital
national infrastructure, jeopardizing the future for
generations to come.

The tragedy in Syria must call on our collective

conscience. We must not stand passively by watching
the security situation deteriorate further. It is time for
the Security Council and the international community
as a whole to express its solidarity with the Syrian
people by taking specific and effective measures to
bring an end to the Violence in Syria and to hold the
parties accountable for the acts they have committed
in clear violation of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.

We reiterate our appeal to the parties to the conflict
to ensure that they comply with the provisions of
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014)
by ending all attacks against civilians and civilian
infrastructure, so as to allow access for humanitarian
aid to those in need. They Syrian Government has the
primary responsibility in that regard. We also call upon
the international community as a whole to increase
assistance to United Nations agencies and partners in
order to enable them to reach all civilians in Syria as
well as in refugee camps in neighbouring countries. In
that connection, we welcome the donor conference held
in Kuwait on 31 March, and hope that all international
partners will honour their commitments by releasing
the funds needed to face up to the increasingly urgent
humanitarian needs.

The countries hosting Syrian refugees, in spite
of limited resources, must be supported, especially
Lebanon and Jordan. That means that the international
community should bear the burden with those countries
and finance projects already begun, particularly
the construction of new infrastructure designed to
strengthen the capacity of the host countries. We
welcome the efforts deployed by United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their partners, which, in
spite of extremely difficult and hazardous conditions,
continue to provide aid to millions of people in need
in Syria.

The Syrian humanitarian disaster once again brings
to mind the crucial need to urgently find a political
solution to the crisis through direct talks between
warring sides, with no preconditions, on the basis of
the Geneva communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). In that regard, we reiterate our support for
the efforts of Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, to bring the parties to the
negotiating table.

