Mr. Bjallerstedt (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.

Let me first, like so many other speakers here
today have done, thank you, Madam President, for
having convened this timely debate on the role of
regional organizations in meeting contemporary
challenges of global security. The complexity of global
security threats and the growing number of intra-State
conflicts call for a greater regional approach to conflict
prevention and peacebuilding. The Nordic countries
therefore welcome this valuable opportunity to discuss
the importance of forging stronger partnerships with
regional organizations and thus building a more resilient
global and regional architecture for maintaining
international peace and security.

Through the United Nations Charter, we have
committed to working together to achieve peace
and security, human rights and economic and social
development. This shared responsibility rests on a web
of global governance, of which strategic partnerships
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations are a fundamental aspect.
Today such partnerships are even more essential, not
least in the face of new threats with increasing cross-
border risks through transnational crime; illegal
trafficking in people, illicit arms and narcotics; and
well-armed groups of terrorists and extremists.

The Nordic countries have consistently advocated
for strengthened cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations. The increased
collaboration between the Security Council and the
African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council is
thus a welcome development. Another good example
is the close work between the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation in very
challenging situations of limited humanitarian access
on issues ranging from conflict prevention and counter-
terrorism to human rights, humanitarian affairs and
sustainable development. There are many other good
examples as well.

In order to build stronger partnerships, we need a
clear strategic vision. We therefore welcome the three
reviews on United Nations peacemaking: on peace
operations; on resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security; and on the peacebuilding
architecture. We in particular welcome the fact that
the report on peace operations highlights the need for
better cooperation with regional organizations, and we
wholeheartedly subscribe to the view that there is an
urgent need to find mechanisms to ensure predictable
and sustainable funding for regional peacekeeping
arrangements that are consistent with the United
Nations Charter and its Chapter VIII.

African-led peace-support and peace-enforcement
missions are today operating in the most challenging
conditions. Better capabilities need to be built, enablers
provided and personnel trained in order to improve the
protection of peacekeepers and to ensure their capacity
to protect civilians in harm's way. In other words, and
to reiterate what United States President Obama said
in Addis Ababa last month ahead of the summit on
peacekeeping in September, we need to develop a new
partnership between the United Nations and the AU that
can provide reliable support for AU peace operations. At
the same time, we need to keep in mind that cooperation
is most effective when guided by the principles of
burden-sharing and complementarity. Partnerships
must be forged on a common understanding of what
each organization can do in any given situation and
on a realistic assessment of one another's comparative
advantages and mandates.

The Nordic countries have engaged in supporting
the capacities of the AU and subregional organizations,
including the strengthening of the mediation capacities
of these organizations. This engagement stands a
much better chance of producing added value with a
system in place for predictable resourcing for regional
peacemaking and peacekeeping.

The Nordic commitment in supporting peace and
security in Africa and elsewhere is to a large extent
focused on tackling the root causes of conflict,
instability and fragility. Effective conflict prevention
and sustainable peacebuilding go hand in hand, which
puts emphasis on the need for strategic coordination
and a robust system for early action at a global as well
as a regional level. We welcome the fact that such
collaboration is already taking place today through
the joint consultations of the United Nations Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council, as
well as between the European Union and the AU. The
United Nations Peacebuilding Commission can also
contibute further by holding regular consultations with
regional bodies in order to discuss early warning and
shared conflict analysis. The African Union, the United
Nations and subregional organizations can, and should,
do better in conflict prevention. There have been some
hard lessons learned by all actors in recent years, inter
alia in the Central African Republic, South Sudan
and Burundi. Sometimes both the United Nations and
regional actors must act sooner.

We would also like to emphasize the importance of
the full and active inclusion and participation of women in
the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts,
as well as in post-conflict efforts and cooperation. It
is the experience of the Nordic countries that women's
genuine participation in all aspects of peacemaking
is an indispensable foundation for solid peace and
sustainable development. That interdependence is also
underlined in the new sustainable development goals
and their targets for peaceful development.

Local ownership is a precondition for bringing
legitimacy and effectiveness into peacemaking efforts,
as well as for facing other challenges - something we
were strongly reminded of by the briefing on the Ebola
epidemic here in the Security Council last week (see S/PV.7502). I can assure the Council that the Nordic
countries will remain firm supporters in forging
stronger partnerships with regional organizations, and
we look forward to the follow-up on the three reviews
of the United Nations peacemaking.

