Mr. Bordyuzha (spoke in Russian): My first
words will be those of sympathy and solidarity
regarding the earthquake in Haiti.
Today's meeting, at which we are considering the
very topical issue of cooperation between the United
Nations with regional and subregional organizations, is
of major importance. The role of the United Nations in
developing cooperation is aligned with the needs and
interests of regional and subregional structures as they
respond to the challenges and threats before the
international community.

For our part, we support any initiative aimed at
strengthening international stability and improving the
security architecture, particularly in the Eurasian area,
and we are ready to take part in implementing United
Nations resolutions aimed at addressing these
problems. We view the development of cooperation
with the United Nations as particularly important,
which is why we are working towards the adoption of a
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO) at the sixty-fourth session of the General
Assembly.

The CSTO was set up in 2002 following an
upsurge in terrorism, and we are doing our utmost to
ensure lasting security in our area of responsibility. In
recent times, the leaders of our countries decided to set
up an effective anti-crisis capacity for the CSTO.
Higher echelons of our armed forces, law enforcement
agencies and ministries of emergency affairs have
established a collective operational response force to
end local and border wars and counteract organized
crime, including drug trafficking, and mitigate the
consequences of natural disasters.

We are currently implementing a collective CSTO
peacekeeping force, the intergovernmental agreements
on which have been ratified by an overwhelming
majority of member States and have entered into force.
In accordance with those documents, it has been
established that the CSTO can implement peacekeeping
operations both autonomously and as part of
peacekeeping operations under a Security Council
mandate.

For many years the CSTO has participated in the
high-level meetings organized annually by the United
Nations Secretary-General with heads of international
and regional organizations, during which issues of
coordinating efforts on urgent contemporary problems
are reviewed. We are part of the standing committee set
up to promote those links. Further work by that body
would be welcome by all organizations interested in
supporting the United Nations and improving the
coordination of activities.

Counter-terrorism activities, the fight against the
illegal production of and trafficking in drugs,
suppressing the illegal arms trade and organized cross-
border crime and preventing and mitigating emergency
situations - that is far from being a full list of the
efforts to ensure regional and international security. We
believe coordination between the United Nations and
regional organizations and cooperation among the
organizations themselves must be strengthened.

Among the success in the CSTO experience we
can mention our cooperation with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, which includes exchange
of information and participation in the CSTO
interdiction operation "Channel", aimed at fighting the
drugs trade. In 2009 that operation brought together
antinarcotics bodies of CSTO member States and
representatives of law enforcement agencies of another
14 States, including Afghanistan, Bulgaria, China,
Germany, Venezuela, Poland, the United States, Turkey
and many other countries, in addition to a number of
international organizations, including the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and
divisions of the financial intelligence services of
member States of the Eurasian Group on Combating
Money Laundering and Financing Terrorism.
Coordinated actions by States allowed us to seize more
than one hundred tons of drugs in the course of two
stages of the operation. In all, through operation
Channel antinarcotics departments have seized 220
tons of drugs since 2003.

The Channel operation and assistance of CSTO
member States for transport of goods for the
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan
are examples of effective cooperation of CSTO
member States in the area of counteracting the threats
to security arising in the territory of Afghanistan. In
our view, the task of coordinating our approach and
developing and implementing agreed lines on
Afghanistan by all international players, who are not
indifferent to the future of that country, is a very urgent
matter.

Recognizing that need, in March 2009 at the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) conference
on Afghanistan, we suggested a special working
meeting with the participation of all interested parties:
Afghanistan, the main transit and consumer countries
and specialized international agencies, including the
close partners of CSTO - the Commonwealth of
Independent States, SCO and OSCE. In that meeting
we could coordinate our efforts and develop a concrete
programme of joint efforts to create and strengthen an
antinarcotic and financial security zone around
Afghanistan.

The main activity of CSTO in the fight against
terrorism is the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. The CSTO 2008-2012 plan for
collective measures by its member States to implement
that Strategy provides a range of organizational,
normative and practical measures aimed at increasing
the level of coordination of its member States'
activities in countering terrorism and political and
religious extremism. Clearly, it would be advisable to
hold a review conference to assess the status of
implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy both by individual States and by
intergovernmental bodies.

Our participation in international efforts to reduce
tension is also shown by CSTO's operation "Illegal
Alien", which focused on coordinating methods to
identify criminal gangs involved in illegal migration
and human trafficking. Contacts on those issues with
the International Migration Organization, OSCE, the
European Union and the International Committee of
the Red Cross have made it possible to increase the
effectiveness of those measures.

In concluding I wish to point out that every day
we see that individual efforts cannot cope with the
tasks in the area of ensuring security. In that regard, we
advocate gradual development of equitable and
constructive cooperation among regional organizations
and intensification of their contacts with the United
Nations.

