Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Nigeria welcomes His
Excellency Mr. Jose Luis Guterres, Deputy Prime
Minister of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste,
and we thank him for his contribution to this debate.
We congratulate Ms. Ameerah Haq, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste, and we commend her for her comprehensive
briefing.

I will limit my remarks to the following points,

which we judge to be very crucial.

First, we welcome the relative stability in Timor-
Leste. We are encouraged by the growing respect for
constitutional order and the commitment to build
consensus on development issues, both by the
Timorese leadership and by the Frente Revolucionaria
do Timor-Leste Independente (FRETILIN) opposition.
These efforts need to be reinforced and the parties
encouraged to continue efforts towards a national
consensus and consultation.
Secondly, for the evolving peace to be
sustainable, it must be underpinned by viable national
and State institutions and genuine socio-economic
progress. In that regard, Timor-Leste requires the
strengthening of its security and justice sector
institutions and measures to create employment, reduce
food insecurity and reintegrate internally displaced
persons (IDPs). Measures should be taken to address
the challenges facing IDPs, in particular their need for
basic assistance and services, the settlement of land
disputes and reintegration into their original
communities.

The professional development of the national
police, the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL), is
critical to the emergence of a national security force.
As the PNTL increasingly assumes more policing
responsibilities, its capacity needs to be enhanced
through vigorous training, mentoring and institutional
development. An efficient and professional PNTL
would, without doubt, enable the Timor-Leste
Government to fulfil one of the certification
requirements for resuming police responsibilities.

Thirdly, we welcome the efforts to redress past
cases of impunity, as well as the establishment of
accountability mechanisms. These measures will
certainly reinforce the rule of law. However, we note
that without a resilient justice and security sector, the
burgeoning peace and stability in the country could be
threatened.

Fourthly, we support the broad desire of the
Timorese leadership and other national stakeholders, as
confirmed by the technical assessment mission to the
country last month, that the United Nations maintain
the integrated support of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) for the country. We
also support the proposal that a cautious approach be
adopted for the initial drawdown of UNMIT police and
that further drawdowns be subject to an assessment in
late 2010. We look forward to the establishment of the
assessment team and to the key elements of the
drawdown proposal.
To conclude, although Timor-Leste has made
significant progress it still faces many serious
challenges as it seeks to establish a stable democracy
and develop its economy. We believe that UNMIT's
medium-term strategy and the related benchmarks can
provide a solid foundation for sustainable stability and
prosperity in Timor-Leste. We therefore welcome the
recommendation regarding the review of the mandate
of UNMIT and its extension for a further period of
12 months.

