I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the developments pertaining to the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), including its support to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM). I will also update the Council on recent developments since the publication of the Secretary-General's report before the Council (S/2020/308). Despite the improving relations between the Sudan and South Sudan, it remains very unlikely that progress will be made in determining the final status of the Abyei Area in the short to medium term. Given that the African Union (AU) Commission and the AU High-level Implementation Panel are stretched dealing with other priorities, the enhancement of the United Nations support to the African Union through the appointment of a deputy head of mission for UNISFA has become more important while the Special Envoy works with the AU to seek ways to revitalize the political process. In that regard, in a positive development, on 4 March, UNISFA held consultations with Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok of the Sudan to resolve the issues of the Athony airstrip and the appointment of a deputy head of mission. The Prime Minister has expressed his willingness to support the mission in those areas. At the local level, the security situation in the Abyei Area remains volatile, with episodes of heightened tensions between the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya communities, an increase in criminality and the presence of armed elements in UNISFA's area of responsibility. UNISFA strove to contain insecurity and to keep the Abyei Area a weapons-free zone through rapid response and presence in sensitive areas. However, the movement of armed men reported by the local population on several occasions during the reporting period remained a source of concern. UNISFA troops have also been subject to attacks by armed elements. In the latest incident, on 24 April, in Sector Centre, UNISFA forces challenged an armed Misseriya herdsman in Nainai, who fired upon them. In a separate incident on the same day, also in Sector Centre, a Misseriya armed group, with automatic assault rifles, engaged with UNISFA troops at the Alal post. With regard to the major escalation of violence between communities, in which, on 19 January, three Misseriya were killed at Nainai by attackers suspected to be Ngok Dinka and, on 22 January, 33 Ngok Dinka were killed by Misseriya armed elements at Kolom in what is believed to be a retaliatory attack, UNISFA established a joint investigative team to conduct a preliminary investigation into the incidents in the aftermath of the attacks. Tensions, which had rapidly escalated, are now slowly easing thanks to the preventive deployments and engagement of the mission with the local communities. On 16 March, a traditional leaders' conference, comprising both Ngok Dinka and Misseriya Paramount Chiefs, took place in Diffra, Sector North. The two sides acknowledged the need for peace and agreed not to escalate the situation. A follow- up meeting with the two Paramount Chiefs took place in Diffra on 9 April. While no agreement has yet been reached on the southern migration of Misseriya herders for the forthcoming dry season, these meetings managed to bring together the traditional leaders of the two sides for the first time since the Kolom attacks in January. They were also the first meetings in that format since November 2017, when the leaders met in Addis Ababa during an Abyei Joint Oversight Committee meeting. Although still insufficient to restore stability to the area, these are encouraging steps taken by the two communities. Our paramount concern is to sustain the positive dialogue restored between the two communities. Following the completion of the Kolom investigation report by the mission, I will be discussing with the Force Commander what other steps may be undertaken to prevent the repetition of such incidents in the future. In other developments, the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism made some progress towards reaching the benchmarks specified by resolution 2497 (2019). Clear guidance for the operational activities of the JBVMM was provided in the outcome document of the ordinary session of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism, held in Juba on 19 February. Both parties have now fully deployed the complete number of national monitors, as per the agreement. Freedom of movement for aerial and ground monitoring missions was also fully guaranteed. The team site at Abu Qussa/Wunkur was then successfully established on 13 January. With respect to the current police generation process, the deployment of the three authorized formed police units (FPUs), expected to be on the ground by July, is facing serious delays due to the travel restrictions decided by the Government of the Sudan to prevent the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The process for the deployment of the first identified FPU from Ethiopia was well advanced by early March, with the completion of the predeployment visit to the mission area. However, all further steps had to be suspended in view of the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak. Although no cases of COVID-19 have been recorded within UNISFA, the UNISFA COVID-19 task force medical teams are visiting all team sites and sectors to verify the state of preparedness in the mission. Engineering work has been completed to establish a 16-bed quarantine area for uniformed personnel. I welcome the Prime Minister's assurance that he will soon put together a team to conduct the necessary consultations with the Ministry of Defence and Intelligence for the use of the Athony airstrip, which would significantly improve UNISFA's medical evacuation capability and address its current logistical challenges. At the local level, on a daily basis UNISFA conducts sensitization with a large section of interlocutors, including civil society, women's associations, communities coming to the different marketplaces and dedicated meetings with Paramount Chiefs, judges and prosecutors, to encourage hand-washing and social distancing. As a result of the discussions in detention centres, the chief criminal court decided to release 13 detainees convicted of petty crimes to help decongest the cells and to comply with the World Health Organization guidelines on social distancing. Agencies are also in discussions with the local administration on requirements for screening sites in several locations of the Abyei Area. While the months ahead will no doubt bring new and unprecedented challenges as we grapple with the COVID-19 pandemic, the UNISFA leadership will continue to engage with the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to facilitate the implementation of the pending aspects of their previous agreements and the UNISFA mandate. UNISFA will also continue to play a stabilizing role in the Abyei Area and along the border regions. I would therefore seek the continued support of the Security Council for the Secretary-General's recommendation to extend the mandate of UNISFA for a further period of six months, until 15 October 2020.
