Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I thank
Mr. Pascoe and Mr. Mulet for their briefings to the
Council, and I welcome Ambassador Alasania.

On 11 August, in this Chamber, the United
Kingdom and others welcomed the French-led efforts
to secure an immediate end to the fighting in Georgia.
The culmination of those efforts was the six-point
agreement signed by Russia and Georgia a week ago,
together with the agreed clarifications issued by
President Sarkozy.

One week on, however, the Russian Federation
has failed to implement its part of the agreement.
Russian forces have not complied with the requirement
to withdraw to their positions prior to 7 August. Russia
has spoken publicly of its intention to withdraw, and
we have heard statements from Moscow claiming that
withdrawal has begun, but we see little evidence of this
on the ground. On the contrary, Russian forces remain
in their positions deep inside Georgia, way beyond the
conflict zones of South Ossetia and Abkhazia.

We are equally troubled by the actions of the
Russian forces now occupying Georgian territory.
Since 7 August, we have seen a systematic attempt to
destroy Georgia's infrastructure. On the military side,
naval patrol boats have been sunk at their moorings.
Barracks and other military installations well beyond
the conflict zone have been levelled. And Russian
forces have destroyed civilian infrastructure too. I

would like to ask the Russian ambassador what
justification there could possibly be for Russian forces
destroying a railway bridge on the main east-west rail
link and for blocking a tunnel on a major road. Why do
Russian checkpoints continue to block civilian traffic
on major transit routes, in breach of President
Sarkozy's clarifications to the 12 August agreement?
Only yesterday, the United Kingdom's defence attache
to Georgia was turned back from a Russian checkpoint
in Georgia and told he required a Russian visa in order
to proceed further. Do foreigners now need Russian
visas to travel within Georgia?

It is hard to see how Russian actions are
consistent with Russia's claimed justification for their
military assault - namely the protection of its
peacekeepers and civilians in South Ossetia and
Abkhazia, even though most of those civilians have
only recently been handed Russian passports and have
not lived in Russia.

I think the facts make it clear that this is a
conflict between Georgia and Russia. Russian
spokesmen try to present the problem as a conflict
between Georgia, South Ossetia and Abkhazia, with
Russia's role one of peacekeeper. That claim was
always doubtful. The last two weeks have
demonstrated beyond any doubt that Russia is a party
to the conflict. Indeed, Russia's letter last week, saying
that they were acting under Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter, confirmed that they are a party to the
conflict, and Russian actions since 7 August have gone
way beyond those of a peacekeeper or mediator. So let
us not pretend that this is anything other than a conflict
between Russia and Georgia, a conflict which Russia
has clearly won militarily. Russian forces in Georgia
are now, in effect, an army of occupation, and they will
remain so until they withdraw to the positions held
prior to 7 August and force levels return to those that
prevailed then.

We remain gravely concerned too by the
humanitarian situation in Georgia. We are particularly
disturbed by reports of killings and ethnic cleansing
perpetrated by South Ossetian and Abkhaz irregulars,
in areas controlled by Russian forces. It goes without
saying that Russia has a legal and moral obligation to
prevent such acts, but, instead, what we have seen is
the eviction of virtually all ethnic Georgians from
South Ossetia. We welcome the visit of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to the
region. The return of refugees and internally displaced
people will be an important element of any long-term
settlement of the conflict in Georgia.

Russia's failure to withdraw its forces, and the
actions of those forces, raise questions about Russia's
objectives in Georgia and about its willingness to
honour the agreement signed by President Medvedev.
They also call into question Russia's commitment to
some of the founding principles of the United Nations
and to respect for the resolutions of the Security
Council, which have consistently upheld Georgia's
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

The United Kingdom calls on Russia to take
immediate steps to comply with the agreement it has
signed and to end its military aggression in Georgia.
First and foremost, that means immediate withdrawal
of Russian forces to the lines held prior to the outbreak
of hostilities. There can be no excuse for further delay,
and for that reason we support the draft resolution that
has been put forward by France.

