Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Mr. President, we
appreciate your initiative in convening this meeting on
Angola. We thank Ambassador Gambari for his
briefing. He is too modest in his characterization of
himself. His remarks reveal him to be a leading
authority on the subject as well as an achiever in the
field.

His enumeration of the requisite programmes is
deserving of high attention. Doubtless, problems
persist. The deterioration of the humanitarian situation
is troubling, and the increase in the number of
internally displaced persons is also disturbing.
Mr. Gambari has rendered a human service in
identifying these problems, which must be addressed.
What he says about the peace process, though, is
heartening. We are extremely encouraged also to have
in our midst today our Secretary-General.

Bangladesh has always supported the important
role that the United Nations has to play in conflict
situations, Angola among them. That role has been
considerably strengthened through the sanctions that
are currently in force, which continue to have a
negative impact on UNITA's war-making capability,
and through the activities of the United Nations Office
in Angola (UNOA). Ambassador Gambari's own
efforts in recent months have proved crucial in
providing it a direction that will immeasurably assist in
the resolution of this long and seemingly intractable
problem. In so doing, new initiatives, under the
guidance of the Secretary-General, will be required.
We will continue to support efforts to that end.

I shall confine myself to focusing on three issues
that we consider specifically important today. First,
given the context of continued conflict, how can the
humanitarian situation best be addressed, and in
particular the problem of access? It is clear that, as
long as the conflict persists, we must continue to
devote attention to the plight of the war-affected
population. A lingering problem impeding the delivery
of humanitarian assistance has been the lack of safe
and secure access. We note with appreciation the
efforts of the Government in facilitating this access in
areas under its control. We believe that more efforts are
required in that direction meaningfully to improve the
situation of the affected population.
My second point concerns relations between the
United Nations and the Government. We are pleased to
note the strengthening of such relations in recent times
as a result of the good work done by UNOA on the
ground. Again, Mr. Gambari's efforts have nurtured
and furthered an active interest in Angola on the part of
the international community and the United Nations.
We have, on earlier occasions, expressed our
appreciation and support for the role and activities of
UNOA. We believe there is scope for expansion of
these activities into new areas such as the pilot project
for war-affected and demobilized combatants. Perhaps
it is time to address this issue.

Providing alternative forms of livelihood to
displaced persons and to those who have renounced
violence is extremely important in driving home the
message of peace. The United Nations should do all it
can to help the Government in this endeavour.

Finally, it is clear that these steps alone will not
achieve the ultimate objective of peace in Angola. The
complexity of the situation demands what the
Secretary-General has described in his most recent
report (S/2001/956) as "creative ways". Paragraph 14
of that report states his conviction that "the conflict
could not be solved by military means alone", and we
fully share that view. The peace process cannot
progress unless there is real dialogue between the
parties. It is very difficult to envisage a dialogue in the
absence of a ceasefire. Within the framework - and,
indeed, on the basis - of the Lusaka Protocol, a
dialogue should make it possible to discuss all issues of
concern, if the parties are serious in their
pronouncements in favour of peace. We are in favour
of the Council's sending a strong signal to all in that
regard. Given the achievements of the Council in
continually monitoring the effective implementation of
the UNITA sanctions, there is now a need to provide a
big push. This will bring us closer to our goal in this
part of Africa and to the resolution of a problem that
has persisted too painfully and for far too long.

