Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would ask you, Madam President, to convey
our gratitude to Minister Czaputowicz for attending
our meeting today. I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for convening today's meeting on such an
important topic.

I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
our new Chinese colleague, Ambassador Zhang Jun,
who is taking part for the first time in a meeting of the
Security Council and in an open debate.

We thank Virginia Gamba, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for participating in today's debate
and for sharing her views on the protection of children
in various countries. We thank UNICEF Executive
Director Henrietta Fore for her briefing. We listened
with great interest to Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan. Their
remarks were deeply disturbing. Such acts should not
be occurring in today's world.
The Russian Federation expresses its concern
about the plight of children in many parts of the world
that are engulfed in armed conflict. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/509) clearly illustrates that
fact. Based on the report, the most worrisome situations
can be seen in Afghanistan, Yemen, Syria and several
other countries.

The Security Council takes consistent measures
to protect children and prevent acts of violence
against them. In accordance with resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent documents, greater attention
should be paid to the six categories of the most serious
violations against children, within the framework of
both the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Such
violations include the recruitment and use of children
as combatants, killing and maiming, abduction, sexual
violence, attacks on schools and hospitals and the denial
of humanitarian access. We should strive to counter
those violations in the course of our work. In that
regard, we believe that attempts to dilute the mandate
of the Security Council in that area, by forcing it to
consider other issues related to rights of children in a
context outside the maintenance of international peace
and security, are a step in the wrong direction. Such
issues are part of mandates of other United Nations
entities, whose work the Security Council should not
duplicate. Only by adhering to the principle of the
division of labour will we be most effective in solving
all issues pertaining to the plight of children.

Preventing crimes against children is an important
aspect of the package of measures on conflict resolution
and post-conflict reconstruction. We highly appreciate
and support the efforts aimed at reintegrating children
liberated from armed groups. We highlight the fact
that the majority of States affected by armed conflict
do a great deal to improve the plight of children. They
often need international assistance. However, national
Governments should play the primary role in protecting
children in armed conflict. The role of the United
Nations is first and foremost to complement and support
those efforts. In that regard, we believe that Security
Council mechanisms can be efficient only when they
cooperate constructively with the country affected by
armed conflict. In addition, resolution 1612 (2005)
outlines the role of national Governments in interaction
between the United Nations and armed groups with
regard to children. Underestimating that requirement
could lead to regrettable results as the leaders of armed
groups may attempt to use their contact with United
Nations agencies to make themselves appear legitimate
in the eyes of the global community rather than to
protect children.

The Russian Federation strongly condemns the
violations of the provisions of international law,
international humanitarian law, human rights and rights
of refugees as they pertain to children. Indiscriminate
attacks, the use of unmanned aerial vehicles, the use
of civilians, children, schools and hospitals as shields
by terrorists and other violations of international
humanitarian law are unacceptable. All those
responsible for such crimes must be duly prosecuted
and held accountable. International humanitarian law
comprises a broad set of norms aimed at protecting
children and civilian infrastructure during armed
conflict. The efforts of the international community
should be focused on adhering to those norms. The
primary responsibility in that area lies with States.

We note with regret attempts to use children
propaganda tools by involving them in plots and
staged videos of all kinds. Apart from being extremely
immoral, such actions undermine the efforts of the
international community to protect children in armed
conflict. In recent years, there have been increased calls
to join various declarations, guidelines or principles
that have been developed outside the framework of the
United Nations and that address separate humanitarian
aspects. We believe that the participation of States in
these documents is a matter of their good will. However,
we would like to emphasize that such declarations,
guidelines and principles cannot substitute for, amend
or elaborate upon universally recognized norms of
international humanitarian law.

Russia supports the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. Her active and unwavering stance
on the protection of children and her efforts to maintain
a constructive dialogue with the States concerned
make possible the achievement of notable progress. We
also commend her impartial and objective approach
in identifying and gathering reliable information on
violations against children, as reflected in the report
of the Secretary-General. We always carefully examine
this information and take account of it in our work.

We call upon all members of the Security Council
to continue to constructively cooperate with a view to
effectively protecting children from the consequences
of armed conflict.

