Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Chairs of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities,
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning Counter-Terrorism for their
comprehensive briefings today. We appreciate the
coordination between the three Committees and the
efforts being made by them to promote dialogue and
transparency with Member States.

Pakistan strongly condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, committed by whomever,
wherever and for whatever purposes. Terrorism and
extremism should not be associated with any religion,
race, ethnicity, faith, value system, culture of society.

Pakistan has adopted a comprehensive approach
that emphasizes the importance of development,
dialogue and deterrence. If we are to attain sustainable
solutions, we need to intensify our efforts to resolve
festering conflicts and crises that spawn extremism.
A comprehensive approach at the international level
is also required to address the immediate issue of
violence, as well as its root causes. The response of
the international community has to be comprehensive,
long-term and multi-pronged; it must involve dialogue
among civilizations, economic development, cultural
harmony, dispute resolution and political settlements.

Al-Qaida has changed in many ways. Self-
radicalized individuals have made the prevention of
terrorism more difficult. Terrorists now use electronic
safe havens to host websites for inspiration and
training. The Al-Qaida sanctions regime needs a more
effective, targeted and evidence-based approach. It
should use clear, fair and transparent procedures. The
Ombudsperson's good work should be emulated in
all other sanctions regimes and her role expanded to
delisting issues. A large number of recommendations
made by the Ombudsperson have led to the delisting
of individuals and entities, clearly indicating that the
Committee's listing process needs to be streamlined.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee efforts to build
the capacities of States are very helpful. We particularly
appreciate the focus of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate on assets freezes,
the prosecution of terrorism cases, and seminars and
workshops on specific themes it has held in various
regions. In Islamabad in October 2013, Pakistan hosted
the seventh regional workshop for judges, prosecutors
and police officers in South Asia on effectively
countering terrorism.

Pakistan fully supports the shared goal of
preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors. The 1540 Committee
has been a strong catalyst in preventing proliferation. It
supports many treaty regimes and, even without being
a treaty regime, ensures compliance through voluntary
measures. We support the measures taken by the 1540
Committee and its experts in such areas as awareness-
raising, outreach, implementation assistance and
capacity-building. The Committee plays an important
part in mobilizing assistance. It should enhance
its matchmaking role by mapping assistance needs
and working as a clearinghouse between assistance
providers and recipients. As the Committee promotes
universal reporting and implementation, assistance
and capacity-building will serve as anchors for such
activities.

Pakistan supports efforts to promote cooperation
and coordination among the subsidiary bodies of the
Council and their respective expert groups. This
objective is best advanced when joint activities are
conducted in close consultation with all Council
members and are consistent with the mandate and
nature of the work of each subsidiary body and expert

group.

