Mr. Dauth (Australia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open meeting
of the Security Council on Timor-Leste, a country that,
like my colleague from Indonesia, I can describe as a
neighbour, a close partner and a friend. We are proud
of what we have done to assist Timor-Leste in building
a stable and sustainable democracy. Together with the
United Nations and with other neighbours, many of
which are represented here today, we continue to have
a big stake, as my colleague from Singapore has just
said, in ensuring that Timor-Leste is equipped to meet
the challenges that it faces.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report
(S/2004/888) on the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET), and we are very pleased
today to welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa. As the
report confirms, Timor-Leste has made steady progress
in its institution-building efforts. It is encouraging that
the support of the United Nations and the international
community is having a tangible impact in areas of key
concern. I was very taken by the remarks in that regard
made by my friend and colleague Ambassador
Guterres.

Of course, although notable advances have been
made, Timor-Leste has not yet achieved self-
sufficiency. More needs to be done to develop its
public administration capacity and the professionalism
and competency of its security institutions. Both areas
are obviously critical to Timor-Leste's long-term
stability. It is clear that Timor-Leste requires the
ongoing assistance of the international community and
of the United Nations.

We therefore strongly endorse the report's key
recommendation that UNMISET be retained with its
current tasks, configuration and size until 20 May
2005. Any precipitate withdrawal would undermine the
many gains that have been made to date. Most
important, UNMISET will continue to play a critical
role in enabling Timor-Leste to further develop the
capacity of key institutions. We very much hope that
Security Council members will support the Secretary-
General's recommendations and agree to UNMISET
continuing for the next six months.

Over the next six months it will be important for
UNMISET to accomplish as much as possible to
implement a viable transition strategy, taking into
account Timor-Leste's development needs. Looking
further afield, it will also be critical for United Nations
development agencies and the broader international
community to remain engaged in a coordinated way to
assist Timor-Leste with its many development
challenges. We hope the next report of the Secretary-
General on Timor-Leste will address those important
issues.

For Australia's part, we remain firmly committed
to assisting Timor-Leste to meet its development
needs. We will continue to provide strong support to
UNMISET, including through the contribution of
personnel to the military liaison officer and police
adviser contingents. Australia will also continue to be a
major provider of bilateral development assistance to
Timor-Leste, especially in the areas of policing and
good governance.

Much remains to be done, but we remain fully
confident that UNMISET personnel, in conjunction
with the critical commitment and efforts of the people
of Timor-Leste, will ensure that UNMISET
successfully fulfils its important mandate.

