Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by congratulating and thanking
your delegation, Mr. President, for the initiative to hold
this debate on such an important matter as that of the
working methods of the Security Council. My
delegation, of course, very much appreciated the
presence of the Secretary-General at our meeting.

Exploring ways and means of improving the
transparency and effectiveness of the work of the
Security Council, thereby strengthening interaction
with non-members, is a very commendable initiative
that, beyond making it possible to consider calls made
by non-members, also serves as a significant
contribution to ongoing efforts to achieve a
comprehensive reform of the Council. The Council's
working methods, which are at the centre of its work,
also serve to give it legitimacy and to ensure greater
acceptance of its decisions. In that connection, my
delegation, which associates itself with the statement to
be delivered shortly by the representative of Cuba on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, would like to
make some comments.

We welcome the progress achieved to ensure that
the Security Council's work is more transparent, but
additional efforts must be deployed in order to take
into account, to a greater degree, the views expressed
by the member States that are not members of the
Council and to ensure that better information is
available. That means, in particular, holding more
public debates and also that, as far as possible, public
briefing sessions be led by the chairmen of subsidiary
bodies and special envoys and representatives of the
Secretary-General.

We also believe that the report of the Council to
the General Assembly should be more analytical, in
order to give a better account of its activities to all
Member States. In addition, when decisions are
drafted, it would be appropriate to take into account
certain existing recommendations on transparency,
inter alia the note by the President of 17 February 1999
(S/ 1999/ 165), recommending that all Council members
be able to fully participate in the drawing up of
Council resolutions and presidential statements and
have sufficient time for doing so. Submitting the texts
of draft resolutions just before the deadline for their
adoption, even if they are supported by groups of
friends or other external partners, is a practice to be
avoided. In our View, we should use the groups of
friends as little as possible, since, even if they are
useful on occasion, they can also sometimes hinder
transparency and lead to frustration.

When it comes to the effectiveness of the
Council's work, my delegation attaches the greatest
importance to the timely distribution of reports in all
the official languages, in compliance with the
presidential note of 26 March 2002 (S/2002/316). That
would enable delegations to make substantial
contributions to debates, and allow national authorities
to gain useful prior knowledge of those reports.

It is also important for the quality of its decisions
that the Council be able to take into account the views
expressed by non-member States in the course of its
meetings. Decisions must therefore be taken after
debates, so that, as far as possible, those decisions may
reflect the views expressed. A better presentation of
agenda items and a rationalization of the agenda could
also enhance the work of the Council.

The issue of enhancing interaction and dialogue
between the Council and non-member States is of
particular importance to my delegation, as I have
already said. Here, we would recommend increased
recourse to the Aria formula, which allows direct
interaction between all interested stakeholders on a
given issue. The Council would also gain from
enhancing communications with the troop-contributing
countries, whose opinions should be taken into due
account, and from discussions with all Member States
with information relating to operations in the field. In
the same vein, we would suggest that the Council
report on the missions it undertakes in public meetings,
and that the representatives of the countries visited
participate. Such missions put Council members in
direct contact with the reality of the questions that they
are dealing with, and that experience should therefore
be shared with all Member States of the Organization.

Allow me to address the question of Security
Council committees and to express our full support of
the recommendations in the president's note of
29 March 1995 (S/1995/234), which lists the
improvements that could be made to the procedures of
those subsidiary bodies. Sanctions committees must
enhance their communication with the States concerned
and grant requests often made by countries that wish to
speak during private committee meetings. We also
believe that a detailed review of the listing and
de-listing procedures of those committees should be
carried out in order to ensure that such procedures are
more transparent and in accordance with the relevant
instruments on human rights.

I cannot conclude without adding my voice to
those of the Member States who would like to see the
formal adoption of a final version of the rules of
procedure of the Council, instead of the provisional
version that the Council has at present.

