The Secretary-General: On 25 September 1997, the
Security Council convened at the ministerial level to
consider the need for a renewed and concerted international
effort to promote peace and security in Africa. The Council
requested that I submit a report on the sources of conflict
in Africa and how they may best be addressed. I am
pleased to submit that report today.

Allow me, however, to begin by expressing my
deepest gratitude to the members of the Security Council
for taking this unprecedented step for Africa. Of course, not
all of Africa is in crisis; not all of Africa is facing conflict.
Indeed, Africa itself has begun to make significant
economic and social progress in recent years. But by
showing the Council's concern for Africa's remaining
conflicts, members have signalled their readiness to further
that progress and make it last for all of Africa.

The report that I present today is guided, above all, by
a commitment to honesty and clarity in analysing and
addressing the challenges of conflict in Africa. For too
long, conflict in Africa has been seen as inevitable or
intractable, or both. It is neither. Conflict in Africa, as
everywhere else, is caused by human action and can be
ended by human action. This is the reality that shames us
for every conflict that we allow to persist and emboldens us
to believe that we can address and resolve every conflict
that we choose to confront.

For the United Nations there is no higher goal, no
deeper commitment and no greater ambition than
preventing armed conflict so that people everywhere can
enjoy peace and prosperity. In Africa, as elsewhere, the
United Nations increasingly is being required to respond
to intra-State instability and conflict. In those conflicts,
the main aim, to an alarming degree, is the destruction
not of armies but of civilians and entire ethnic groups.
Preventing such wars is no longer a question of defending
States or protecting allies. It is a question of defending
humanity itself.

Since 1970, Africa has had more than 30 wars
fought on its territory, the vast majority of which have
been of intra-State origin. Fourteen of Africa's 53
countries were afflicted by armed conflicts in 1996 alone.
These accounted for more than half of all war-related
deaths worldwide, resulting in more than 8 million
refugees, returnees and displaced persons. The
consequences of these conflicts have seriously
undermined Africa's efforts to ensure long-term stability,
prosperity and peace for its peoples. No one - not the
United Nations, not the international community, not
Africa's leaders - can escape responsibility for the
persistence of these conflicts.

Indeed, colossal human tragedies have taken place in
Africa over the last decade - tragedies that could and
should have been prevented. Not enough was done to
address the causes of conflict. Not enough was done to
ensure a lasting peace. Not enough was done to create the
conditions for sustainable development. It is a reality that
must be confronted honestly and constructively by all
concerned if the people of Africa are to enjoy the human
security and economic opportunities they seek and
deserve.

Today, in many parts of Africa, efforts to break with
these past patterns are at last beginning to succeed. It is
my aspiration that this report will add momentum to
Africa's renewed quest for peace and greater prosperity.
The report strives to do so by offering an analysis of
Africa's conflicts that does justice to their reality and
seeks answers in their sources. It strives to do so by
proposing realistic and achievable recommendations
which, over time, may reduce if not entirely end Africa's
conflicts. And it aims to summon the political will of
Africans and non-Africans alike to act when action so
evidently is needed - the will without which no level of
assistance and no degree of hope can make the difference
between war and peace in Africa.

 

The sources of conflict in Africa are as varied and
complex as the continent itself. In this report, I have sought
to identify the kinds of actions that most effectively and
most lastingly may address those conflicts and resolve
them.
The significance of history and of factors external to
Africa cannot be denied. But, more than three decades after
African countries gained their independence, there is a
growing recognition among Africans that the continent must
look beyond its colonial past for the sources of and the
solutions to its current conflicts.

The proposals that I set forth today require, in some
cases, new ways of thinking about African conflict. In
others, they require new ways of acting. Whether in
peacekeeping, humanitarian assistance or post-conflict
peace-building, genuine and sustainable progress depends
on three critical factors: a clear understanding of the
challenge; the political will to respond to that challenge;
and the resources necessary to provide the adequate
response.

Equally important is the understanding that peace and
development remain inextricably linked - one feeding on
the other, enabling the other and securing the other. The
renunciation of Violence as a means of gaining or holding
political office, or of gaining power, is only the beginning.
Then must follow a renewed commitment to national
development founded on sober, sound and uncorrupted
economic policies.

A number of African States have made good progress
in recent years, but others continue to struggle. Poor
economic performance and inequitable development have
resulted in a near-permanent economic crisis for some
States, greatly exacerbating internal tensions and greatly
diminishing the Governments' capacity to respond to those
tensions.

Good governance is now more than ever the condition
for the success of both peace and development. It is no
coincidence that Africa's renaissance has come at a time
when new and more democratic forms of government have
begun to emerge and take root.

What we have learned over the past decades is that,
with political will, rhetoric can truly be transformed into
reality. Without it, not even the noblest sentiments will
have a chance of success. With sufficient political will on
the part of Africa and on the part of the international
community, peace and development in Africa can be
given a new momentum.

Africa is an ancient continent. Its lands are rich and
fertile enough to provide a solid foundation for prosperity.
Its people are proud and industrious enough to seize the
opportunities that may be presented. I am confident that
Africans will not be found wanting in stamina, in
determination or in political will.

Africa today is striving to make positive change, and
in many places these efforts are beginning to bear fruit.
In the carnage and tragedy that afflict some parts of
Africa, we must not forget the bright spots or overlook
the achievements that have been made. What is needed is
for those achievements to grow and multiply throughout
Africa.

Three areas deserve particular attention. First, Africa
must demonstrate the political will to rely upon political
rather than military responses to problems. Democratic
channels for pursuing legitimate interests and expressing
dissent must be protected and political opposition
respected and accommodated in constitutional forms.

Secondly, Africa must summon the political will to
take good governance seriously, ensuring respect for
human rights and the rule of law, strengthening
democratization and promoting transparency and the
capability of public administration. Unless good
governance is prized, Africa will not break free of the
threat and the reality of conflict which are so evident
today.

Thirdly, Africa must enact and adhere to the various
reforms needed to promote economic growth. Long-term
success can be achieved only if African Governments
have the political will to enact sound economic policies
and to persevere in their implementation until a solid
economic foundation has been established.

Political will is also needed from the international
community. Where the international community is
committed to making a difference, it has proved that
significant and rapid transformation can be achieved. With
respect to Africa, the international community must now
summon the will to intervene where it can have an impact
and invest where resources are needed.

New sources of funding are required, but so too is
a better use of existing resources and the enactment of
trade and debt-relief measures that will enable Africa to

 

generate and better reinvest its own resources. Concrete
steps must be taken, and I have made a number of concrete
recommendations towards this end.

Let us never forget that it is the persistence of poverty
that is impeding the full promise of peace for all of
Africa's peoples. The alleviation of poverty must be the
first aim of our efforts. Only then - only when prosperity
and opportunity become real - will every citizen, young
or old, man or woman, have a genuine and lasting stake in
a peaceful future for Africa - politically, economically and
socially.

In this report, I set out to provide a clear and candid
analysis of the sources of Africa's conflicts and why they
persist. I have recommended actions and goals to reduce
conflict and in time to help build a strong and durable
peace. I have urged Africans and non-Africans alike to
summon the political will to rise to the challenge which
together we must all confront.

The time is long past when one could claim ignorance
about what was happening in Africa or what was needed to
achieve progress. The time is also past when the
responsibility for producing change could be shifted onto
other shoulders. It is the responsibility we all must face.

Allow me to conclude by saying that the United
Nations not only seeks, but welcomes, this responsibility.
For we wish, above all, that this report should mark a new
beginning in the relationship between the United Nations
and Africa on these issues. Let us make that beginning
today and together.

