Mrs. Chaimongkol (Thailand): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, upon your assumption
of the Council presidency for the month of August and
for convening this timely debate on United Nations
peacekeeping operations. My appreciation also goes to
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Uganda, for his leadership as the President of the
Council for the month of July.

The debate today is very important and relevant,
as United Nations peacekeeping operations are at
present facing many critical challenges, having to do
more with less while operating in conflicts whose
natures and environments are changing rapidly and
becoming more demanding.

My delegation would like to thank Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-
Secretary-General for Field Support, for their
comprehensive briefings today and for the non-paper
"A New Partnership Agenda: Charting a New Horizon
for United Nations Peacekeeping", which highlights a
number of important points and provides valuable
recommendations for Member States to deliberate. My
delegation would also like to thank General Martin
Luther Agwai, Force Commander of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, for
his insightful briefing today and for his leadership on
the ground.

Thailand associates itself with the statement
made by the delegation of Morocco on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. We would like to take this
opportunity to highlight a few points that, we believe,
merit serious consideration.

First, there is a strong need to establish a better
and more effective coordinating system within the
United Nations system for peacekeeping operations.
Thailand is of the view that regular and inclusive
dialogue between the Council and relevant
stakeholders, especially the troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), before and throughout the
deployment process - from the drafting of the
mandate to the exit and termination of the operation -
is necessary to ensure credibility of a mandate and
success of a peacekeeping operation. Thailand
appreciates the effort of the Security Council Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations, led by Japan, to
reach out and seek views of various stakeholders on the
current state of peacekeeping operations.

Secondly, Thailand supports the ongoing
evolution of peacekeeping towards an operation more
integrated in outlook and mandate, which would enable
operations to effectively combine both peacekeeping
and peacebuilding elements and bridge the critical gap
between cessation of fighting and durable peace. In this
connection, there should be greater emphasis on
sustainable peace, security and development as well as
on national ownership, with a clear strategy for a
seamless transition.

United Nations peacekeeping can contribute
tremendously to the early recovery of a country in the
aftermath of conflict. Capitalizing on its presence in
the early stage of a peace process, it can help to bring
about safety and security, support political processes
and energize economic recovery, which will lead to a
quick and smooth transition into the peacebuilding
phase. Early engagement in peacebuilding activity is a
window of opportunity to restore livelihoods, create an
atmosphere of trust and confidence and bring about
sustainable peace. In short, peacekeepers can be early
peacebuilders.

Thirdly, effective partnerships between the
United Nations and regional organizations are vital.
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations should be mutually reinforcing to
achieve a win-win situation for all partners. In many
cases, regional organizations have comparative
advantages and better understanding of challenges in
their respective regions. The United Nations could help
strengthen the capacity of regional organizations so
that they can better support the United Nations
peacekeeping operations in their regions.

The blue beret of United Nations peacekeepers
has become an iconic image of the United Nations in
the eyes of peoples around the world. The success and
dedication of courageous men and women under the
United Nations flag in various conflict zones have
given the ideals and principles of the United Nations
Charter a real and tangible meaning.

Thailand - as a strong and consistent supporter
of United Nations peacekeeping for decades and as a
country that has put our peacekeepers under the United
Nations flag in various missions - has a stake in the
evolution and reform of United Nations peacekeeping.
Therefore we will closely and with interest follow the
discussions on this issue, on various tracks, and look
forward to actively contributing to the process.

