I wish to thank the President, as well as Secretary-General Guterres and Chairperson Mahamat, for their informative briefings as part of this important debate. As the United Kingdom's Minister for Africa, I am keen to work closely with the African Union (AU), which is a personal priority for me. In fact, I was the first United Kingdom Minister to make an overseas trip after the first wave of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic when I visited the AU Commissioners in July. The United Kingdom is investing up to $27 million in the African Union COVID-19 Response Fund to tackle the disease and save lives. In my remarks, I will focus on three key aspects of how the United Nations-AU partnership can bolster the fundamental purpose of the United Nations, which is the maintenance of international peace and security. The first is the early identification of risks to regional peace and security; the second is coordinated efforts to mediate and encourage peaceful resolutions to conflict and the third is coherent support in implementing peace agreements, consolidating democratic governance and building peace. Both the United Nations and the AU would benefit from more integrated analysis in order to identify the emergence or re-emergence of conflicts. We should not shy away from identifying underlying drivers of instability and conflict and having honest conversations about where we must act. The United Kingdom is proud to support the AU's Continental Early Warning System, and I look forward to visiting the Early Warning Centre on my next trip to Addis Ababa. But accurate and timely information must be coupled with plans for effective and early action, which needs to happen at the State, regional or continental level. The African Union's support to elections in Madagascar two years ago and its mediation in the Sudan last year were impressive examples of what it can do. However, in other cases, action by the AU and the United Nations has either come too late or not at all. The key to greater shared success is consistency in our approach. That brings me to my second point. When conflicts do emerge, the United Nations and the AU bring complementary skills to the table. We are all deeply concerned by the situation in Tigray, where the immediate priorities are securing greater humanitarian access and ensuring the protection of civilians and human rights. The United Kingdom will continue to support AU-led efforts in that regard. I urge all parties to accept credible offers of support to establish the conditions for a sustainable political solution. That brings me to my third point. Once conflict is brought to an end, the real work of building and sustaining peace begins. Continued partnership between the United Nations and the AU is vital to seeing the peace agreement through in the Central African Republic, brokered through their joint efforts. The next milestone is credible, inclusive and peaceful elections later this month. Strong cooperation is particularly important during peacekeeping transitions, as the United Nations or AU presence reconfigures to meet evolving conditions. I hope that the AU will be able to provide its expertise and political support to the work of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan, helping the Sudan's transition to democracy. African Union forces currently play an invaluable role in Somalia. I pay tribute to the brave men and women of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the African Union-led peace operation. Looking ahead, the Somali security forces are now stronger but still need support. I will encourage greater effort in that regard, from the AU, the United Nations and others, to ensure that the AU-led mission evolves in response to Somalia's increasing capabilities. Predictability and sustainability in financing are an important element of the AU's ability to deploy operations like AMISOM. The United Kingdom supports, in principle, access to United Nations-assessed contributions for future AU-led peace support operations, on a case-by-case basis and subject to certain key conditions. It is abundantly clear that a deeper and broader partnership between the United Nations and the AU is indispensable as we strive towards our shared goal of a conflict-free Africa. The United Kingdom remains committed to supporting that partnership.
