Mr. Motoc (Romania): I wish first to welcome
Japan's initiative to convene this timely debate on the
situation in Afghanistan. More generally, Japan is to be
congratulated on its significant contribution to the
overall international efforts aimed at establishing
lasting peace in Afghanistan, and in particular on its
notable performance as the lead nation in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. Special acknowledgement and credit are
also due for the leadership assumed by the Japanese
delegation here in New York in coordinating the
Security Council's initiatives and action on the Afghan
question.

I would like also to join other members of the
Council in thanking Special Representative Jean
Arnault for the comprehensive briefing he provided
today and for the substantial activity that was behind
that briefing. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
latest report on the question (S/2005/525).

I shall be brief, since Romania, as an acceding
country, aligns itself fully with the statement just made
by Ambassador Jones Parry on behalf of the European
Union.

Remarkable progress has been achieved so far in
the implementation of the Bonn process. This would
not have been possible without the resilience and
determination of the Afghan people, and without the
partnership between the Government of Afghanistan
and the international community. As the Bonn process
is due to be completed with the holding of
parliamentary elections in September, now is the right
time to take stock of what has been accomplished so
far and define the future steps that will consolidate
progress made to date and make it irreversible.

Undoubtedly, Afghanistan will continue to need
the support of the international community. As the
Secretary-General rightly pointed out in his report,
security, effective institutions and development will
continue to require time and concerted efforts beyond
the completion of the Bonn process.

It is in this context that Romania supports the
Secretary-General's intention to launch a process of
consultations on the post-electoral agenda. We look
forward to participating in upcoming discussions on
the future role of the United Nations in Afghanistan.
We are of the view that the United Nations should
continue to play a central role in coordinating the
efforts of the international community in Afghanistan,
building upon the remarkable work already performed
by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

Turning now to the current developments in
Afghanistan, we consider the forthcoming
parliamentary elections to be a major priority. We are
very much encouraged that preparations are on track.
No effort should be spared to ensure the successful
holding of elections. The electoral process has to take
place in a safe and stable environment. The recent
outbreaks of violence, especially in the southern part of
the country, are a vivid reminder of the persistence of
terrorist threats alongside other challenges to the
stability of Afghanistan. The extended presence of
international forces remains key to improving security
conditions and, thus, to securing the prospects for the
successful holding of elections - as well as, beyond
that point, to ensuring the sustainability of the peace
process.

NATO's commitment to continue to expand its
presence in the country is, therefore, highly
commendable. For its part, Romania is temporarily
increasing its military presence in Afghanistan, with
400 additional troops as supplementary assistance in
providing security for the elections. This temporary
increase will add to the 543 troops already in ISAF and
Operation Enduring Freedom.

I think it is appropriate at this juncture to pay
tribute to the sacrifice made by 17 of their Spanish
colleagues serving on the ground in Afghanistan and to
convey our most sincere and deepest condolences and
sympathy to the Spanish Government and people.
Also with regard to the security situation, the
launching of the disbandment of illegal armed groups
was timely and very much needed to ensure not only
more stable conditions in the country, but also more
credibility as concerns the elections.

Turning now to counter-narcotics efforts, we are
supportive of a comprehensive approach that covers
the whole range of activities connected to narcotics and
takes into account the specific circumstances in
Afghanistan. Special emphasis should be placed on
creating alternative livelihoods. Moreover, counter-
narcotics efforts at the national level should be
accompanied by coordinated action undertaken at the
regional and even the international levels, as my
delegation has constantly maintained. At present, the
Romanian Government is engaged in a process of
putting into practice a proposal to support international
efforts to combat narco-trafficking through offering
alternative livelihoods to Afghans.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate Romania's
belief that Afghanistan requires a long-term
commitment and a comprehensive framework for the
international community's engagement. Our ultimate
goal should be to secure the achievement of the
primary objective that was placed very high within the
Bonn process; that of a stable, peaceful and democratic
Afghanistan. Romania has invested too much in that
direction to settle for anything less, and we trust that
all international actors collaborating in the ongoing
efforts in Afghanistan share that ambitious objective.

Lastly, Sir, permit me to express my delegation's
support for the draft presidential statement that you
have so kindly submitted.

