Mr. Mminele (South Africa): My delegation is
grateful to be able to participate in this debate, and we
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2015/677).
South Africa appreciates the statements made by the
Foreign Minister of the State of Palestine and the
Permanent Representative of Israel.
We also align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We meet at a critical moment of great concern. The
escalation of violence and inflammatory rhetoric in the
occupied Palestinian territories and East Jerusalem,
especially around the holy sites of the Temple
Mount - the Haram Al-Sharif compound - including
the Al-Aqsa Mosque and Joseph's Tomb, are a source of
great concern. South Africa denounces all attempts to
change the decades-long status quo in the Holy Land,
which has preserved mutual respect for the holy sites
of the world's three major monotheistic religions. It is
especially disconcerting that the reverence for those
sites has been exploited politically and used to incite
violence.

South Africa reiterates, in the strongest terms, its
condemnation of violence in all its forms, regardless
by whom it is perpetrated. We convey our sincere
condolences to the families and friends of the victims
on all sides who have been killed or injured. We support
calls for both the Government of Israel and the State
of Palestine to conduct investigations into the latest
killings and to ensure that the perpetrators are held
accountable for their actions.

We call upon the authorities in Israel and Palestine
to respond to the current developments with restraint
and in a measured manner. South Africa agrees with
the assessment by the Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs on Friday, 16 October, when he stated
that the collective punishments carried out by the Israeli
Defence Forces are in contravention of international
law and should be terminated without delay.

Israel and the international community must
understand that the outrage among Palestinians has been
created by developments on the ground, which have
rendered a viable Palestinian State nearly unattainable.
In addition, the depressed economic situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, especially in Gaza, and
the illegal settlement activities that continue unabated
have compounded the rage of the Palestinians, who
believe that violence is the only option left to them.

Statements and debates in the Security Council over
the past years have proved ineffective to address the
deteriorating situation in Palestine. We keep meeting
in this Chamber to no effect, and it is depressing to
realize that the Council has become unable to address
major crises, mainly because the narrow interest of
a few member States has rendered it toothless. The
Council's unwillingness to take meaningful action to
move the peace process forward has led directly to the
complete breakdown of the negotiation process and to
the resulting escalation of tension and violence in Israel
and Palestine.

South Africa calls on the Security Council to
urgently respond to the situation in Israel. Unified and
impartial action by the Council is long overdue. As a
first step, we believe that the Council should urgently
pave the way for the cessation of violence and create the
opportunity for the parties to be able to meet. It is clear
that there is no trust between the parties and that the
restoration of some degree of trust is required to begin
the long road back to the negotiations on a two-State
solution. The Council should also adopt measures for
the cessation of collective punishment and settlement
activities, which are illegal, as well as for lifting the
blockade against Gaza. Urgent measures are required
to alleviate the suffering on the ground. We believe that
only then can a timeline be set for the resumption of the
peace process.

My delegation has taken note with interest of the
report of the Secretary-General submitted to the Council
on 21 October, which provides ample examples of the
deployment of international protection forces, and we
look forward to further discussions on those options in
the Council as well as in the General Assembly.

South Africa views developments in the Middle
East as intrinsically connected and believes that the
only way to achieve sustainable peace in the region is
for the international community to work on multiple
fronts to bring about the resolution of conflicts. We
remain deeply concerned by the civil war in Syria,
which has wreaked havoc in that country and beyond
for four years. The instability in Syria has affected the
entire region and has created ample breeding ground
for extremists and terrorism. However, we do not
believe that continued or increasing military activity by
major Powers can resolve the situation in a satisfactory
manner. We believe that concerted and unified action
by the Security Council is required to restore peace and
stability in the entire Middle East, with due respect for
the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations.

