Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian delegation played an active part in
the discussion in the Security Council on the issue of the
confiscation of Palestinian lands in East Jerusalem, and
closely followed the process of achieving agreement on the
draft resolution submitted by the Non-Aligned Movement
group of countries.

In so doing, we took as our premise that the question
of Jerusalem, as is provided for in the Declaration of
Principles, must be the subject of future negotiations on the
final status of the Palestinian territories. Until then, any
action to alter the status quo in Jerusalem cannot be
considered otherwise than as contravening the spirit of the
Palestinian-Israeli agreements and the peace process as a
whole, a process of which the Russian Federation is a co-
sponsor.

Our position basically coincided with the approach of
all the other Council members, and this being the case, we
believed that the best possible course would be to achieve
a consensus reaction to Israel's actions - for example, in
the form of a statement by the President. Unfortunately,
that has not proved possible.

However, we note with satisfaction that, during the
discussions on the draft resolution, its sponsors took into
account most of the amendments and proposals suggested
and thereby made it more balanced and purposeful. In its
present form, the draft resolution expresses first and
foremost, heightened concern over the Israeli action, which
violates Security Council resolutions and the Declaration of
Principles, reaffirms that this action is null and void and
calls upon Israel to rescind it. We fully concur with
those provisions and will support the draft resolution.

The Russian delegation expresses the hope that the
Israeli authorities will find it possible, at this crucial and
extremely sensitive stage of the negotiating process in the
Middle East, to reconsider their attitude towards the
confiscation of Palestinian land in East Jerusalem. This
would help keep up the momentum of the peace process,
ensure that it continues to move forward and would help
towards the establishment of genuine peace and good-
neighbourliness between Arabs and Israelis.

