Mr. Dinh (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, Her Excellency Ms. Heidi Grau and His Excellency Mr. Halit Cevik for their insightful briefings on the implementation of resolution 2202 (2015), the Minsk agreements and the humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine. I would also like to welcome His Excellency the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine to today's meeting. Over the past few months, we have seen encouraging signs of progress on issues related to the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine. A number of detained persons associated with the conflict were released in prisoner exchanges. After a long standstill, the Normandy format meeting held on 9 December 2019 enabled the successful resumption of communication processes at the highest level. We would like to commend the great efforts of the Normandy Four leaders, as well as their commitment to a sustainable and inclusive architecture of trust and security in Europe. I look forward to forthcoming meetings.Meanwhile, the situation on the ground in the region is still of serious concern. Incidents, including armed hostilities, occur every day in that part of Europe. The conflict continues to cause death, injuries, displacement, shelter destruction and the lack of basic living conditions for millions of civilians - many of whom are elderly, women and children. We hope that the momentum for stabilization and de-escalation will continue, with the aim of moving further towards a peaceful settlement to the situation, in accordance with international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant Security Council resolutions. In that regard, we call for greater efforts to fully implement the Minsk agreements. We also look forward to the concrete implementation of a comprehensive ceasefire regime, the development and implementation of additional disengagement areas and an updated mine clearance plan, among other measures. We urge the parties to explore further trust-building steps by promoting dialogue and negotiations.
