Mr. Momen: I wish to thank you, Sir, for inviting
me to take part in this debate in my capacity as the
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission. The
Commission is pleased to contribute to the Council's
consideration of the Secretary-General's report on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict (S/2012/746).

The Commission was briefed on 20 July on the
emerging findings and recommendations of the
Secretary-General's report, and shared its views
on the areas that could be further emphasized. The
Commission then met on 26 November to discuss the
final report. We commend the Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacebuilding Support, Ms. Judy Cheng-
Hopkins, for her efforts and those of her team.

The Commission took note with appreciation of the
Secretary-General's report. The periodic reporting of
the Secretary-General to the Security Council and the
General Assembly on peacebuilding in the aftermath
of conflict offers an opportunity to take stock of how
the United Nations operational entities play a role in
supporting post-conflict countries in addressing the
root causes of and preventing relapse into conflict.
Delivering results on the ground, focusing on national
capacity development, and building institutions that
are necessary for recovery from conflict are all key
elements of this.

In this regard, the Commission noted the
importance of the main themes contained in this year's
report: inclusivity, institution-building, sustained
international support and mutual accountability.
Through its political declaration adopted at the high-
level event on "Peacebuilding: Way towards sustainable
peace and security", which took place on 25 September,
the Commission drew attention to these themes among
its broader membership at the highest political level,
and sought to reinvigorate the political commitment
to the overarching peacebuilding objectives in post-
conflict countries.

The Commission noted the analysis and
recommendations made in this year's report with
respect to women's participation in peacebuilding. In
its interaction with the Secretariat ahead of the release
of the report, the Commission emphasized the need for
programmes to be designed with a view to enhancing
the integration of women and youth as agents for
inclusive post-conflict recovery and reconstruction.
The Commission realizes that, while progress is being
achieved in mainstreaming a gender dimension in
peacebuilding, there is a need for additional efforts and
focus on investment in the socioeconomic and political
empowerment of women in post-conflict societies.
Experience-sharing, particularly through South-South
and triangular cooperation in specific thematic areas,
can contribute to achieving the objective of women's
empowerment.

The Secretary-General's report contains three
specific recommendations addressed to the Peacebuilding
Commission, which have been well-received. We
realize that those recommendations are also in line
with the recommendations of the 2010 Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture, which the Commission has
been addressing through an annual road map of actions.
In that regard, I wish to briefly make some specific
remarks on each.

First, we have taken steps to strengthen our
approach to promoting and improving collaboration,
coherence and the alignment of partners behind
national peacebuilding strategies in the countries
on the Commission's agenda. Our focus has been on
strengthening partnership with national Governments,
the World Bank and the African Development Bank. We
have also resumed consultations with the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States.
We are making progress in identifying specific areas
where the Commission can contribute to improving
alignment with those institutions. We believe that
such alignment, especially with the World Bank and
the African Development Bank, in support of newly
developed national poverty reduction strategies, will
help to channel much-needed resources to otherwise
underfunded peacebuilding priorities and bring
attention to country-specific challenges. Such efforts
could contribute to strengthening country ownership
and would enhance mutual commitments.

While continuing to strengthen and deepen the
partnership with the World Bank and the African
Development Bank, the Commission is also prioritizing
its outreach to foundations and private corporations.
Our immediate objective will be to identify practical
entry points that could help encourage these critical
actors to support peacebuilding objectives in the
countries on the Commission's agenda.

Secondly, the Commission is also making
progress in identifying options for differentiated and
flexible forms of engagement with the countries on its
agenda, with a view to enhancing the Commission's
impact on the ground. In that regard, we are taking
practical steps to enhance linkages with country-
level actors and mechanisms, including Special and
Executive Representatives of the Secretary-General,
and to strengthen coordination among all actors.
We are increasingly focused on identifying areas of
complementarity, collaboration and coherence. Our
efforts are still a work in progress, but we are committed
to continuing to sharpen our tools in this area.

Thirdly, and lastly, the Secretary-General
encouraged the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission to build on the excellent and most
useful debate and interactive dialogue that took place
under the Colombian presidency this past July (see S/PV.6805). I express special thanks to Ambassador
Nestor Osorio, Permanent Representative of Colombia,
for his efforts. In a letter that I addressed to the
President of the Council, I summarized the practical
outcome of the July interaction to allow for follow-up
dialogue with the Council. We are thankful that the
Council has responded by requesting specific advice
from the Liberia and the Sierra Leone configurations
ahead of its September deliberations on the renewal of
the mandates of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone, respectively. In that connection, the
Commission is proceeding with the development and
formulation of its advice in collaboration with key
United Nations and non-United Nations actors in both
countries.
In November, the Commission's Working Group
on Lessons Learned convened discussions with key
operational actors to look at where the Commission
could add value to Security Council discussions on
United Nations missions in transition. There are initial
and important findings that need to be put into practice,
following further discussions between the two organs.

The United Nations peacebuilding agenda is in
the normative phase. While not perfect, our efforts
are making a difference and are worthy of our
collective commitment and investment. For its part, the
Peacebuilding Commission is committed to enhancing
its impact in the field and to supporting United Nations
and global efforts to accompany the countries emerging
from conflict on an irreversible path to peace and
development.

Looking ahead, the Commission stresses the need
to draw on lessons learned from country-specific
experiences in terms of good practices, challenges
and opportunities. We invite the Secretary-General
to place particular emphasis in his future reports on
the practicality of his recommendations in terms of
impacts on the ground and the operational effectiveness
of the United Nations in post-conflict countries. That
would also allow us to set clear peacebuilding targets
and should also stimulate serious evaluation of the
Organization's policies and tools in support of those
targets.

For its part, the Commission will continue to look
forward to working closely with the United Nations
and other non-United Nations partners, such as the
international financial institutions, in support of more
coordinated and coherent response to those priority
areas, as relevant, in the countries on its agenda.

