Mr. Ceriani (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank and congratulate Nigeria
on its conduct of the presidency ofthe Security Council
for August, and also for its timely choice of subject for
today's open debate, which enables the Council and the
international community to advance the Organization's
essential task of maintaining international peace and
security.

As the concept note (S/2015/599, annex) circulated
for today's debate clearly highlights, the international
environment has been undergoing profound and rapid
changes that challenge the Organization and the
international community and make it necessary to
act in a coordinated and effective way to tackle those
changes. In that regard, the nature of the new global
security challenges cannot be addressed in the same
way that they were even a decade ago. Increasing threats
and their transnational character, such as pandemics,
organized crime and various forms of terrorism,
require States to act together, because individually
they do not have the ability to control those threats.
Therefore, the role they play in regional and subregional
organizations under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations can be a key element in the fight against
such global threats. Uruguay, as a member of the Union
of South American Nations (UNASUR), finds in that
organization a framework for regional cooperation that
seeks to collectively confront the challenges of our
region.

Today we are witnessing multiple conflicts that
have progressively deteriorated and cause growing
concern that the world is far from seeing the purposes
and principles essential for peaceful coexistence,
development and cooperation among peoples and nations
fulfilled. To be able to enforce those purposes and
principles and ensure the maintenance of international
peace and security, regional organizations should
work from the outset to include conflict prevention
and resolution and to generate other initiatives that
contribute to safeguarding regional peace and security.
They must work in an ongoing and tireless way, while
being creative and resourceful in response to such
global challenges, and they must support conditions that
ensure political stability and democratic governance in
their regions and institutions so as to ensure the rule
of law, the promotion and protection of human rights
and the defence of the territorial integrity of States and
their right to inclusive and sustainable socioeconomic
development.

In that task, UNASUR has, for example, been able to
develop a strategy that has managed to solve problems,
using good offices and mediation in situations of
tension between its members, even in the internal crises
of some of them. That has been possible because the
work has been based on the view that democracy serves
as a beacon to guide actions for adoption whenever a
threat had emerged.

Moreover, the main security body accountable to
UNASUR is the South American Defence Council,
established at the end of 2008 and the main objective
of which is to serve as an active forum for political
dialogue with the aim of defusing potential conflicts in
the region. The South American Defence Council does
not seek to create a South American armed force, nor
does it wish to develop a joint operative capability or a
common defence policy. Rather, it seeks to achieve the
consolidation of the South as a zone of peace capable
of shaping a South American identity with regard to
defence and of generating consensus to strengthen
regional cooperation on such issues. Today we can say
with satisfaction that Latin America and the Caribbean
is a zone in which there are no serious conflicts between
States that threaten international peace and security.

In line with that fact, and continuing with the
example of UNASUR, we note that the work of the
organization, of which we are a part, is based on lessons
learned in the region at different times of tension. We
believe, without wishing to export models, that they
can also be applied in those areas where the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter are today being
violated. The need to adapt to new problem situations
and the challenges they present can be the basis for
providing a new dimension to regional organizations on
cooperation in matters of peace and security. Similarly,
coordination and cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations should be addressed
so as to ensure the validity of the principles and values
enshrined in the Charter of the Organization.

