Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): Today's
Security Council open debate on the issue of justice
and the rule of law has great significance for our
delegation. Togo would like to congratulate your
presidency, Sir, for having organized it, and thanks the
Secretary-General for his report (S/20121/634*) and
his presentation. As part of this debate, my delegation
would like to make the following remarks.

Renouncing the use of force is a fundamental
principle of the United Nations, even if the
requirements of collective security and the right to

12-2096]
self-defence limit its scope. From the outset, it is worth
recalling that essential principle at a time when we
note that force seems to be the choice for achieving
justice, to the detriment of the peaceful settlement of
conflicts. Peace and respect for the law are therefore
interlinked, while respect for the rule of law is a
prerequisite for peace and security, guaranteeing
human rights and combating impunity.

I would briefly like to underscore the fact that the
role of the International Court of Justice takes on
particular importance in that regard. The Court has
intervened in situations where a peaceful settlement
has not been achieved. In that way, the Court
contributes to the maintenance of peace and security
and to the promotion of justice and the rule of law.

It is also undeniable that international law is
beneficial and effective only if it is implemented at the
national level. That is why Togo thought that the
functioning of its institutions should be based, first and
foremost, on respect for justice and the rule of law. The
preamble to Togo's basic law therefore clearly
recognizes the primacy of international law and affirms
that the State must be founded only on relevant
international legal principles and instruments.

Furthermore, my country believes that the best
way to promote justice and the rule of law is to ensure
that the conduct of all national political stakeholders,
as well as the international community, is anchored in
the principles of law, and that the violation of such
principles be punished in line with established norms.
That is why Togo believes that no crime committed
during armed conflict should ever go unpunished,
including genocide, rape, gender-based violence and
violence against children.

It is also undeniable that the perpetrators of such
crimes must be punished in accordance with the
national law of each country. However, to do that,
justice must operate with equality and independently
on the basis of the strength of the law and not the law
of force. There must be equal justice for all. It must be
accessible to all, without any impediment linked to
social rank, ethnic origin, culture or religion. Justice
for all must be encouraged, in particular in post-
conflict countries, because a lack of justice and the
prevalence of impunity undoubtedly fuel cycles of
vengeance and violence. My country therefore
welcomes the fact that the Secretary-General's report
on the rule of law and transitional justice in conflict

12-2096]
and post-conflict societies (S/2011/634*) is focused on
access to justice for all.

The Government of Togo has undertaken broad
reform of its justice system to ensure respect for the
rights of all citizens. It has established a fully active
truth, justice and reconciliation commission, which
seeks to shed light on acts of violence perpetrated in
the country's past, identify victims and ensure
reparations in the context of national reconciliation.

My country also welcomes the gradual
establishment of international and ad hoc tribunals, the
International Court of Justice in particular, that have
promoted number of positive developments. The
perpetrators of serious Violations of human rights and
international law who, for any reason, cannot be tried
in their own countries must be referred to those courts.
Ideally, however, alleged perpetrators would be held
accountable for their actions before national courts.

While it is the State that can most readily enforce
the law and ensure its primacy in times of peace,
challenges remain to civic well-being in conflict and
post-conflict societies. It is therefore important during
the reconstruction phase for a viable and credible
justice system to be established in order to promote
respect for human rights, national reconciliation, peace
and stability. We feel that such a system should be able
to integrate reparations and punitive justice, while
incorporating national sociological values and
traditional mechanisms prevent, manage and settle
conflicts.

In conclusion, Togo reaffirms its commitment to
the rule of law and transitional justice, and believes
that the Security Council should continue to play its
role in promoting and coordinating efforts in this area.
Togo welcomes the adoption of measures by the United
Nations on the protection of civilians and children in
armed conflict. The Security Council should also
encourage better international cooperation in the
promotion of the rule of law and justice, and assist
countries - developing countries in particular - in
ensuring that those principles are anchored in their
daily lives.

