I would like first to congratulate the Dominican Republic on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of April, and to commend your endeavours, Mr. President, to make a success of the Council's work in the face of the challenges to multilateral action arising from the crisis unleashed by the coronavirus pandemic. Egypt aligns itself with the statements made on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Arab and Islamic groups on this topic and appreciates the briefings provided by United Nations officials at the opening of this meeting. The world is witnessing an unprecedented crisis as a result of the coronavirus pandemic, which is showing up a good many flaws, as yet only in outline, in how we conduct international affairs. When the conditions are right, we shall need to carry out a thorough review of the crisis and its repercussions and together examine how to avoid such crises in future. In that regard, I wish to commend the Secretary-General for his efforts to deal with the crisis and create an environment conducive to addressing the repercussions of the pandemic and laying the groundwork for a comprehensive political process, which the Middle East so desperately needs, based on the relevant Security Council resolutions and terms of reference for the resolution of conflicts. Similar appeals have been made by United Nations envoys to the region and the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States. I would emphasize that the repercussions of this crisis have not passed the Middle East by. Rather, the region could be said to be in the eye of the storm in economic, health and human terms, especially given the internal crises that some countries in the region have been undergoing over the past years. The communication and cooperation between the Palestinian Authority and Israel in dealing with the consequences of the pandemic for both sides is definitely a positive development that Egypt trusts will continue. Egypt hopes that the cooperation established between the two sides will be extended with a view to improving the detention conditions of Palestinian prisoners, in particular the elderly and those with chronic illnesses, who are the most vulnerable to the disease. The cooperation between the two sides reflects the importance of communication, mutual understanding and coexistence in resolving international crises, and the fact that any crisis or dispute can be resolved through dialogue between those involved where there is the political will and genuine desire to arrive at a just and lasting settlement. In spite of the positive cooperation between the two sides, the call by the Secretary-General for a general ceasefire and developments around the world that require solidarity and cooperation among all countries worldwide, the pattern of Israeli practices in the occupied Palestinian territory has gone on unabated, and even at a greater pace. That is particularly the case with regard to settlement activity, as the Israeli occupation authorities have continued to confiscate more land and expel Palestinians from it, demolish homes and announce plans to build more settlement units. That is on top of attacks by Israeli settlers against the Palestinian people in the West Bank, which must be contained and brought to an end. The position of Egypt with regard to the Palestinian question remains firmly based on its support for a just and lasting solution whereby the Palestinian people exercises its legitimate right to self-determination through the establishment of an independent State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, within the borders of 4 June 1967. It is critical to put a stop to all unilateral practices that could exacerbate instability and threaten the long-awaited two-State solution and to work towards the resumption of Palestinian-Israeli negotiations as soon as possible. Egypt welcomes any initiatives aimed at a resumption of negotiations on the basis of internationally recognized resolutions. Egypt has followed with interest the press releases issued by the Security Council over the past two weeks regarding the demand for a ceasefire and de-escalation in Yemen and Syria and the call by the Secretary-General and his envoys to the countries of the Middle East for a comprehensive ceasefire in the region's armed conflicts. Egypt again urges the Security Council to intensify efforts to reach sustainable political settlements in those armed conflicts in the Arab region and to live up to its responsibility to maintain international peace and security. In order to do so, the Council should show unity of purpose regarding a clear vision on the need to combat terrorism, hold its supporters to account and confront Governments and organizations that misuse the Islamic faith as incitement to take up arms and resort to violence to achieve a political project aimed at demolishing the concept of the civil nation State and the principles of citizenship. This tendentious political scheme is perhaps the principal reason for and common denominator behind the prolongation of the armed conflicts in the Arab region, in the absence of clear and practical steps or a unified vision on the part of the Security Council to address those threats. With regard to the Libyan crisis, Egypt has maintained consistently, since the outset of the crisis, that there needs to be a political solution to pave the way for building a new, secure and stable State. That position is self-evident and is dictated by the close geographical and historical ties that bind the two countries and their peoples together, not to mention the national security concerns of Egypt. Egypt has therefore long supported the various regional and international efforts to achieve peace in Libya, most recently the Berlin conference on Libya. Cairo also recently hosted meetings of the Libya Expert Economic Commission, one of three tracks on which the United Nations Support Mission in Libya is working. In that regard, Egypt reiterates its call for the Council to adopt a decisive position to address the negative actions of Turkey, which are common knowledge in Libya and are further complicating the conflict and stand in the way of achieving the yearned-for peace and stability in Libya. Turkey played a central and pivotal role in last week's clashes: it supported militias and mercenaries as they set free hundreds of terrorists and criminals, and the subsequent killing of civilians in Sabratha and Surman by terrorists. That unacceptable crime was passed over in silence by the international community. In order to reach a peaceful settlement in Libya, certain marginalized areas of the country must be brought into the mainstream, thereby enabling a fair distribution of wealth and power and the rebuilding of national State institutions. That can be achieved only by forming an independent Government acceptable to Parliament, disarming the militias and confronting the terrorist organizations. Egypt looks forward to a time of greater stability in the post-pandemic world. Priorities will need to be reordered, and the international community will need to set goals for the coming period, a time in which stability and peace shall prevail in the Middle East, which has for so long suffered from crises and instability. We look forward to, and will work towards, a better tomorrow for the region's peoples and its future generations.
