The President (spoke in French): I am very
pleased to welcome the heads of State or Government,
ministers and other representatives participating,
together with the Secretary-General, in this high-level
meeting of the Security Council. Their presence is an
affirmation of the importance of the subject matter to
be addressed. I would like in particular to welcome
the presence of the Secretary-General.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi.

It is so decided.
I extend a warm welcome to Mr. Brahimi.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to draw
attention to document S/2008/590, containing the text
of a letter dated 3 September 2008 from the Permanent
Representative of Burkina Faso to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.

I shall now introduce the debate and make a
statement in my national capacity.

The conflicts afflicting regions throughout the
world require all States, organizations and citizens of
our planet to resolve them through effective
mechanisms. In inviting participants to this high-level
meeting on the topic "Mediation and settlement of
disputes", we sought to highlight the need to use
peaceful means as the method of choice for the
settlement of disputes. I would therefore like to address
my sincere thanks to all here for having answered our
invitation. Their presence attests to the interest they
2

attach to the deliberations of the Council as the organ
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security and the need to settle disputes by peaceful
means. I am particularly grateful for the diligence with
which they agreed to come and share their respective
experiences.

I am convinced that, by the end of our
discussions, we will have a convergence of views on
our ongoing search for peace through peaceful means. I
call upon the Security Council, the General Assembly,
the Secretary-General, regional and subregional
organizations, and civil society to draw on that
convergence for inspiration in a world where the
smallest crisis can become a real threat to international
peace and stability. The new dimensions of ideological
conflicts and the heightened complexity of current
conflicts require us to resort to the most innovative and
ingenious mediation strategies.

With respect to today's theme, I would like to
share a number of considerations that I believe are
vital. I have had the weighty responsibility of assisting
through mediation a number of African countries in
crisis in their quest for peace and stability.

I hold to the conviction that no mediation, no
matter how selfless and enthusiastic, can succeed
without the full participation of the protagonists.
Moreover, the mediator must remain objective,
independent and impartial and have a solid knowledge
of the specifics of the conflict, in particular those
relating to the major actors in the crisis and the
sociological realities of the countries and the region
concerned. That is where the role of regional and
subregional organizations is fundamental. They can
contribute effectively to the settlement of disputes
through close mediation, given their knowledge of the
situation on the ground and in their capacity as the
primary beneficiaries of restored peace.

That is the spirit of Security Council resolutions
1809 (2008) of 16 April 2008 and 1625 (2005) of
14 September 2005, on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations and on
strengthening the effectiveness of the Security
Council's role in conflict prevention, particularly in
Africa. The comprehensive implementation of the
relevant provisions of those resolutions would energize
regional and subregional mediation efforts. The
responsibility of the international community must not
go unnoticed. Bilateral and multilateral partners must
08-51564
be proactive in any mediation process by promoting the
leadership role of the mediator and supporting each
step of the process in a timely and appropriate manner.

In that regard, the United Nations and especially
the Security Council can and must play a critical role. I
therefore welcome the proposal made by Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon to strengthen the capacities of
the United Nations in the area of mediation. Our major
expectation is to see the Council become more invested
in that endeavour.

In drawing lessons from our ongoing experience,
I can say that progress made in implementing the
Ouagadougou Political Agreement on the crisis in Cote
d'Ivoire is due largely to the firm commitment of the
signatories of the Agreement, the unfailing support of
the Security Council and the Secretary-General, and
the eager willingness of countries and institutions to
support our efforts. I take this opportunity to reiterate
our deep appreciation to all and to express the hope
that this exemplary mobilization will be maintained
until the end of the process.

Mediation requires confidence and ongoing
coordination between the mediator, the parties to the
conflict, local actors and all partners. Such an
environment has helped to strengthen ownership of the
peace process by the main protagonists in Togo,
thereby creating conditions for a return to harmony and
reconciliation.

The current evolution of the ongoing process in
Cote d'Ivoire confirms that vision. In fact, the close
cooperation between the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Facilitator of the
Ouagadougou Agreement allows the Facilitator and the
United Nations to be fully informed of the situation
and to be confident that the crisis will be resolved.

In our experience of crisis mediation, three
essential elements should be highlighted. The first is
undoubtedly the importance of ownership by the major
parties of the process to resolving the crisis. The
success of any mediation presupposes the ongoing
commitment or the parties to the conflict to
implementing diligently the contractual provisions that
they have signed.

The second element is that the final document
must satisfy each protagonist and provide answers to
fundamental questions regarding the onset of the crisis,
08-51564
while remaining faithful to principle of even-
handedness.

The third element is the need for any peace
agreement to envisage appropriate follow-up
mechanisms that will allow the parties to gradually
overcome the many obstacles that could undermine the
peace process. The full participation of the protagonists
in the mediation process and the implementation of
follow-up mechanisms require the mediator to remain
usefully available to help and to listen as a guide, go-
between and neutral representative of the international
community. In addition to serving as follow-up and
coordination tools, follow-up mechanisms can be true
frameworks to strengthen dialogue and confidence
among the actors.

The many and diverse mediation initiatives in one
conflict raise the crucial question of how to harmonize
and coordinate them. The main organizations and
personalities concerned must work to establish
common or coordinated mechanisms in order to ensure
the synergy of actions taken and to avoid
counterproductive use of energies.

I therefore welcome the joint efforts of the United
Nations and the African Union to find sustainable
solutions to the crisis in Darfur. The recent
appointment of a Joint Mediator attests to the resolve
of the international community to put an end to the
tragedy on an urgent and ambitious basis.

Maintaining peace and security throughout the
world requires an international environment conducive
to the emergence of a culture of ongoing, structured
and dynamic dialogue to ensure the more effective
prevention of conflicts and above all, their timely
management and resolution. On that basis, a peaceful
approach is necessary in settling the disputes in the
Near and Middle East, the Caucusus, and a number of
African countries that are facing insurgencies or post-
electoral violence. Therefore, Burkina Faso has
requested the Secretary-General to submit to the
Council a report on the value of mediation both by the
United Nations and by regional organizations.

I express my deep appreciation to all delegations
for the support they have provided for the draft
statement submitted by Burkina Faso recognizing our
deliberations. Beyond what conflict settlement
mechanisms have to offer us, it is more important than
ever for human societies to reaffirm the supreme values
of tolerance, solidarity, dialogue and peaceful
3
coexistence that are the foundation of a healthy and
strong international community. It is therefore my hope
that the discussions on mediation that Burkina Faso has
sought to promote will continue and grow, and
especially that we will develop more effective conflict-
prevention mechanisms in furtherance of a fair and
peaceful world.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I invite His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the
Secretary-General, to take the floor.

