Mr. Alday Gonzalez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Jordan for convening and participating in
today's open debate. A look at recent events in the
Middle East serves to highlight the vital importance
that Mexico gives diplomacy and dialogue as key tools
for crafting long-term political solutions to conflicts
that affect the region.

The continuing humanitarian crisis in Syria, the
deplorable Violence against civilians by extremist
groups in several countries in the Middle East, the
accelerating deterioration of the situation in Yemen and
the stagnation of the peace talks between Israelis and
Palestinians are a selective sample of the challenges
the international community as a whole is facing in
its attempts to achieve security, stability and higher
levels of development in the region. The loss of
innocent lives in each of those crises and the violations
of international law can no longer be the common
denominator of a region that has contributed so much
to modern civilization.

Since the suspension of the latest round of peace
talks between Palestine and Israel a year ago, we see
a process of political decay between the parties and
a worsening humanitarian situation for millions of
Palestinians. The reconstruction and development
of the Gaza Strip depends not only on a political
process that reflects the will of the parties, but also
the unrestricted access of humanitarian assistance
pursuant to resolution 1860 (2009). We advocate for
the secure and ongoing implementation of the tripartite
mechanism established to monitor the entry of people
and supplies into Gaza, ensuring both attention to the
basic needs of the Palestinian people and the security
of Israel.

My delegation reiterates its support for a
comprehensive solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict based on the recognition of the right of
existence of the State of Israel and the establishment of
a politically and economically viable Palestinian State
and which allows for coexistence in peace and security
within secure borders and internationally recognized.

Mexico believes that Israeli settlements on
Palestinian territory are a violation ofinternational law,
and therefore constitute one of the main obstacles to
reaching a peaceful solution to the conflict.

We expect the new Government to reaffirm Israel's
commitment to the two-State solution and that it take
measures to promote the atmosphere needed to restart
negotiations. We are also convinced that hatred and
discrimination will never lead to peace. We echo
the condemnations of all forms of racism, including
anti-Semitic attacks or demonstrations, wherever they
occur and whatever the pretext.

The international community cannot remain a
passive actor while the root causes of conflict persist.
Mexico reiterates its call for the Security Council to
fulfil its responsibilities under the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. Its involvement, support
and leadership in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process
is vital. We call for the resumption of peace talks as
soon as possible, and reiterate our commitment to a
peaceful resolution of the conflict and our willingness
to continue contributing to international efforts towards
that goal.

We take the opportunity of this open debate to

also express our profound concern over the rapid
deterioration of, and escalation of the crisis in, Yemen,
which has not only led to violence against civilians but
also turned into a severe humanitarian crisis owing
to the failure to provide people with access to their
basic needs in various parts of the country. I reiterate
the concern expressed by several previous speakers at
the unfortunate loss of civilian lives as a result of the
violence. We call for dialogue between the parties and
the active mediation of the United Nations with a view
to reaching a political solution, not a military one, that
can allow us to reach a firm and lasting solution to the
Yemeni conflict.
Along similar lines, we are in favour of a political,
peaceful negotiated solution to the Syrian conflict that
guarantees respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law. The gravity of the level of violence
in that country and attacks against the population are
unprecedented. We believe that the use of chemical
weapons is not only a violation of international law,
but also an unacceptable chapter in our contemporary
history. Once again, we condemn the use of prohibited
chemical weapons against civilians in Syria, by
whomsoever and under any circumstances.

Finally, I would like to reiterate the commitment of
Mexico to the efforts of the international community to
counter the spread of violent extremism. Human rights
violations and violations of international humanitarian
law committed by the so-called Islamic State are
intolerable and unjustifiable.

It is important for the international community
to generate comprehensive preventive measures to
promote tolerance, respect for human rights, the
empowerment of the least represented groups and the
promotion of development opportunities for the most
affected communities.

