Mr. Merafhe (Botswana): Madam President, we are
delighted to see you presiding over this celebratory
meeting of the Security Council. Your country, Italy, and
Botswana enjoy warm bilateral relations. We are therefore
happy to see a friend at the helm of this august gathering.
We congratulate you.

The fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the
United Nations offers us a unique opportunity to review
the Organization's successes and shortcomings and to
reflect on what the world body has come to represent for
all of us.

The United Nations was founded in the aftermath of
one of the most devastating wars in the history of
mankind. It was established to, inter alia, "save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war". This

 

objective has largely been realized, to the extent that there
has not been an outbreak of a major war in the 50 years of
the Organization's existence. Yet, in the same period, local
or regional wars have claimed more lives than were lost
during the Second World War.

In a local or regional sense, therefore, succeeding
generations have not yet been saved from the scourge of
war. The conflicts currently raging in Afghanistan, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Georgia, and Sierra Leone, the genocide
that was perpetrated against the people of Rwanda last year
and the unsettled situation in Burundi, to mention but a few
examples, are illustrative in this regard. Lack of success in
conflict resolution, however, cannot be blamed on the
Organization alone.

The parties to the conflicts, who often fail to heed
calls by the United Nations for the cessation of hostilities
or even challenge the authority of the United Nations
Security Council, must bear the lion's share of
responsibility for failure in the maintenance or restoration
of international peace and security. Where the parties have
cooperated with the United Nations - in Namibia,
Mozambique, Cambodia and El Salvador and now in
Angola and Haiti, to mention a few recent examples - the
results have been resounding successes.

My delegation strongly believes in the sovereign
equality of Member States. The importance of each
Member State of the United Nations does not lie in how big
or small, how rich or poor it is. Rather, it lies in the
contribution it makes to the maintenance of international
peace and security, to the promotion and enjoyment of
basic human rights and freedoms and to economic welfare
for all, and, finally, to the progressive elimination of other
problems afflicting modern society which make the
presence of war and conflict an ever-present spectre in
human existence.

The few rich and powerful Members of the United
Nations should not use their power to veto the national
aspirations, interests and policies of the poor majority. They
should instead use this power for the elimination of poverty
and for the economic and social uplifting of small and poor
States and the poorer sections of society in those countries.
Equally, the majority developing countries should not use
the power of their numbers to frustrate the national interests
of the big Powers, because the result would be an
international impasse on issues of crucial importance to
mankind.

We are pragmatic and realistic enough to appreciate
that total convergence of national interests among the
Member States for collective action for the maintenance
of international peace and security would be very difficult
to attain. This would be so even at the best of times, so
long as the nation-State system remains the predominant
feature in international relations. We are also fully alive
to the fact that the United Nations is not a world
government or a super-State. It can act or function
effectively only on the basis of whatever authority and
titbits of national sovereignty the Member States are
willing to cede to it.

In other words, the United Nations can only be as
good as its Member States want it to be. Obviously, there
is a need to strike a balance between the national interests
of the States members of the Security Council and the
wider international implications of action or inaction in
the light of threats to peace. And this is not an easy task.

In the circumstances, the United Nations Security
Council should serve as the crucible for the harmonization
and coordination of these national interests and policies in
order to ensure that the wider interests of the peoples of
the world for peace and security are not compromised.

In situations where there is an absolute need for the
derogation of some of the authority of the Security
Council to regional arrangements to deter or prevent the
aggravation of a conflict, the mandate of the regional
arrangements must be clearly stated.

This must include what is intended to be achieved
and how, what can or cannot be done without prior
consultations with the Council and such other limitations
on the mandate of the regional arrangements which would
ensure that the authority, credibility and respect of the
United Nations are not compromised. It is a matter of the
utmost importance that the United Nations should retain
its impartiality in all conflict situations.

The Security Council should never take sides, either
by commission or omission, in any conflict, for therein lie
the seeds of its undoing: it cannot be both an honest
peace broker and a peace enforcer at the same time
without compromising the ends of justice and the
possibility of a more durable peace in the long term.

Those of us who have emerged from the ashes of a
region scorched by the hell fire of racial hatred and
political oppression in southern Africa have learned a
great lesson: that the freedom of any one country, be it

 

big or small, rich or poor, resides in its affording other
countries their own freedom. If this cannot be universally
attained, there will be less hope for world peace. As we
commemorate this auspicious occasion, let us rededicate
ourselves to the lofty ideals which inspired the founding
fathers of our Organization and renew our faith in the
efficacy of the United Nations, its purposes and principles.

But also in equal measure, let us redouble our efforts
to ensure that the Security Council will continue to be
responsive to the wishes of a world sick and tired of
conflict.

We owe it to posterity to create a world safe for
peace.

