Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like
to thank Italy for convening this debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for remaining vigilant on this
important challenge and the briefers for their detailed
accounts concerning the situation on the ground. My
delegation aligns itself with the statement delivered by
Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Before I start, allow me to express our deep shock
and condemnation, as well as condolences, to Nigeria
for the cowardly attack on a mosque today. Our prayers
and thoughts go to the bereaved families.

Martin Luther King, Jr. once said that our lives
begin to end the day we become silent about the things
that matter. Human trafficking is an offense and a
serious threat to human dignity, physical integrity,
human rights and sustainable development. Indonesia
therefore again reiterates its strongest condemnation of
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
and calls on all countries to strengthen and enhance
their commitment to the global efforts to combat this
crime. Sadly, so far, despite our joint efforts to combat
that menace, it remains a grave challenge to humankind.

According to the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime 2016 Global Report on Trafficking in
Persons, more than 33,000 people were trafficked in
2016, while the International Labour Organization
estimates that 21 million people are victims of forced
labour and trafficking globally. Furthermore, as we
speak, there are 22.5 million refugees worldwide. We
must all work together to ensure their welfare and
safety so as to prevent them from becoming victims of
human trafficking in any form.

In another part of the globe, news reports show
alarming incidences of African migrants in Libya
allegedly being sold as slaves. We applaud the
Secretary-General's swift response on that issue, and
urge the international community to work together in
fighting that heinous crime.

At this juncture, allow me to share some of
Indonesia's views on this matter.

First, it is critical that we reinforce all the global
norms and legal framework that relate to human
trafficking. In that regard, we call on countries that
have not ratified the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children to do so. We should
also strengthen efforts to implement all anti-trafficking
instruments, including the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons and
resolution 2331 (2016).

Furthermore, Indonesia also welcomes, and
co-sponsored, the new resolution 2388 (2017) on
trafficking in persons in situations of armed conflict,
which, among other things, is aimed at strengthening
detection with a victim-centred approach and a United
Nations-coordinated response and contributions of its
field missions. We look forward to the implementation
of resolution 2388 (2017).
Secondly, we must prioritize efforts to strengthen
cross-border collaboration aimed at investigating,
disrupting and dismantling human trafficking networks
that are profiting from conflict and human suffering.
At the regional level, Indonesia, working with other
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), stands ready to fully implement the ASEAN
Convention against Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children.

Indonesia is also committed to implementing the
Bali Declaration on People Smuggling, Trafficking
in Persons and Related Transnational Crime to create
safe and orderly migration in the region and to engage
the private sector in preventing trafficking in persons.
To that end, in August, Indonesia and Australia, as
co-Chairs of the Bali process, successfully organized
a Government and business forum that provided an
avenue of engagement for Governments and businesses
in curbing trafficking in persons.

Thirdly, Indonesia advocates greater focus on
increasing awareness and response capabilities of
peacekeepers through better predeployment training
to enable them to respond effectively to victims of
trafficking in persons during conflict situations, in
accordance with the mandate and basic principles of
peacekeeping. We also recognize the increasingly
important and positive role of women peacekeepers
in responding to women and children who have
fallen victims to sex traffickers and exploitation in
conflict areas. We are now preparing another 140 women
peacekeepers to be deployed. The United Nations and
its Member States must therefore do more to further
strengthen the role of women in peacekeeping, as
clearly outlined in the London communique of 2016.

Lastly, peace and development lay the foundations
for a stable society and human well-being. The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development provides a means
for countering instability and the resulting economic
desperation, which amplify the risks of conflict and
encourage human trafficking. Allow me to conclude
by reaffirming Indonesia's unwavering commitment to
putting an end to that heinous, centuries-long crime; we
must not allow it to exist for another second.

