Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I have
the honour also to speak on behalf of the European
Union. In addition, the acceding countries Bulgaria and
Romania, the candidate countries Turkey and Croatia,
the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Serbia and Montenegro, the European
Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries Iceland and
Liechtenstein members of the European Economic
Area, as well as Ukraine, align themselves with this
statement.

I, too, am grateful to Mr. Alvaro de Soto for his
briefing. I wish him every success in his new role.

European Union (EU) ministers, on 18 July,
recalled and stressed the global strategic importance of
peace, stability and prosperity in the Mediterranean
and the European commitment to the resolution of the
Middle East conflict. The European Union supports the
Israeli withdrawal from Gaza and parts of the northern
West Bank as an initial stage towards achieving a fair,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

On behalf of the Union, High Representative
Javier Solana visited the region from 10 to 14 July.
There he re-emphasized the European Union's
commitment to keeping both parties engaged in the
peace process and in the implementation of the road
map, and, furthermore, to ensure that EU action should
be coherent, focussed and coordinated with the Quartet
and the international community.

On security, the European Union is gravely
concerned at the recent escalation in violence in Israel
and the occupied territories and has condemned
unreservedly the recent terrorist attacks on Israel that
have resulted in a number of Israeli fatalities and
injuries. We have also condemned violence by
Palestinian militants against Palestinian security
personnel.

While having repeatedly condemned terrorist
atrocities against Israelis, and recognizing Israel's right
to protect its citizens against terrorist attacks, the
European Union has consistently opposed extrajudicial
killings, which are contrary to international law. The
European Union emphasizes that Palestinians and
Israelis must not return to the cycle of violence that has
been characteristic of recent years. We urge Israel to
exercise maximum self-restraint and the Palestinian
Authority to take immediate and effective action
against those involved in attacks.

We commend the political courage shown by the
leaders of the two sides with regard to the withdrawal
from Gaza and certain parts of the northern West Bank.
A successful disengagement is vital, and only one
month remains before it is scheduled to start. EU
ministers have therefore reaffirmed the need for both
parties to the conflict to make every effort to take
advantage of the opportunity presented by
disengagement and, furthermore, urge Israel to ensure
that withdrawal is complete and coordinated with the
Palestinians and the international community. We call
for intensified coordination between Israel and the
Palestinians, which is central to achieving tangible
results, especially with regard to the crucial issues of
access to and from the Gaza Strip.

The European Union fully supports the Quartet
and its Special Envoy for Disengagement, James
Wolfensohn, and his mission. The Union is determined
to work in close cooperation with him to ensure the
success of disengagement, and we urge the
international community, including Arab States, to do
likewise. The EU has emphasized the urgent need for
Israel and the Palestinian Authority to cooperate
effectively with one another and with Mr. Wolfensohn
in order to support Palestinian institutional and
economic development. It wants the Palestinian
Authority to accelerate reforms and Israel to put in
place the conditions essential to viable Palestinian
economic growth.

While noting the ongoing contacts between Israel
and the Palestinian Authority, including the meeting
between the Israeli Prime Minister and the Palestinian
President on 21 June in Jerusalem, we want such
contacts to improve in both substance and frequency
and to take place at all levels. Both sides should renew
their efforts to implement the commitments made at
Sharm el-Sheikh and avoid any action likely to
undermine mutual confidence. Crucially, no party
should take unilateral measures which might prejudice
the outcome of negotiations on the final settlement. In
that context, the European Union is concerned about
the recent Israeli Cabinet decision to complete
immediately the separation barrier in and around East
Jerusalem.

On law and order, the European Union has urged
the Palestinian Authority to step up its efforts to ensure
a secure environment in which its citizens' own needs
for law and order are met. We are committed to
contributing to the development of Palestinian security
capacity through the Palestinian civil police, in
coordination with United States Security Coordinator
General Ward.

On final status issues, EU ministers on 18 July
recalled that the Union will not recognize any change
to the pre-1967 borders other than those arrived at by
agreement between the parties. We continue to believe
that the way to achieve a permanent peace is a viable
two-State solution, achieved through the full
implementation by both parties of their commitments
under the road map.

Finally, I would like to reiterate the European
Union's position regarding the Israeli separation
barrier. While the European Union recognizes the right
of Israel to protect its citizens from terrorist attacks, it
has demanded that Israel stop and reverse the
construction of the barrier inside the occupied
Palestinian territory, including in and around East
Jerusalem, which is in contradiction to the relevant
provisions of international law.

