Mr. Levald (Norway): Norway welcomes this
opportunity to discuss security sector reform (SSR) in
the Security Council. SSR deserves increased attention,
and it is therefore important that SSR has been placed
on the agenda of the Security Council. We welcome the
concept paper prepared by the Slovak presidency
(S/2007/72, annex). The concept paper serves as an
excellent basis for today's debate, and as an impetus
for an enhanced United Nations role as regards SSR.
We fully concur with the draft presidential statement to
be adopted later today.

We support the formulation of a comprehensive,
coherent and coordinated United Nations approach to
SSR. Norway is ready to support United Nations
efforts in that regard. We appreciate that the United
Nations has already done a lot of work out in the field,
albeit not always under the heading of SSR. The
United Nations has important practical experiences to
be drawn upon when formulating an overarching
approach.

Norway would like to underline the importance
of coordination with ongoing work on this subject
taking place in other international and regional
organizations. For several years, Norway has
contributed to security sector reform in the Western
Balkans, both bilaterally and in cooperation with
various other actors, including NATO. I would also like
to mention the work of the Organization for Economic

Cooperation and Development (OECD), especially
regarding efforts to define the concept. Agreement on a
definition is key to future cooperation and coordination
of efforts in this vitally important field. The OECD
defines the security system as encompassing the armed
forces, civil police, the judicial and prison system, and
the civil authorities responsible for controlling those
groups, including ministries and parliaments. Reform
of those sectors is vital to ensure sustainable peace in
post-conflict societies, as well as in countries in
transition from one-party rule to democracy.

The complex realities facing modern-day crisis
management operations require multidimensional
responses. Civilian aspects of international crisis
management are increasingly regarded as integral parts
of crisis management operations. SSR is an element of
crucial importance if we are to achieve sustainable
peace and Viable democracies. If there is a fundamental
lack of trust in the institutions that should uphold the
principles of rule of law and respect for human rights,
there will hardly be any progress in a post-conflict
situation.

Norway has responded to the increasing demand
for civilian crisis response capabilities by
systematically pooling experts within priority areas.
We have pools of police, legal and defence experts, as
well as advisers on democracy-building and human
rights. Our experts are deployed in international
operations and to bilateral SSR projects.

Norway actively seeks to integrate gender
awareness into security sector reform, as well as into
all other activities of the United Nations. Mandates for
peace operations should specify how the various
measures affect both women and men. We have
adopted a national plan of action for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security.

Security sector reform is also on the agenda of
the Peacebuilding Commission. In the case of Burundi,
for example, SSR has indeed been identified as a
critical area. Development and security are strongly
related, both in the short and the long term. Without
timely security sector reform, extensive peacebuilding
and appropriate reintegration of fighters, countries may
fall back into violent chaos. That would destroy any
hope of rapid development.

