Mr. Pemagbi (Sierra Leone): My delegation
would like to join others in congratulating you,
Madam, on your country's assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of June.

Our participation in this open debate should be
seen from the perspective of a country that has
experienced a prolonged armed conflict and is in the
process of building and consolidating peace. We in
Sierra Leone have learned that the search for peace is
not, and should never be, the exclusive prerogative of
Governments. Civil society and other non-
governmental organizations should be fully involved in
peacemaking efforts.

Who could forget the role that the civil society
movement - comprising, among others, trade unions,
women's movements and the Inter-Religious
Council - played in facilitating informal but crucial
contacts between the parties to the conflict in Sierra
Leone? While the Government had always maintained
an open-door policy as far as dialogue with the rebels
was concerned, those organizations were helpful in the
implementation of that policy.

The consequences of armed conflict do not
discriminate between Governments and civil society.
That is one reason why we share the view that
representatives of civil society should be given an
opportunity to participate, as observers, in peace talks.
We in Sierra Leone went beyond that. We made a
provision in the 1999 Lome Peace Agreement with the
rebels for the establishment of a Commission for the
Consolidation of Peace in which 40 per cent of the
seats were assigned to members of civil society. Three
representatives from civil society were also represented
in the Commission for the Management of Strategic
Resources to promote national reconstruction and
development.

The act of signing a peace agreement is not
enough. Disputes and conflicting views over the
interpretation and implementation of the provisions of
such an agreement could create obstacles in the process
of consolidating peace. It may be necessary, therefore,
as we found out in Sierra Leone, to create appropriate
non-governmental mechanisms for dealing with such
disputes. We made provisions in the Lome Peace
Agreement for a Council of Elders and Religious
Leaders to mediate in any conflicting differences of
interpretation of any article in the Agreement or its
protocols.

The peace-building process is not merely a
response and a reaction to the consequences of armed
conflict; it is also a proactive contribution to conflict
prevention. In building peace, we are also preventing
the recurrence of war. That is why the peace-building
process should be taken more seriously. It is a process
that demands collective effort on the part of the States
concerned and the international community as a whole.

As the Council itself has determined, most armed
conflicts in the world today - including those
described as internal conflicts or civil wars - have
repercussions on the maintenance of international
peace and security. It is therefore imperative that we
mobilize all resources and institutions, including those
of civil society, within and across States in the
concurrent processes of building peace and preventing
further conflict.

The role of civil society in the reintegration of
ex-combatants cannot be overemphasized, because
their reintegration involves, first and foremost, their
acceptance by members of their respective
communities. Sierra Leone is aware of the fact that, as
in other post-conflict situations, completing the
disarmament and demobilization of ex-combatants is a
prerequisite for peace-building. We are also aware of
the need to get rid of weapons that may have slipped
through the formal process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) - weapons
that could be used either to rekindle armed conflict or
as instruments of banditry or of some other social
menace. That is where community arms collection
programmes come in. The success of such activities at
the community level depends on the active
participation of civil society. The Sierra Leone police,
in collaboration with civil society, has successfully
conducted a community arms collection campaign
outside the official DDR programme.

It may be unnecessary to emphasize that civil
society is absolutely indispensable in the process of
creating a human rights-sensitive culture, especially
after a conflict characterized by human rights
violations. Citizen education is equally essential in
transforming a post-conflict society into a peaceful and
stable democracy where all citizens are aware of their
rights and responsibilities and where they stand up for
those rights.

While recognizing the role that civil society has
played and continues to play in building peace in
countries emerging from conflict, we must also
emphasize the need to ensure that civil society is
equipped to meet the challenges of peace-building. The
proliferation of armed conflicts, especially in Africa,
and the complexity of the problems created by those
conflicts - particularly in Africa's least developed
countries, such as Sierra Leone - require new
strategies for meeting those challenges. Among other
things, we need to strengthen or, where they do not
exist, create networks of civil society groups at the
national, regional and international levels. As The
Hague Agenda for Peace and Justice for the Twenty-
first Century pointed out, the effectiveness of civil
society is often hampered by a lack of coordination
between groups operating in similar fields.

My delegation believes that The Hague Appeal
for Peace, as it relates to the role of civil society in
peace-building, is still relevant. We would like to take
this opportunity to recall that Appeal: in order to
increase its effectiveness in this area, civil society
should create networks that promote the building of
coalitions and constituencies between civil society
organizations.

We believe that the Security Council, as part of
its responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, should reaffirm the need to create
and strengthen civil society networks. The Council
should promote and support initiatives already in place,
such as the Mano River Union Women's Peace
Network, organized by women's organizations in the
volatile region of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.

This meeting of the Council nearly coincided
with the launching of the report of the Secretary-
General's Panel of Eminent Persons on United Nations-
Civil Society Relations. The Council may wish to take
note of relevant recommendations of the Panel. We are
referring to those recommendations that could be
applied to the Council's relations with civil society -
relations that could enhance the work of the Council in
the area of post-conflict peace-building.

