Mr. Atieh (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): I would like,
at the outset, to express my pleasure to see you
assuming the presidency of this meeting of the Security
Council, because of the importance of the issue under
consideration today and its regional and international
implications. We would like to extend our thanks to
Mr. Guehenno for his comprehensive and detailed
briefing on the recent developments in Kosovo.

The review mechanism launched on 5 November
on the initiative of the Contact Group on Kosovo and
under the auspices of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri, is an effort that
deserves all our support and follow-up because it gives
a new momentum to the implementation of the
"standards before status" policy that was established by
the Security Council in its resolution 1244 (1999). That
initiative, as I mentioned earlier, requires international
support, which the Security Council expressed in the
Presidential Statement dated 12 December 2003
(S/PRST/2003/26). It also requires direct dialogue
between the parties concerned, particularly between
Pristina and Belgrade, because of the importance of
that dialogue in ensuring that the political process can
move forward towards an agreement on practical issues
of concern to the two parties.

We hope that, between the present time and the
middle of 2005, we can set a time for the overall
review of the progress made by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo, which will
assess developments in all areas, particularly with
regard to the eight standard benchmarks, so that the
Council can determine the final status of Kosovo in the
future.

We support the transfer of unentrusted
responsibilities outlined in chapter five of the
Constitutional Framework to the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo in a gradual
and organized manner, and in cooperation with the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government. We look
forward to establishing a harmonious, tolerant, multi-
ethnic society in Kosovo and we believe that that
requires consolidating the rule of law, improving the
security situation, promoting the rights of minorities
and returnees and supporting economic development,
in addition to combating organized crime and
prohibiting trafficking in weapons and narcotics. All of
that will help to create the appropriate climate to
encourage internally displaced persons and refugees to
return to their homes and contribute to the political and
economic reconstruction of Kosovo.

In conclusion, and since this is the last time my
delegation will participate in discussions on the issue
of Kosovo in the Security Council, I would like to
express the Syrian Arab Republic's appreciation for the
efforts made by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Kosovo and his staff in working
to bring stability and security to that region.

