Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
the Kuwaiti presidency of the Council for having
organized this meeting.

The most effective way of enabling the Council
to dutifully fulfil its responsibilities is indeed its
reform. That is why one of the five core subjects of
the intergovernmental negotiations is enhancing the
Council's working methods, within which accountability
is an essential concept. Accountability starts from
Articles 24 and 25 of the Charter of the United Nations,
according to which the Council - acting on behalf
of the Organization's entire membership and being
accountable to it - is obliged to act in accordance with
the Charter and according to which Member States
agreed to carry out its decisions. Nevertheless, in
practice, while Member States continue to fulfil their
respective commitments, the Council has regrettably
not acted in accordance with the Charter in many cases.

The living example is the Council's exploitation
by a certain State to impose sanctions against other
countries owing only to that State's animosity against
those countries. The Council's sanctions against Iran in
the past was a case in point. The most recent example
is the United States violation of resolution 2231
(2015), which was drafted by the United States itself,
adopted unanimously - including with the United
States' affirmative vote - and expressly recalled the
obligations of all Member States under Article 25 of
the Charter of the United Nations. The irony is that
the United States now brazenly threatens other States
to either violate that resolution or face punishment.
Unfortunately, such cases are increasing significantly
and becoming seriously alarming.

In such situations and without being in breach
of their Charter obligations, Member States have the
right to defy the Council's decisions simply because a
decision that is ultra vires does not command a duty
of compliance. Furthermore, according to a conditional
link between Articles 24 and 25 of the Charter, States
have no obligation to comply with a decision that is
not in conformity with the Charter. Even beyond that,
States have a duty to defy such ultra vires decisions
by the Council given that compliance with them would
lead to the violation of the rights of other countries,
which is prohibited under international law. States
therefore have both the legal and legitimate right and
duty to defy the Council's ultra vires decisions.

It was based precisely on that fact that we witnessed
past cases in which States made individual and collective
decisions to defy the Council's measures. Should the
Council continue to make decisions that are inconsistent
with the United Nations Charter and international law
in the future, States would again certainly exercise
their rights and carry out their duties to defy them.
Therefore, in order to prevent the further erosion of
the Council's credibility, which is already suffering
from a serious trust and confidence deficit, this body
should stop acting arbitrarily and inconsistently with
the Charter. That is imperative and urgent.

That, of course, cannot be done without ensuring
that the Council, as a body, and its members are
completely accountable vis-a-vis their actions and
missions. It means that, under any circumstances,
they have to act in full conformity with the Charter
and international law, avoiding making any ultra vires
decisions and refraining from the politicization of the
Council's activities. It also means that Council members
should take decisions based not on their own national
interests or that of the geopolitical or geographical
groups to which they belong but based on the common
interests of the entire United Nations membership.

In conclusion, due to the importance and urgency of
promoting the Council's accountability, I propose that
an open debate be convened specifically on that subject.

