Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this meeting and thank
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, for the valuable information she
has provided.

Peru condemns any use of chemical weapons. We
believe that such a practice constitutes, in and of itself,
a threat to international peace and security, a heinous
crime and a flagrant violation of the non-proliferation
regime and international humanitarian law. With that
in mind, we note with deep concern the recurrent
allegations regarding the use of chemical weapons in
Syria, and we are keeping a close eye on the results of
the investigations being carried out by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). We
believe it to be critical that such investigations be able
to identify the perpetrators of those serious crimes,
with a view to guaranteeing accountability and access
to justice, as well as the effectiveness of an international
rules-based order.

On that note, we wish to reaffirm our full confidence
in the professional work being carried out by the OPCW
in Syria and our recognition of the dedication of its
personnel in particularly difficult conditions. We note
some progress, such as the completion of the process
of destruction of the 27 chemical weapons-production
facilities recognized by the Syrian Government.

We regret, however, that those advances are
continually overshadowed by systematic errors and
omissions in Syria's declaration, five years after its
accession to the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction. We hope
that the documentation recently provided by the Syrian
Government, which is currently under evaluation by
the OPCW, will finally make it possible to clear up the
existing discrepancies.

In conclusion, we reaffirm that Peru will continue to
be guided by a comprehensive evaluation of the situation
and by our ongoing commitment to international law
and the protection of civilians on this matter.

