We are grateful to Mr. Frangois Lounceny Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for his detailed briefing. Russia has always supported the activity of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) as an important instrument of preventive diplomacy. We see that the good offices of the Special Representative are in demand in that subregion. It is clear that the challenges facing the Central African countries are complex. This year, the coronavirus pandemic was added to that list. It is important that timely measures be taken to contain the spread of infection. We are convinced that regional organizations have a key role to play in crisis prevention and conflict resolution. We welcome the success of the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) with regard to institutional reform, which will strengthen the capacity of the organization. We anticipate that UNOCA will continue to work closely with ECCAS. The Central African region is extremely important for combating the spread of terrorism throughout the continent. We are concerned that the destructive potential of Boko Haram has not diminished. Chad and Cameroon are suffering from terrorist attacks. We attach particular importance to regional efforts to develop coordinated approaches to deal with that threat. We believe that it is important to provide predictable financing for the activities of the Multinational Joint Task Force. For our part, we intend to continue to work in various formats to eliminate terrorism on the African continent. We are closely following developments in the Central African Republic. We support the efforts of President Touadera to stabilize the situation in the country. This is especially important in the context of the forthcoming elections. The 6 February 2019 Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic is working and provides the basis for a long-term settlement of the situation. Russia will continue to closely accompany the national reconciliation process by coordinating efforts with those seeking to normalize the situation. Other factors of instability in the region include piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. Unfortunately, the robbery of foreign maritime vessels continues, including the taking of hostages, including Russian citizens. Our country has considerable experience in international efforts to counter that threat, including within the framework of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. We hope that it will be useful in resolving similar problems in the Gulf of Guinea. We note the general decline in the activity of the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). We trust that the African Union's initiative for regional cooperation to dismantle the LRA will bear fruit. We are also following developments in Cameroon. The problem of the Anglophone provinces there has its roots in the colonial period. Unfortunately, this is not the first time we see decisions made previously in the interests of former colonial Powers affect the situation in today's independent States, which have to overcome such legacies. The solution to the compounded problems can therefore be found only at the negotiating table. All Cameroonian parties must show restraint and renounce all forms of violence. The holding of regional elections on 6 December was an important step in the implementation of the recommendations of the national dialogue. We hope that it will provide positive momentum for calming the situation. In conclusion, I reiterate that the challenges facing Central Africa are closely interlinked and the States of the region are interdependent. Unrest and instability in one country can undermine the security of its neighbours. It is therefore crucial to understand the situation and not to cross the line between prevention and interference in the internal affairs of States.
