Ms. Millar (Australia): Australia welcomes the
Security Council's continuing consideration of small
arms and light weapons and the Secretary-General's
useful and comprehensive report to the Council on
small arms. The Council's ongoing attention to small
arms issues, particularly in the regional context, will
serve to strengthen the international community's
resolve to work towards the prevention of the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. In that context,
we welcome and support the discussions by the
Security Council on the draft resolution on small arms
sponsored by Argentina.

All States Members of the United Nations have a
responsibility to address the small arms threat. Member
States should affirm and facilitate legitimate trade in
small arms and light weapons through national
implementation of effective transfer controls which
take into account relevant arms embargoes; the
prevention of destabilizing accumulations of small
arms and light weapons; the internal and regional
situation of the recipient State; and the risk of
diversion to unauthorized users, including terrorists
and other criminals.

Australia notes the particular need for effective
stockpile management, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, and security sector reform in post-
conflict and other developing countries. Australia
encourages international cooperation and assistance, in
particular at the bilateral and regional levels.

The success of the Australian-led Regional
Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI)
demonstrates how integrated efforts to improve
governance, including in the areas of justice and law
and order, can, in addition to efforts to reduce the
availability of small arms and light weapons, reduce
demand for weapons and facilitate sustainable
peacebuilding.

We are working with a number of Member States,
both in our region and more widely, on practically
focussed outcomes to prevent the destabilizing
accumulation of small arms and light weapons,
including in the areas of capacity-building and needs
assessment.

Australia welcomes the confirmation by the
Secretary-General in his report of the growing
participation of Member States in the Register of
Conventional Arms, including in relation to man-
portable air defence systems (MANPADS). Australia
remains concerned about the unauthorized possession
and use of MANPADS by non-State actors and the
dangers those weapons pose to civilian aviation.

Australia's international MANPADS initiative,
announced by the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Downer, in December 2005, is designed to build on
the Australian-sponsored resolutions at the last two
United Nations General Assembly sessions and to
encourage States - notably those in our own region,
the Asia-Pacific region - to introduce or strengthen
controls over the manufacture, storage and transfer of
MANPADS and related equipment, training and
technology. Australia urges all Member States to
implement the General Assembly resolutions, including
by enacting and improving legislation to ban the
transfer of MANPADS to non-State actors.

Australia welcomes the constructive discussions
held at the recent meeting of the preparatory committee
for the 2006 United Nations conference to review
progress made in the implementation of the small arms
and light weapons Programme of Action, and we look
forward to a successful review conference.
