Mr. Yamamoto: Afghanistan is experiencing a
politically dynamic period. Ten days ago, we witnessed
an extraordinary series of events in Afghanistan that
demonstrated both the possibilities for peace and the
enduring structural obstacles. On 7 June, President
Ghani declared a unilateral ceasefire for the period
12-19 June to commemorate the Bid festivities that
conclude the month of Ramadan. Two days later,
the Taliban announced its own unilateral ceasefire,
covering 15-17 June. During these overlapping three
days, both sides honoured their respective ceasefires
for the first time in the past 17 years of conflict. Many
Afghans reacted with jubilation. Local Government
authorities invited members of the Taliban to lay down
their arms and enter cities to visit their families; some
Afghan soldiers visited Taliban-controlled areas. Social
media was inundated with photos of Taliban fighters
embracing Afghan security forces.

President Ghani then proposed to extend the
ceasefire - a proposal endorsed by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
many members of the international community. The
Taliban, unfortunately, recommitted themselves to
battle. I regret deeply that the Taliban did not take up
the opportunity to cease fighting and reduce violence.
Their decision to fight will only increase the suffering
of civilians.

It is nonetheless worth taking stock of how much
has changed this year alone on the question of peace in
Afghanistan. The National Unity Government's offer
of peace talks without preconditions, made during the
Kabul Process conference on 28 February, created a
new reality. Even though the Taliban did not formally
respond to the offer, a number of other developments
reinforced it. First, we saw an unprecedented grass-
roots movement. Beginning in March, ordinary Afghan
people began setting up tents in around 20 of the 34
provinces, where they protested for peace. In early June,
a group of 2,000 religious scholars met in Kabul. They
pronounced suicide bombings to be against the teaching
of Islam and called for a ceasefire and for peace talks
to begin. At the beginning of Ramadan, one of the first
groups to set up a peace tent began a 500-kilometre
march from Helmand to Kabul, stopping along the way
to raise support for their call for a ceasefire and talks
and reaching Kabul last week. Their demand to end the
conflict is addressed to every party to the conflict. The
Afghan people's genuine demand for peace, coming
from the bottom of their hearts, must not be ignored.

We should ask ourselves two questions. What have
we learned from these events for peace and how do we
respond? What we have learned is that both the Afghan
Government and the Taliban have command and control
over their troops. Afghans, including Taliban fighters,
clearly want peace. It is also clear that President Ghani
is taking courageous steps to seek peace through talks.

How do we respond? In returning to the battlefield,
the Taliban insist that its goal is to end the presence
of foreign forces in Afghanistan. Therefore, it shuns
direct talks with the Afghan Government. However,
any future political settlement in Afghanistan must take
into account the concerns of all Afghans. The Afghans
must talk among themselves to end the conflict and to
decide on the future. That clearly requires the Taliban
to have direct talks with the Afghan Government.
We believe that the issue of international forces will
inevitably be taken up in the comprehensive context of
peace talks, which will determine the future political
order for all Afghans. I should like to note here that
regional efforts to counter terrorism have been receiving
more attention, with some important international
conferences organized by Tajikistan and the Office of
Counter-Terrorism.

Preparations are now under way in earnest for
parliamentary elections in October and presidential
elections planned for spring of next year. Since
mid-April, over 7 million people have registered to
vote. This is the first time since 2003 that Afghanistan
is conducting a complete registration of voters for both
parliamentary and presidential elections. The goal is a
single, national voter registry that can produce accurate
lists based on polling stations. When achieved, it is
expected to significantly reduce fraud.

The registration of over 7 million voters is a
positive achievement under difficult circumstances,
particularly insecurity. On closer scrutiny, however,
there remains cause for concern. First, in six provinces,
less than 35 per cent of the estimated eligible voters
were registered. Secondly, registration within provinces
is uneven, with certain areas being prevented from
registering for logistical or security reasons. Given
Afghanistan's multi-ethnic composition, the exclusion
of those communities could lead to the election results
being contested. Such disparities have also affected the
nomination of candidates.

This time, elections in Afghanistan are being
conducted as a fully Afghan-led and-owned process.
All Afghans share responsibility for transparent
and inclusive elections. The Independent Election
Commission has the primary responsibility. All
Commissioners must become fully aware of the
lofty responsibilities they shoulder for the future of
Afghanistan - to strengthen the foundation of the
democratic political process and to demonstrate that
Afghanistan is determined and ready to take on the
challenges to bring about an independent, sovereign
State that can stand on its own feet.

Political parties and political leaders need to be
fully aware that they also carry a large part of the
responsibility for credible elections. Rather than simply
criticizing the process, they must be actively engaged
to make elections truly Afghan-owned.

We welcome the commitment of civil society to
monitor voting, counting, tabulating, and transmission
of results at every polling station. The international
community must support their monitoring activities. The
United Nations has 23 international experts currently
working with the Independent Election Commission
and the Electoral Complaints Commission, as well as
their respective secretariats, and additional technical
advisers are being recruited. UNAMA will do all it
can alongside the international community to assist
Afghan efforts to bring about transparent, inclusive and
credible Afghan-owned elections.

The ministerial conference on Afghanistan in
Geneva, hosted by the United Nations and co-chaired
by the Government of Afghanistan, will be held on
28 November. The conference comes at the mid-point
of the transformation decade during which the country
transitions from dependence on the international
community to self-reliance. The conference will focus
on three areas. The first is the extent to which the country
is moving towards self-reliance and the effectiveness of
aid. The second area is the remaining challenges, for
example insecurity and job creation. Clearly, a safer
country where the private sector can grow faster is
key to creating employment. Finally, it will address
the link between short-term humanitarian action and
development cooperation. The link between peace
and security, humanitarian action and development is
a key theme for the United Nations, and the Geneva
ministerial conference offers an opportunity to focus
on that nexus.

In Geneva, we expect the Afghan side to report on
its achievements in the areas of development, poverty
reduction and reforms, and to outline concrete plans to
address remaining challenges. In response, I count on
Afghanistan's development partners to actively support
the people and institutions of Afghanistan as they
move the country forward. We are encouraged to see
that the Afghan Government is already looking beyond
the transformation decade, for example by working to
increase regional connectivity and trade. Much has
been achieved, but much remains to be done in the
domains of peace, security and development. Geneva
affords us all this year's best chance to set in stone the
road to a safer and better future.

Much of Afghanistan, in particular the north and
the west, have been struck by drought more severe
than anything experienced in almost a decade. Wheat
production in 2017 was reported to be 57 per cent below
the five-year average. The 2018 harvest is forecast to
be even lower. The humanitarian response plan has
been revised by the amount of $117 million up to the
still modest total of $547 million in order to enable the
United Nations to provide relief to affected populations
and to complement the work of the Government to
assist people in need.

While our attention has been focused on the larger
political processes, it is important that we not lose sight
of the critical issue of the protection of women's rights.
UNAMA recently issued a report on the use ofmediation
to resolve criminal cases of violence against women. I
was greatly disturbed by the findings. The report found
that a majority of those cases were resolved through
mediation instead of being tried in accordance with
criminal laws. In many cases, such traditional means of
resolution compounded the original violence. Women
were left to suffer. Women who have been subjected
to criminal violence must be able to assert their rights
according to the law.

The key political events of peace and the
elections are far from ensured. However, we are
seeing unprecedented opportunities to make progress
in seeking peace and in consolidating the political
foundation for the future. Afghanistan's evolving
development needs and the strategies to address them
are being re-evaluated as part of the preparations for the
Geneva conference. In other words, the coming months
will present critical opportunities for the international
community to seriously review and adjust the way in
which it supports and assists Afghanistan in its efforts
to bring about peace, democracy and self-reliance.

