The global pandemic has impacted the whole world profoundly and poses particular risks for fragile and conflict-affected countries. We are seeing hard-won peacebuilding and development gains jeopardized, economic challenges exacerbated and societal tensions increased. Responding to the health, economic and social ramifications of the pandemic is now a central challenge, not just for individual States, but for the multilateral system. The United Nations, international financial institutions, regional organizations, non-governmental organizations and Member States need to work together and ensure that a conflict prevention perspective is incorporated into all responses to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Australia supports the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and continues to provide long-term core funding to the United Nations peacebuilding agencies. We welcome the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) and commend the important contribution of United Nations peace operations and country teams to local and national COVID-19 efforts around the world. In this crisis, we must continue to recognize the importance of social cohesion, resilience and inclusive approaches. We commend the United Nations peacebuilding agencies for consistently promoting gendered and youth perspectives, as well as the long-term peacebuilding efforts of the United Nations in the Pacific, particularly in Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands. We urge the United Nations and Member States to intensify efforts to support the meaningful inclusion of women and youth as agents of change in shaping our global pandemic response. This is essential given the evidence that the negative impacts of COVID-19 are disproportionately affecting already vulnerable groups in society, including women and youth. We must not let the pandemic or our responses to it undermine gender equality, development, peacebuilding or human rights gains. We must use its disruption and urgency as an opportunity to build back better, including through taking forward United Nations reforms. This debate is particularly timely in the context of the peacebuilding architecture review. We welcome the Secretary-General's report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2020/773), which highlights good progress in a number of areas, particularly in relation to the resident coordinators' offices, which have a critical role in managing the COVID-19 response of the United Nations. We urge all stakeholders to continue to drive the implementation of the sustaining peace agenda. That work is vital, not only to combating the pandemic, but to creating resilience for other global challenges to come.
