Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General Khiari and Agnes Marcaillou,
Director of the United Nations Mine Action Service
(UNMAS).

The Syrian process has dragged on for many years.
The humanitarian dimension is interlinked with the
quest for a political settlement and the exigencies of
counter-terrorism, so a holistic approach is necessary.
Resolving the Syrian issue through the political track
is the most effective means of easing the humanitarian
situation in the country, and rooting out terrorist forces is
a precondition for restoring peace and bringing order to
the lives of the Syrian people. Turkey recently mounted
a unilateral military operation that exacerbated the
complexity and fragility of the situation in north-east
Syria, leading to greater challenges in the fight against
terrorism and worsening the country's humanitarian
situation, all of which could negatively impact the
reaching ofa political settlement.

Going forward, I wish to propose the following.

First, there is a need to resolve the issue by political
and diplomatic means, so that peace and stability can
soon prevail throughout the entire territory of Syria.
China has consistently been against the use of force in
international relations. Any effort by any country to
address its concerns must be in line with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the basic norms governing international relations.

It is imperative to respect in good faith Syria's
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity and to consider seriously and take on board
the views and positions of the Syrian Government. On
22 October, the Russian Federation and Turkey signed
a memorandum of understanding on the issue of north-
east Syria, which we hope will help facilitate a negotiated
solution through dialogue between the parties.

There is no viable alternative to a political
solution to bring Syria out of the crisis. The Syrian
Constitutional Committee will hold its first meeting
in Geneva towards the end of October. We hope that it
will get off to a good start and produce positive results.
China supports the United Nations and in particular
Special Envoy Pedersen in continuing with their good
offices, upholding the principle that this be a Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned process and implementing resolution
2254 (2015) to help bring about a political solution that
addresses the concerns of all parties.

Secondly, there is a need to ramp up humanitarian
assistance to the entire Syrian territory, lift the
economic sanctions imposed on the country and
facilitate the return of refugees and displaced persons.
The underfunding of the humanitarian response plan
for Syria is worrying. The economic sanctions have
led to a deterioration in the Syrian people's living
conditions. The presence of numerous Syrian refugees
places economic and social pressures on neighbouring
countries and constitutes a destabilizing factor for
the region.

As a consequence of the military operation that
began on 9 October, close to 180,000 people have
been displaced in the north-east. The international
community should provide United Nations and other
relevant agencies with sufficient resources so that they
can provide humanitarian supplies for people in need
throughout Syria, including food, drinking water and
medical services for those in the north-east.

The parties concerned should help to improve
Syria's economics situation and facilitate the safe and
voluntary return of Syrian refugees. China commends
UNMAS for working actively and conducting risk-
education and awareness-raising programmes recently
through bilateral channels. China provided Syria with
100 buses and assisted in the repairing of two schools.
We will continue to do everything we can to help.

Thirdly, it is necessary to consolidate the gains
made in the fight against terrorism and to continue to
combat terrorism by applying uniform standards in
accordance with the relevant Council resolutions and
international law. Counter-terrorism is pivotal to peace
and security for Syria, the Middle East and the world
as a whole. All parties must attach the importance to
this matter. It is necessary to refrain from taking any
action that jeopardizes the gains of counter-terrorism,
to address jointly the risk of spillover or relocation
of terrorists, to remain vigilant, guard against an
opportunistic resurgence of Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant forces, and effectively manage the
resettlement of foreign terrorists fighters and their
families. The Secretariat should keep a close watch on
developments on the counter-terrorism front and the
relocation of terrorists, report to the Council on same
in a timely manner and study in earnest the issue of
bringing terrorists to justice.

Terrorist forces remain entrenched in most parts
of Idlib, and the international community should be
committed to the quest for a holistic solution to the
counter-terrorism process and humanitarian issues
in Idlib.

