Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate.

Instability and prolonged conflicts in the Middle
East and North Africa continue to cause a high number
of causalities and material costs. The international
community must work harder in concert to tackle this
issue. In our view, a political solution through diplomacy
is the only way to resolve the conflicts. We firmly
believe lasting peace can be achieved only through a
peaceful process. We must therefore create the space
and opportunity for an inclusive political dialogue and
reconciliation to take place. It is important that such
inclusive political and reconciliation process has no
pre-set or preconceived outcomes.
For our part, Indonesia remains committed to
supporting the peaceful resolution of conflict in
the Middle East and North Africa, while respecting
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of all States. A myriad of issues have
arisen as a result of continued conflicts in the Middle
East and North Africa. Issues such as the influx of
irregular migrants, the rise of the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria (ISIS) and the emergence of foreign terrorist
fighters are proof of how this situation can significantly
impact other regions and threaten international peace
and security.

Indonesia believes that the key to addressing the
rise of ISIS and the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters is by addressing the root causes. That is why
the launching of an all-inclusive political process is
imperative. We also need a comprehensive approach.
While recognizing the role of the hard-power approach,
Indonesia believes that the soft-power approach is
important for preventive measures in countering
terrorism. Indonesia believes in the importance of
multi-stakeholder engagement in efforts to counter
the terrorist ideology. The role of women - I
emphasize - should be empowered, for they are a key
pillar in providing children with guidance, values,
tolerance and education. The role of moderates and civil
society should also be promoted to provide counter-
narratives to terrorist propaganda.

For its part, Indonesia is committed to addressing
the cycle of radicalization. We have, among other
things, done this through interfaith dialogue and by
ensuring the teaching of Islam in the education system
while stressing that its teachings bring about blessings
and prosperity.

In response to the emergence of ISIS and foreign
terrorist fighters, we must also strengthen international
cooperation, in particular on intelligence, as well
as among the relevant law enforcement agencies and
legal instruments. We must also bolster the exchange
of information and experience on legislation on foreign
terrorist fighters, enhance the promotion of tolerance
and moderation and improve border security.

At the international level, the role of the United
Nations should be strengthened, including by enhancing
coordination among the various United Nations bodies
related to counter-terrorism, as well as synergizing
with counter-terrorism initiatives other than in the
United Nations framework.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity to
ask the Security Council to devote more political energy,
vigour and time to resolving conflicts peacefully and to
counter terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, in
line with the mandate and responsibilities enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations.

