Mr. Kolby (Norway): Many of today's wars are
internal, protracted, fought in developing countries
along ethnic, linguistic or religious divides, fuelled by
illicit economic activity and fought with small arms
and light weapons, and they involve a high proportion
of non-State actors. That combination of factors has
exposed children to an unfortunately high risk of death,
injury and suffering.

The important challenge of protecting civilians,
not least children, in armed conflict must take its
rightful place as an integral part of all relevant matters
dealt with by the Security Council. The reports and
recommendations of the Secretary-General and of his
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict are highly relevant and should be given full
consideration.

The draft resolution before us imposes a number
of requirements on Member States, the United Nations
system, financial institutions, regional organizations
and, not least, the parties to armed conflict. That will
raise expectations. We must now live up to them. To
that end, improved cooperation among the whole range
of intergovernmental, regional and non-governmental
organizations is needed. My delegation is particularly
pleased by the fact that, as a means to bridge the gap
between short-term and long-term measures, the draft
resolution makes direct reference to the international
financial and development institutions and their
responsibilities in this regard.

It is encouraging that mandates of some
peacekeeping operations now include specific
provisions for the protection of war-affected children.
We also welcome the fact that child protection officers
are included in the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone and in the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Because we
all know that children are affected by armed conflict
wherever it occurs, the most appropriate approach for
the future will therefore be to include child protection
staff in United Nations peacekeeping operations more
as a rule than as an exception.

Small arms, including anti-personnel mines, play
a central role in internal conflicts and destroy the lives
of millions of people. Commitments made during the
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects must be
followed up. In order to protect the lives of innocent
civilians, including children, we must continue our
efforts to establish more efficient control mechanisms
that will change today's easy access to those weapons.

War affects boys and girls differently. Girls are
often more exposed to rape and other forms of gender-
based violence. In wartime, increased numbers of
women and girls are forced into prostitution by
exploitation, poverty and hunger. Boys are exploited in
other ways, most commonly as child soldiers. All these
young people run a high risk of contracting HIV/AIDS,
a disease that spreads even more rapidly in connection
with conflicts and displacement.

Displacement also poses other extreme risks for
children. Displaced children have lost the security of
their communities and in many cases their families, and
are often regarded with resentment and suspicion when
they arrive in new communities. Because many of them
have experienced traumatizing violations of human
rights and humanitarian law, they may be in need of
special protection in the country where they seek
refuge. We support and encourage United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations in their
work to reunite children with their families.

Those responsible for exploiting children during
conflict should not enjoy impunity or be considered
under amnesty provisions. With the coming into force
of the International Criminal Court, the international
community will have a good basis for enhancing
accountability for crimes against humanity, including
the conscription and enlisting of children under the age
of 15 years into the armed forces and the use of
children in hostilities. We urge those States which have
not done so to consider ratifying the Rome Statute of
the Court at the earliest possible date. We also urge
States to provide financial support for the
establishment of the Special Court for Sierra Leone.

The peace-building process hinges on civil
society. Civil society's engagement is crucial for
strengthening local healing processes and for
preventing future violence. We must support the often
imaginative endeavours of civil players to rehabilitate
and reintegrate war-torn societies. In order to heal the
wounds and truly integrate children back into their
communities, peace and reconciliation processes must,
to the extent possible, also include children.

Finally, my delegation finds that the draft
resolution before us has taken an imaginative step by
requesting the Secretary-General to attach a list of the
names of those parties to armed conflict that recruit or
use children in violation of relevant international
obligations in situations that are of concern to the
Council's agenda. That will hopefully increase
accountability and provide more accurate information.

By adopting the draft resolution, the Council
would reaffirm its commitment to keeping the question
of children in armed conflict high on its agenda. We
have the normative framework in place. Our challenge
now is to find ways to apply it and to ensure that it is
respected. My delegation totally agrees with the
Secretary-General that it is now time to initiate an "era
of application" (S/2001/852, para. 5).

