Mr. Sc'epanovic' (Montenegro): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your presidency of
the Council this month and on organizing this important
open debate.

In addressing the topic of today's meeting, I would
like to begin on a more general note with a point that I
believe can never be emphasized enough. In discharging
its important duty to maintain international peace and
security, the Security Council might consider making
better use of the options at its disposal in order to
prevent conflicts from emerging. Making progress in
shifting from a culture of reaction to one of prevention
continues to be essential. Potential crises should be
addressed before they fully break out, and proactive
steps should be taken promptly in order to mitigate any
escalation of violence. Once a crisis unfolds, measures
based on Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations should be given priority.

In that context, let me single out mediation because
it represents such a cost-effective tool for the prevention
and peaceful resolution of conflict. But it has largely
been underutilized. As a sign of my country's firm
dedication to advancing the cause of mediation,
particularly in the historically very turbulent and
conflict-prone of the Mediterranean, which largely
covers the area that is the subject of our discussion
today, Montenegro plans to host the next annual seminar
in 2016 within the framework of the initiative on the
promotion of mediation in the Mediterranean. I remain
convinced that the best and only truly sustainable way
to resolve differences and rectify tensions and conflict
situations is through peaceful means, in the spirit of
dialogue, and by committing to diplomatic and political
efforts and tools.

Any political solution has be accompanied by a
sufficient humanitarian response in order to alleviate
large-scale suffering and the consequences of serious
human rights violations for the affected populations.
The absence of those critical elements in the wake of
continuing violence has a devastating toll not only
on civilians, but on the international community in
general, to which the Syrian and current refugee crises
attest.

An environment of unabated conflict with total
impunity, such as that in Syria, has an additional,
significantly negative aspect. It provides fertile
ground for the expansion of terrorism. Therefore, the
international community should recognize its vested
interest in rallying around and fostering decisive action
with a view to bringing an end to the long-standing
crisis - sooner rather than later - because the cost of
inaction is enormous. The Syrian crisis is also a reason
why Montenegro believes that cases of mass atrocities
ought to be tackled with greater decisiveness by the
Security Council.

When one speaks of long-standing crises, the first
to come to mind is the Israeli-Palestinian situation.
The persistent stalemate and status quo do not favour
anyone. With the ongoing crisis in Syria and Iraq and
the emergency created by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIS), the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
has fallen by the wayside, and this has to change. Key
international actors, especially the Quartet, should play
a reinvigorated role and bring the sides back to the
negotiation table. The parameters of a comprehensive
peace package based on a two-State solution are
already in place. All stakeholders have to recognize the
potential ofa final status agreement, as it can go a long
way towards building trust and easing tensions between
Arabs and Israel, as well as reducing radicalization in
the region. The situation in the many fragile countries
throughout the Middle East and North Africa - as if it
were not already complex enough - has been further
complicated by the presence and spread of terrorists,
mainly ISIL, which now makes it necessary to seek
parallel, political and counter-terrorism solutions.

In Libya and Yemen, achieving stability and
countering the terrorist threat requires the creation
of inclusive reconciliation in Government, as well as
consolidating and strengthening the security sector
with international support. For countries emerging from
conflict, where peace is fragile, institution-building
and institutional reform are crucial. Although creating
national bodies that promote human rights and the rule
of law and socioeconomic development is a long-term
project, it is a prerequisite for sustaining peace. Those
countries require targeted and effective international
assistance under the auspices of the United Nations so
that they will be in a position to protect their people and
deliver basic services.

We now find ourselves in desperate need to
take joint, comprehensive action against the very
sophisticated threats of ISIL, which is challenging the
wider landscape and endangering the very existence of
certain States. In dealing with ISIL and international
terrorism, it is vital to counter incitement to terrorism
and stop the spread of extremist ideology. One
recommendation in that regard is for religious leaders
to play a more prominent and vocal role in denouncing
the goals that terrorists are aggressively pursuing by
abusing the values of Islam. It is worth recalling that,
in relation to the fight against terrorism, the same can
be said for the migrant crisis, which requires a broad
approach that goes to the root-causes of the problem,
rather than addressing the symptoms.

The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters poses
another challenge that requires a resolute response. My
country has made legislative changes and stands ready
to further cooperate with a view to make its contribution
to the full implementation of resolution 2178 (2014).

In closing, I would like to welcome the signing
of the agreement on the Iranian nuclear programme,
which is an important step towards enhancing regional
and global peace and security. We express our hope that
the conference on establishing a Middle East zone free
of weapons of mass destruction will take place soon, as
it also has the potential to contribute significantly to the
renewal of trust and the lasting stability of the region.

