Mr. Ruzicka (Slovakia): Slovakia would first like
to align itself with the statement delivered earlier by the
observer of the European Union.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2015/684) and to welcome
Special Representative Haysom and thank him for his
briefing. Also, we carefully listened to the remarks of
Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime at Vienna. I would
also like to take this opportunity to thank Ambassador
Tanin for his statement and, personally, for his excellent
work and friendship during his tenure in New York.

A year ago in this very Chamber, I began my
statement (see S/PV.7267) by calling upon the Afghan
leaders to uphold their declared commitments, form
a Government of national unity and take steps to
stabilize the country. Today, I praise the National Unity
Government and the leadership of Afghan politicians
who have been able to work together in a constructive
manner in their efforts to address the increasing
political, economic and security challenges. The
inspirational role of leaders in Kabul is irreplaceable
and closely followed by the Afghan people. Only when
the elite set an example can we expect the same attitude
at other levels of the decision-making process. In that
regard, I would like to express my appreciation for
the four initiatives of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to promote an
inclusive Afghan-owned and -led dialogue in a number
of provinces.

Also a year ago in the Chamber, many speakers
included electoral issues among the mentioned
challenges I just mentioned. Today, I commend the
commencement of work by the Special Electoral
Reform Commission, which is a sign that the National
Unity Government is stepping forward to meet the
agreed goals. We took note with admiration of the
broad consultation process of the Commission, both in
the capital and in the provinces, whereby it met with
political, religious, civic and international leaders.

And also a year ago, I applauded the bravery of
the Afghan people, who had gone to the polls to vote
in April and June 2014. Today, we should make every
effort to ensure that the elections scheduled for 2016 for
the lower house of Parliament and for district councils
take place. But for that to happen we need an improved
security environment.

While Afghanistan's transition is on a good
and promising path, security challenges continue
to seriously threaten the transformation process.
Despite the considerable progress made in ensuring
security in the country, Government forces still face
attacks by non-State armed actors. We are particularly
deeply concerned by reports on the presence of groups
associated with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
in the eastern part of the country, as well as by the
activities of scattered formations of foreign fighters.
Both make the position of Government forces more
complicated in addressing local incidents.

In terms of Afghan security, Slovakia continues
to assist the country through the Resolute Support
non-combat training mission. Its role in Afghanistan
is vital, as it provides further training, advice and
assistance for the Afghan security forces and institutions.
In January, Slovakia commenced its three-year plan to
financially contribute to sustaining the Afghan forces
with $1.5 million. We will also provide further official
development assistance.

Slovakia welcomes the initiative of President Ghani
to unveil Afghanistan's new national drug action plan.
We are awaiting the details of the plan as to how the
international community may participate in addressing
this acute problem.

The leaders of Afghanistan have shown their
commitment to shaping a democratic and peaceful
future for their country. The international community
must not abandon them in these crucial years when
terrorism is on the rise globally and when the wider
region of Central Asia is dangerously threatened.

