Mr. Benitez Saenz (Uruguay) (interpretation from Spanish): The item before the Security Council today is of
the greatest importance. Anti-personnel mines are a weapon
of destruction widely used throughout the world; they are
particularly bad because they are indiscriminate and because
they continue over time to sow death and destruction even
after the end of the conflict that caused them to be laid.

The figures collected by international agencies are
terrifying: more than 10 million mines in Afghanistan;
nearly 15 million in Angola; between 8 million and 10
million in Cambodia; millions in the former Yugoslavia,
Chad, El Salvador, Georgia, Guatemala, Mozambique,
Rwanda and Somalia. The list goes on to include 65
countries in which mines have been laid.

The international community has made considerable
efforts in the area of demining, but regrettably the results
are outweighed by the efforts of those who lay more mines
every year. It is important to underscore this disparity and
to remember the words of the Permanent Representative
of the United States, Ambassador Madeleine Albright,
who has called anti-personnel mines a slow-motion
weapon whose harmful effects continue for many years
after the cessation of the conflict, with human destruction
that does not respect age, age, creed or political
affiliation.
In the framework of its peace-keeping operations,
the United Nations has carried out an extensive
programme of assistance to affected Governments
covering not only demining tasks but also the training of
local personnel and helping civilian populations to
identify the presence of mines, the dissemination of
information on the dangers of mines, and activities
intended to abate the effects of mines, especially through
medical treatment and rehabilitation.

Here the participation of Member States is vital. As
a contributor of troops to peace-keeping operations,
Uruguay is sharing in the endeavours of the United
Nations, with special emphasis on the two aspects of
providing safety and security for troops in the field, and
supporting the implementation of large-scale demining
programmes in the context of a complex mandate.

Specifically, the participation of Uruguayan
contingents in the operations in Cambodia, Mozambique
and Angola is a clear example of our cooperation in this
area. In the particular case of Angola, the activities of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM)
have yielded concrete results: nearly 6,000 kilometres of
roads have been opened, certified or demined by United
Nations troops.

Uruguay has participated in the establishment and
functioning of the Central Mine Action Office and the
Mine Clearance Training School. Recently, a Uruguayan
teacher at the School, Captain Fernando Poladura, was
gravely wounded in the course of his duties. To date,
there have been three Uruguayan casualties in mine-
explosion accidents.

Uruguay was among the sponsors of General
Assembly resolutions 50/70 and 50/82, on the suspension
of the export of anti-personnel lane-mines and on
assistance in mine clearing respectively. Here too we
acknowledge the efforts to achieve consensus proposals.

My country has repeatedly spoken out against the
traffic, stockpiling, export and manufacture of these
weapons. That is why we were particularly interested in

 

ideas that have been put forward by a number of
delegations, which made it possible to hold today's debate.

I highlight the German seven-point proposal for the
elimination of the use of anti-personnel mines and the
proposal on the immediate world-wide entry into force of
the revised Protocol on land-mines adopted at Vienna in
May this year. We hail measures leading to unilateral
indefinite moratoriums on the export of anti-personnel
mines of all kinds.

There is no doubt that Germany's concern that the
Security Council should propose that demining be included
in the mandates of United Nations peace-keeping operations
is an excellent initiative.

