Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, you were right to choose the present
format for this meeting on the special report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) (S/2003/243) as the
situation in Timor-Leste is cause for concern, as
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno has just said - and I thank
him for introducing the report. It is quite natural for the
Council to meet to discuss the proposals put forward by
the Secretariat in the special report.

I would like to welcome the presence of J ose Luis
Guterres, Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste. I
would also like to inform the Council that on 20
January, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bulgaria,
Solomon Passy, and Ambassador Guterres signed an
act establishing diplomatic relations between Bulgaria
and Timor-Leste.

I would also like to express my country's
condolences to the Government of the Republic of
Korea on the loss of five of their soldiers who took part
in UNMISET.

As Jean-Marie Guehenno said just now, until now
we were used to speaking of Timor-Leste in an
optimistic tone. Unfortunately, events in recent months
with respect to the security situation in that young

country no longer encourage such optimism. We
believe that the Security Council must take note of the
worsening security situation and act cautiously.

Previous speakers mentioned the incidents in Dili
on 4 December 2002 and those in the region of the city
of Atsabe on 4 January, as well as the incidents in the
region of Bobonaro, which had several victims. Those
incidents jeopardize the efforts of UNMISET and the
forces of order of Timor-Leste, which seek to
normalize the situation in the country. It is important
that those incidents be investigated and that their
perpetrators be brought before the courts. Appropriate
measures must be taken with respect to threats from
former militia personnel and armed groups in remote
areas, as well as to fight crime.

UNMISET is an invaluable instrument in
normalizing the situation in Timor-Leste. We take this
opportunity to thank the men and women of UNMISET
for their excellent work.
The special report of the Secretary-General
envisages modifying the strategy of UNMISET in the
light of the events of recent months. It seems to us that
the report's conclusions are logical, and we support
them.

At the bilateral level, my country is attempting to
contribute to the normalization of the situation in
Timor-Leste, a young country of which the United
Nations is rightly proud. We are trying to develop
assistance programmes for weapons, which the nascent
armed forces and police urgently need.

The donor community must continue its
engagement on Timor-Leste. Any withdrawal by
donors would have a terrible effect on the stability that
has been achieved at the cost of significant efforts by
the international community.

