Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I congratulate you, Madam, and
your entire team on the outstanding manner in which
you are leading the Security Council this month.

I wish to welcome Secretary-General Antenio
Guterres and inform him that we are impressed by
his leadership, his skills and his desire to ensure that
2017 is a year of peace in the United Nations. When
Mr. Guterres assumed his post, President Evo Morales
Ayma sent him a message in which he told him that
"I share your concerns and commit myselfto helping
you in all your tasks aimed at building a peaceful
world as the highest priority so that the current and
future generations can enjoy a life free of conflict,
war and intolerable unilateral interventions that
only cause destruction and irreparable damage and
claim innumerable victims, refugees and migrants".

Bolivia participates in today's debate as a
plurinational State and country of Latin America and
the Caribbean - a region in the process of resolving its
last remaining armed conflict and which has declared
itself free of nuclear weapons - and as a member of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Group of
77. It participates as a country that has constitutionally
declared itself a pacifist State that promotes the culture
of peace and the right to peace, and that rejects all
wars of aggression and as a territory with no foreign
military bases.

There is a common understanding that the United
Nations system should focus on the need to prioritize
prevention and mediation in order to break the vicious
circle of conflict. The report of the High-Level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446)
highlighted the primacy of policy and stated that lasting
peace was possible with political solutions and not with
military or technical engagement alone. We affirm
the need to effectively and efficiently consolidate the
Peacebuilding Commission, which takes full advantage
of the benefits of its diverse membership. We also
acknowledge the work done by the Commission since
it began its activities in various countries on its agenda.
We commend the swift progress of the Commission, in
particular, in building on the principle of the national
ownership of processes, the need for capacity-building
and the recognition and indication of the importance of
economic recovery and the development component in
the process of building peace.

Dynamic partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations must be established and
strengthened. In addition, regional efforts should
receive the necessary attention and support. We stress
the need to have integrated, coherent peacebuilding
strategies and programmes that are in line with the
strategies and programmes of host countries in order to
ensure national ownership. We are concerned about the
fragmentation among the various intergovernmental
organizations in the area of peace and security. Each
of them is a piece of the peacebuilding puzzle and such
fragmentation has been a significant hindrance to peace
operations on the ground where peacebuilding occurs.
We agree with the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy that efforts should continue in
order to strengthen and take full advantage of the
capacity of the United Nations in areas such as conflict
prevention, negotiation, mediation, reconciliation,
judicial settlement and, of course, the jurisdiction of
the International Criminal Court, inter alia, the rule of
law and peacekeeping and peacebuilding to assist with
effective conflict prevention and peaceable resolution
of protracted conflicts. In addition, the strengthening
of cooperation and coordination links among United
Nations organs, as well as the balance that should be
maintained among them, are essential.

The Security Council should not encroach upon the
domain or usurp the functions of the General Assembly,
the Human Rights Council or the Economic and Social
Council. At times, the Security Council suffers from
bipolar disorder. The Margarita Declaration of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries states that the
Security Council has been too hasty in threatening
or authorizing the use of force in some cases and has
remained silent and inactive in others. We must reiterate
and stress that the work of the Security Council should
be carried out with commitment and respect for the
sovereignty, independence, unity, territorial integrity,
non-interference in countries' internal affairs and
equality of all States.

My remarks refer to the architecture of our
Organization and the Council's work. Nonetheless,
we would be dishonest if we did not acknowledge
that the United Nations architecture depends on other
structures that have a direct link to and have caused
such conflicts. It is our duty to change those structures.
Let me share a brief story written by Eduardo Galeano,
a Latin American born in Uruguay. He wrote:

"Pastor Miguel Brun told me that some years
ago he was with Indians from the Paraguayan
Chaco. He was part of an evangelizing mission. The
missionaries visited a cacique who was renowned
for being very wise. The cacique, who was rotund
and reserved, listened intently to the religious
propaganda that was read to him in the language
of the Indians. When the reading was finished, the
missionaries waited. The cacique took his time.
He said, 'It scratches. It scratches a lot and very
well'. Then he said, 'but it scratches where it does
not itch.'"

The conflict prevention, mediation, reconciliation
or judicial settlement efforts that we make at the highest
level will not be sufficient if we do not address the
structural and root causes of the conflicts or, scratch
where it itches. We are living in a very interesting
era of transformation, with certainties, such as the
leadership of our Secretary-General and uncertainties.
What will be under threat in the coming months and
years? Multilateralism, a system of checks and balances
that allows problems to be resolved peaceably, is under
threat. We must acknowledge that we living in an era of
change that will have a direct impact, not only on the
relevance of our Organization or on multilateralism as
such, but also on global conflict.

Let me read a quote from a recent analysis given
by the Vice-President of my country, Alvaro Garcia
Linera, on the world in which we live today. He said:

"In today's world, neoliberal globalization
is the ultimate goal - a political, ideological
objective capable of channelling collective hope for
a common future that would meet all of the possible
expectations of well-being. However, that goal has
been shattered into a thousand pieces. Now, there is
nothing that exists to replace it that can articulate
such expectations. There is now a fearful focus on
our own borders and a return of a type of political
tribalism fuelled by xenophobic rage in a world that
now belongs to no one; a return to protectionist
States and, if possible, States surrounded by
walls, along with a global malaise that will result
in the destruction of working- and middle-class
economies caused by the global free market".

Against that backdrop, what are the structural
threats to maintaining international peace and security?
The first threat is interventionism. We wonder whether
or not we would be witnessing the grave situation in
the Middle East and North Africa if it had not been for
interventionism - the unilateral policy that violates
United Nations principles governing regime change?
Would we be seeing today's conflicts had it not been
for neocolonialism and the back-door policies of areas

of influence and related to the way in which the world
was divided? Perhaps the fact that one State, the United
States of America, has declared itself exceptional and
indispensable is not a threat to international peace
and security. And what about other States? Are we
not indispensable too? The vision of a First World and
a Third World is a fallacy. There is only one world
and the threat of climate change is a genuine one,
which means that we have common but differentiated
responsibilities. The fight against climate change is the
same fight for the rights of Mother Earth.
Without a doubt, inequality is another major threat
to international peace and security. A recent Oxfam
report states that nearly 50 per cent of global wealth
is concentrated in l per cent of the population. That
is a threat to international peace and security. But
not just that: the ownership of wealth is in the hands
of transnational corporations, and unfortunately the
United Nations has failed to internationally regulate the
influence of transnationals.

Also, in order to understand the threats of conflict
to peace and international security, we have to ask
ourselves who owns the natural resources, as the
Secretary-General has said. Is not the dispute over who
owns natural resources that is the real cause of many
conflicts? And who holds the reins of the financial
system? How many domestic or international conflicts
have been caused by the current architecture of the
financial system? What is the relation of the external
debt and conflict in the countries of the South? Is it
not true that the military strength concentrated in just a
few Powers - with their outrageous military spending
and their nuclear weapons, which are one of the greatest
dangers to the survival of the planet i is a threat to
international peace and security? Is it not also a threat
to international security that technology, knowledge
and science are in the hands ofjust a few?

The United Nations, as we all know, is not a club
in which to have a good time. It is the most important
and indispensable forum for solving those problems.
The best way to keep our Organization relevant is to
transform it, to revolutionize it.

Allow me to conclude my statement by reiterating
that we, the peoples of the United Nations, are here,
as our Charter states, to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war that has brought untold sorrow
to humankind.

