Mr. Motoc (Romania): I would like to join
previous speakers in thanking Ambassador Denisov for
his comprehensive presentation on the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the
challenges ahead. I take this opportunity to extend to
him our appreciation for the impressive leadership he
is displaying at the helm of the CTC.

As Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union, I shall
confine myself to only few brief comments of a
complementary nature.

For several years now, terrorism has topped the
agenda of the Security Council. The very first speech I
delivered before the Council last year, on 12 January,
was terrorism-related. Furthermore, the starting point
of Romania's contribution within the Council to
fostering successive initiatives in the field of
combating terrorism was its active involvement in the
intricate process of negotiating resolution 1526 (2004),
which was unanimously adopted on 30 January 2004.

It is therefore no coincidence, I believe, that
United Nations Members are once again called, at the
beginning of this new year, to learn about the activities
of one of the most dynamic subsidiary bodies of the
Council and to express their views on this topic.

Countering the ominous scourge of global
terrorism requires continuous review and
reinforcement of the mechanisms at the disposal of the
United Nations, as well as the consolidation of the
institutional dimension of the efforts undertaken in that
field at the United Nations level.

Visits by the CTC to selected Member States,
with their consent, is one of the most recent
instruments with which the Committee has been
provided in its endeavours to enhance dialogue with
the relevant authorities of the respective countries. It is
our belief that such visits will contribute significantly
to strengthening the monitoring of the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) while also giving important
indications of States' needs for technical assistance.

Nevertheless, close coordination and cooperation
are required between the CTC and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban in preparing such
visits in order to avoid any possible overlap. Joint
visits by the two Committees could be envisaged to
achieve that goal. Since the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) has become fully
operational, the participation of its representatives in
such joint visits might also be contemplated.

The significant number of States that are late in
submitting their national reports to the CTC remains of
particular concern. Non-reporting, regardless of
motivation - lack of willingness or lack of capacity
on the part of the States concerned - is a highly
worrisome situation that must be addressed on a
priority basis. Further measures should be therefore
sought to boost the level of reporting by States
Members of the United Nations.

In carrying forward its leading role in the global
fight against terrorism, the Security Council benefits
from the work of three energetic subsidiary bodies,
namely the CTC, the 1267 Committee and, lately, the
1540 Committee. The mandates and activities of those
Committees are closely interlinked, as terrorist acts and
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction are
two faces of the same coin. Cooperation among their
Chairmen, as well as among their experts, is therefore
essential to ensuring a coherent approach on the part of
the Council in combating terrorism. The informal
tripartite consultations mechanism which has already
been established should be further consolidated and
given new dimensions. The regular exchange of
information as well as collaboration in analysing and
responding to reports submitted by Member States
could bring added value to such efforts.

Such interactions will not be complete if they do
not encompass the undertakings expected from the
working group established under resolution
1566 (2004). I take this opportunity to welcome
Ambassador Baja of the Philippines to the
chairmanship of that working group and to assure him
of our full cooperation, as expressed in the context of
the explanations of vote made after the voting on
resolution 1566 (2004) by most of the members of the
Council. We trust that, under the able leadership of the
Permanent Representative of the Philippines, the
working group will become an important source of
valuable recommendations for the work of the Security
Council in the field of combating terrorism.

In the same vein, it is crucially important that the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED),
under the notable guidance of Ambassador Javier
Ruperez, enter swiftly into full operational mode and
that it receive all necessary support from the entire
system, on a clear priority basis - as should be the
case for all structures established by the Council to
effectively counter the dual proliferation of terrorist
acts and of weapons of mass destruction, respectively.

I believe that, as the United Nations membership
moves to examine the recommendations of the High-
level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, it is a
good opportunity for our delegation to register its
support for the general strategy on combating terrorism
United Nations-wide that is proposed and supported by
the Secretary-General.

Finally, I would like to express our gratitude to
the Commonwealth of Independent States and to the
Government of Kazakhstan for the efforts made in
organizing the fourth special meeting of the CTC with
international, regional and subregional organizations,
to be held next week in Almaty. We fully support
furthering the practice of holding such meetings, as
they are aimed at increasing the cohesiveness of the
global response to the dreadful threat posed by
international terrorism, while drawing upon the results
of the important strides made at the regional and
subregional levels in this fight.

