Mr. Prosor (Israel): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important open debate on counter-
terrorism.

There is a specific kind of ecosystem that creates
terrorism. Terrorism is rooted in hatred, watered with
instability and State support, and then planted in the
next generation. Every roadside bombing, every suicide
attack and every act ofterrorism begins with words and
thoughts of hatred. It begins with Al-Qaida websites
that turn suicide bombers into jihadi celebrities. It
begins with Hizbullah summer camps that use arts and
crafts to glorify martyrdom and teach bomb-making
skills to children. It begins with statements by Hamas
leaders like Atallah Abu Al-Subh, who recently said on
public Palestinian television, "The Jews are the most
despicable and contemptible nation to crawl upon the
face of the Earth". That is the poison that is being fed to
people across the Middle East day after day.

So I want to take the opportunity of this debate
to ask the simple question: How do we truly counter
terrorism?

Yes, we must combat terrorists wherever they seek
to strike. Yes, we must attack terrorist infrastructure
and go after those who support and finance terrorism.
However, true counter-terrorism must also begin by
disrupting the ecosystem of extremism in which terror
thrives. It means advancing education and teaching
peace, not hatred, and mutual understanding, not
martyrdom. It means speaking out against incitement
and all forms of terrorism, even when it is politically
inconvenient.

We are far, far away from that reality. In too many
corners of the planet, extremists have had the tools
to grow the next generation of terrorists. In this very
Council, some States offer justification for certain
terrorists while condemning others.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) all remain essential parts of
the global effort to isolate terrorists and deny them the
means to inflict harm. Israel appreciates the work of the
United Nations counter-terrorism agencies. The United
Nations has expanded its counter-terrorism efforts over
the past decade - in particular by coordinating and
facilitating technical assistance to Member States.

Israel is proud to be an active partner and donor
in those efforts. We continue to share the knowledge
and experience that come through years of combating
terrorism. We remain committed to implementing the
relevant Security Council resolutions, and to that end,
we recently submitted our periodic report, in accordance
with resolution 1540 (2004). We also support the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. All four
pillars of the strategy must be treated as a whole.

Israel is working closely with many States and
regional organizations to advance counter-terrorism
cooperation in areas from aviation security to border
protection to terrorist financing. Those activities reflect
our fundamental belief that terrorism can effectively be
confronted only through international cooperation. No
State should stand alone in this effort.

It takes a network to beat a network. The challenges
we face are growing as a result ofan increasingly linked
network of smuggling rings, transnational criminals
and terrorists. Ayman Juma was recently indicted in a
United States court for smuggling 85 tons of cocaine
into the United States and for laundering $850 million
for a Mexican drug cartel. He took a 14 per cent
commission for his efforts on behalf of his bosses, the
Hizbullah terrorist organization. Juma is one of many
thousands of Hizbullah operatives in a network that
spans from West Africa to the Middle East to Latin
America to Europe. That global criminal network
funds Hizbullah's terrorist activities and provides the
logistical support to carry them out.

Make no mistake. There is a direct connection
between powder cocaine smuggled from Latin America
and the gunpowder of Hizbullah weaponry in Lebanon.

Criminals are not the only supporters of terrorists.
Many States - including some in this Chamber - work
hand in hand with them as well. Iran stands chief among
those nations. Across the African continent, Iranian
weaponry has become the tool of choice for some of the
region's bloodiest insurgencies and terrorists.

In Gaza, Iran is funding, training and arming
Hamas, Islamic Jihad and other terrorists, giving them
the capabilities to strike Israel's largest cities. Iran's
politicians and military commanders boast about
providing terrorists with that assistance. The head of
the Islamic Jihad in Gaza said last November that "the
entire world knows that Iran is the main source of our
weapons".

Iran has also helped Hizbullah to build its arsenal
to unprecedented levels in Lebanon, amassing 50,000
deadly missiles, in flagrant breach of resolution 1701
(2006). Those weapons can reach all of Israel and well
beyond.

Hizbullah intentionally stores its weapons in
civilian areas. Just last month, a large Hizbullah
weapons-storage facility exploded in the Lebanese
village of Tair Harfa, just 300 metres from a school.
The people of Lebanon are more valuable to Hizbullah
and Iran as human shields than as human beings.

We face the frightening possibility that Hizbullah
could soon get its hands on Al-Assad's vast stockpiles
of chemical weapons. The Council must act today,
not tomorrow. We have a responsibility to prevent the
world's most dangerous weapons from falling into the
hands of the world's most dangerous actors.

The Council cannot turn a blind eye to those
States that sponsor, support and arm terrorists. The
international community must hold them accountable
for the violence that they spread and the lives that they
have taken.
We have adopted many, many resolutions in this
Chamber in the global fight against terrorism. Our
collective efforts cannot end there. The voices of the
victims of terrorism call to us; they demand our united
action.

We must take the words from the printed page and
breathe life into them every day. We must be steadfast;
we must be strong. We must, as Churchill said, seek
"victory, however long and hard the road may be". We
cannot rest until the evil ideologies that fuel terrorism
become nothing more than relics of the past.

