Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation was not able to support
the technical resolution 2471 (2019) proposed by the
United States delegation, which extends the sanctions
regime for South Sudan in an unchanged form. We are
against the automatic extension of sanctions and urge
for basing decisions on the situation on the ground
in every such case. The situation in South Sudan is
steadily stabilizing.

We welcome the agreement on extending the
pre-transition period in South Sudan. We know that a
number of objective circumstances prevented it from
being concluded by 12 May, but a significant part of the
agreements reached in Khartoum in September 2018
have nevertheless been implemented. In that regard,
we note that the structures and mechanisms provided
for in the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan have been
formulated and have begun to be operationalized. We are
pleased that there has been a significant reduction in the
level of violence and numbers of human rights violations
since the signing of the Revitalized Agreement. An
increasing number of refugees and internally displaced
persons have expressed their willingness to return to
their permanent homes. Confidence-building measures
are being implemented on the ground and opposition
politicians are returning to the capital.

We do not share the view that the progress we have
seen in the settlement in South Sudan was promoted
by the strengthening of the sanctions pressure and the
introduction of an arms embargo in July. It was not the
sanctions but the regional mediators who played a role in
it. On top of that, at a particular stage the arms embargo
prevented the region from giving flexible support to the
settlement with the help of its own security initiatives.

Lastly, taking into account the fact that today is
the last public meeting of the Council in the Chamber
for this month, I would like to thank the Indonesian
presidency for its outstanding work and to wish our
Kuwaiti colleagues every success.

