Let me begin by expressing our thanks to Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for their informative briefings, and our deep appreciation to all humanitarian workers and United Nations personnel working on the ground during this very challenging time. I welcome the participation of the representatives of Syria, Iran and Turkey in today's meeting. On the political front, towards the end of 2020, we have been witnessing certain movements within the framework of the Constitutional Committee. We understand that the decade-long conflict has driven the parties far apart and, of course, there remains profound disagreement on various issues. However, we are delighted to see that discussions have been renewed in the past months, even with the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). That shows that breakthroughs on the constitutional track, as well as in the broader political process, are not unachievable. In that regard, we encourage the parties to actively engage in constructive dialogue with a view to consolidating trust and confidence. The best interests of all the Syrian people should be the number one priority. In order to achieve a tangible and lasting solution, the efforts of the Syrian parties should be coupled with the assistance of the international community. Viet Nam will continue to support the tremendous efforts of the United Nations and the Special Envoy, as well as any viable diplomatic engagements in that regard. To facilitate the search for a political solution, it is also crucial that a calm security situation on the ground be preserved. We therefore urge all parties to the conflict to exercise restraint and refrain from further escalation. Efforts to counter terrorism should also be in line with obligations under international law, including international humanitarian law. On the humanitarian situation in Syria, I would once again like to voice our serious concern over the suffering of the Syrian people, who are affected daily by instability and the mounting economic crisis. Unfortunately, the impacts of COVID-19 during 2020 are putting Syria on the brink of a further disaster. It is distressing to see that the prices of food and other essential goods are at their highest point since the beginning of the crisis. At the same time, that situation further exacerbates the vulnerability of more than 11 million people in need of assistance and 9.3 million others facing food insecurity across the country. On top of that, harsh winter conditions aggravate the suffering of the people and may further impede humanitarian efforts. On a positive note, our delegation welcomes the efforts made by the United Nations and the parties concerned to sustain humanitarian assistance to those in need, as mentioned in the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/1195). We note with encouragement that efforts are continually being increased to overcome operational challenges and establish cross-line access into the north-west. We also note that the United Nations and its partners are doing their best to maintain aid delivery to the north-east. Taking into consideration certain difficulties in terms of access and the remaining gaps in certain parts of Syria, our delegation would like to reiterate our call for further cooperation between the parties concerned in order to ensure timely, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access and facilitate the humanitarian response in all parts of Syria. We call for the continued and generous support of the international community, with particular focus on COVID-19 response capability, food security and sustained delivery during the winter. In the light of the COVID-19 impact, sustainable solutions are needed to address the situation in various internally displaced person camps and the water shortages occasioned by the closure of the Allouk water station. It is also relevant to make sure that sanctions do not undermine the Syrian people's capacity to respond to the pandemic. The predicament of millions of Syrians can end only with a comprehensive political solution that is in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and fully adheres to international law and the Charter of the United Nations, including full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria and non-interference in its internal affairs. Finally, let me also take this opportunity to express our sincere thanks to Belgium and Germany for their hard work as co-penholders on the Syrian humanitarian file over the last two years.
