Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Algeria
which is resolutely committed to strict respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and
independence of Lebanon, as well as for the principle
of non-interference in the internal affairs of Lebanon
and in its political and economic choices, decided to
abstain on the draft resolution presented by the United
States and France for a number of reasons.

First, the situation prevailing today in Lebanon
does not appear to constitute a threat to international
peace and security and is therefore not of a nature to
prompt consideration, especially on an urgent basis, by
the Security Council - still less a decision on its part.

Secondly, it is Israel that, by its policy of
occupation and colonization of Arab lands, including
the Lebanese enclave of Shaba'a, the Syrian Golan and
the Palestinian territories of the West Bank, Gaza and
East Jerusalem, and its policy of aggression against the
countries of the region and of brutal repression of the
Palestinian people, constitutes an incontrovertible
threat to international peace and security - a threat
that does require urgent consideration and effective
measures by the Security Council to compel Israel to
respect the decisions of the Council and to comply with
international law.

My delegation would therefore have hoped to see
the Security Council display towards Israel the same
firmness it is today showing with respect to Lebanon
by demanding that Israel withdraw its occupation
forces from Arab lands within 30 days. It would
undoubtedly gain credibility and would make a
decisive contribution to the settlement of a painful
problem that has been undermining the Middle East
region for decades.

Thirdly, the Security Council must interfere
neither in the internal affairs of States nor in bilateral
relations between States, especially when these in no
way pose a threat to international peace and security,
because the Council's primary responsibility under the
Charter is solely the maintenance of international peace
and security. In that regard, the Council's consideration
of an internal Lebanese matter constitutes an
unfortunate precedent that must not be repeated, lest
the Council be dragged seriously adrift, with
consequences that would be detrimental to its
credibility and to the Charter in both its letter and its
spirit.

Fourthly, as a matter of principle, Algeria cannot
associate itself with a draft resolution that includes
even implicit threats against fraternal countries -
countries, moreover, that respect international law.

Finally, bearing in mind the complex and
multidimensional nature of the Middle East problem,
Algeria believes that only a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement based on respect for international
law, the principle of land for peace and Israel's
withdrawal from all occupied Palestinian and Arab
lands can bring about a just and final peace throughout
the region.

