Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would like to thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria for his
comprehensive briefing. It is certainly much too early
to bid him farewell, but let me take this opportunity to
express our deep gratitude for his tireless peace efforts
over all these years. It is with great regret that we note
the fact that his mission will soon come to an end.

Like Jordan, Egypt and Saudi Arabia, Germany is
taking the floor as a member of the Small Group on
Syria. I will make three brief points on the situation in
Idlib, the political process and refugees.

To start with Idlib, we welcome the fact that the
Idlib agreement reached by Turkey and Russia has so far
prevented a full-scale military offensive by the Syrian
regime that could have triggered an unprecedented
humanitarian catastrophe. At the same time, we call
on Russia and Iran, as Astana guarantors alongside
Turkey, to ensure that the ceasefire continues to be
fully respected by all parties, including the Syrian
regime. We expect them to follow through with their
commitment and guarantee the protection of civilians
and infrastructure, as well as safe, unhindered and
sustained humanitarian access.

On the political process, as Secretary-General
Guterres emphasized, with the Idlib agreement now
in place the international community must seize
the opportunity to move forward with the United
Nations-led political process. Otherwise, the military
de-escalation will not be sustainable. We need to
urgently seize the chance to make progress in the
United Nations-led political process. Now is the time
to start working towards an inclusive, credible and
sustainable political solution in Syria, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015).

Germany therefore fully supports the Special
Envoy's efforts and his clear mandate to convene a
constitutional committee as quickly as possible, as the
members of the small group called for in their statement
of 27 September. The Special Envoy's clear mandate to
form a credible and inclusive constitutional committee
must be respected. In that regard, Russia and the Syrian
regime must live up to their Sochi commitments. That
includes respecting the fact that it is solely the Special
Envoy's prerogative to select the independent members
of the committee. We urge all parties to refrain from
any attempts to manipulate or undermine that process.
Doing so would endanger its credibility and legitimacy
and therefore any prospect of achieving a political
solution consistent with resolution 2254 (2015). We are
looking forward to Staffan de Mistura's next report on
the progress achieved in the Security Council.

Finally, I want to say a word on refugees and
reconstruction. We repeatedly hear suggestions these
days from Russia, Iran and the Syrian regime that it is
time for the return of refugees and for reconstruction.
Let me say first that Germany has made very significant
contributions to alleviating the suffering of the Syrian
people by contributing to the financing of humanitarian
assistance, and we will continue to do so.

With respect to returns, Germany, too, certainly
supports the return of Syrian refugees to their homes,
but only if and once the conditions are ripe. More
than stones, cement and bulldozers, Syrian refugees
need safety guarantees and political change in Syria
so that they can begin to see a future for themselves
in the country they had to flee. Returns must be
voluntary, safe and dignified, in accordance with
international standards. As the key institution for
dealing with refugees, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) must not
be bypassed. It stands ready to facilitate large-scale
returns once the many obstacles have been removed
and the necessary guarantees are in place. We fully
agree with UNHCR that the biggest immediate obstacle
for a large-scale return is the lack of safety in Syria.
Returnees need more than protection from armed
conflict; they need to be safe from political persecution,
arbitrary arrests or expropriation.

Certainly, Syria needs economic and social
rebuilding, but as we and the European Union have
stressed many times, we will have a meaningful
discussion on reconstruction only if we see clear,
irrevocable progress in the political process. We
will not invest in war and corruption. We will not
build on shifting sands. What we need is a political
transition that paves the way for viable economic and
social reconstruction.

