Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I take the floor to explain
Rwanda's vote on resolution 2147 (2014), which renews
the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), including the Force Intervention
Brigade, for an additional year.

First of all, I would like to thank Ambassador
Ge'rard Araud of France, penholder on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for the usual good conduct of the
negotiations that enabled the Security Council to adopt
the resolution unanimously. I equally appreciate the role
played by Ambassador Samantha Power of the United
States in ensuring consensus on that important text. I
also thank all Council members for the contributions
and flexibility throughout the negotiating process.

Rwanda hopes that this mandate renewal, in
particular of the Force Intervention Brigade, revives
MONUSCO's mission to neutralize armed groups in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially
the so-called Forces democratiques de liberation du
Rwanda (FDLR), which continue to pose a sustained
threat against populations in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and against my
country, Rwanda.

Like resolution 2136 (2014), of 30 January 2014, the
resolution just adopted recalls, in its twelfth preambuar
paragraph, that the FDLR is

"a group under United Nations sanctions whose
leaders and members include perpetrators of the
1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, during
which Hutu and others who opposed the genocide
were also killed, and have continued to promote
and commit ethnically based and other killings
in Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo".

Indeed, for the past 20 years, the FDLR has
continued to destabilize the region and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Reports from non-governmental
organizations and the United Nations have implicated
the group in widespread rape, killing and other
atrocities in the eastern part of the country. It continues
to use children as soldiers and slaves. And it has held
hostage refugees who are willing to return to Rwanda.
Also, just recently, innocent civilians in my country
were killed as a result of renewed attacks by the FDLR
in public markets and bus stations, mostly in the city
of Kigali.

In resolution 2147 (2014), the Security Council
expresses its concern that the FDLR has continued to
have freedom of movement in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It also reaffirms its commitment to
eliminate the great threat posed by that genocidal
movement through sustained actions by the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo
(FARDC), MONUSCO and the Force Intervention
Brigade. That is also in line with the recent meeting
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region held in Luanda on 25 March, which called for
coordinated efforts to urgently engage military action
against the FDLR and to continue to repatriate those
willing to disarm.

That mandate is one aspect of a comprehensive
plan to permanently address issues of insecurity,
especially in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and for MONUSCO and the Intervention Brigade to
support the FARDC to put such plans into sustained
action. We urge the Council to ensure accountability
for its implementation.

Finally, through its national, bilateral and regional
commitments, Rwanda reiterates its unwavering
support to peace, stability and prosperity in our region.

