Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I join the Belgian
Ambassador in paying compliments to the President of
the Council for the past month and particularly for
promoting this open debate today.

New Zealand has long maintained that, in
addition to changes to the composition of the Security
Council, there is an equally pressing need for wide-
ranging reform of its working methods. As the Belgian
Ambassador emphasized, one reform should not be
hostage to the other. This stems from our belief that,
just as the Council derives its authority from the
Charter, it must be accountable to all the 193 Member
States that adhere to that Charter. The values and
principles it must uphold are our values and our
principles; the global peace and security it upholds is
our peace and security; and its successes and indeed its
failures in fulfilling its mandate profoundly affect us
all.

For the overwhelming majority of Member States
that are not members of this Council - the faces
pressed against the window - its working methods
affect our ability to understand and contribute to its
work. In turn, they directly affect the effectiveness and
legitimacy of the Council itself. All States have a stake
in ensuring that those working methods are transparent,
inclusive and effective, and when they are discussed,
we all have a right to have our voices heard and
listened to.

New Zealand therefore welcomes today's debate,
the fourth on this topic since 1994. Since then,
significant improvements have been made to Council
working methods, most notably through presidential
notes S/2006/507 and S/2010/507. We commend those
welcome changes. Today's discussions provide an
opportunity to review progress and to highlight areas
where further improvements can be made. In the
interests of time, I will focus on just four.

First, we acknowledge the significance of the
measures in note S/2010/507, but we still need more
consistent and meaningful implementation of those
measures. Such implementation would go a long way
towards enhancing the transparency, inclusiveness and
quality of Council deliberations. Achieving that,
however, requires that we challenge the Council's
traditional culture and achieve a major shift in
longstanding mindsets.

Achieving that means that, whenever possible,
Council meetings, regardless of format, must be open,
and that there must be a clear and compelling reason -
preferably one that is publicly stated - when that is
not the case. It means making participation in such
meetings more meaningful and providing genuine
scope for non-members to contribute to Council
deliberations throughout the decision-making process.
It also means achieving more timely, consistent and
meaningful interaction with those non-members that
have a legitimate stake in its deliberations, particularly
troop- and police-contributing countries and countries
that are actually on the Council agenda. One way of
achieving that would be to make greater use of
innovative Council meeting formats, such as informal
interactive dialogues.

It also means sharing draft documents with
non-Council members sooner and more frequently and
giving affected parties greater opportunities for input
in the preparation of those documents. It means
stimulating more substantive and interactive
discussions between Council members themselves. And
above all, it means making transparency and
inclusiveness a reflex action. Transparency and
inclusiveness should be the norm for the Council's
work, not the exception.

The cultural shift required for the more consistent
and meaningful implementation of the
recommendations in note S/2010/507 will take time,
but it would help significantly if there were a more
systematic process for monitoring progress in that
implementation. As a first step, the Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Matters should
consider developing a concrete action plan that
establishes clear goals and benchmarks for
implementation. Such a plan could form the basis of
regular progress reports, perhaps as part of the
Council's annual report to the General Assembly.
Ideally, those reports would be informed by, and would
in turn feed into, future open debates in the Council
itself.

Secondly, we need to review current Council
conventions that inhibit the optimal and equitable
distribution of tasks and responsibilities. For example,
the conventions under which the permanent five (P5)
alone determine the Chairs of subsidiary bodies, under
which chairing roles are allocated to elected members
only, and under which the P5 always lead on country-
specific resolutions all lack any obvious justification
and should be discontinued.

Thirdly, we must ensure that the Council more
effectively draws on the expertise of, and coordinates
its activities with, relevant external actors. We urge the
Council to build on recent positive steps to increase
meaningful interaction with the Peacebuilding
Commission, particularly with the Chairs of country-
specific configurations and with regional and
subregional organizations. Consideration should also
be given to expanding that interaction to other relevant
actors. Such interactions need not impinge on the
Council's powers and prerogatives. Indeed, properly
handled, they have the potential to augment the quality
and legitimacy of its deliberations.
Fourthly, we need to reconsider the existing
practice regarding use of the veto. New Zealand's
views on the veto are well known, and they have been
consistent since we and others forced a vote on its
inclusion in the Charter in 1945. The veto is a truly
awesome power. Greater transparency regarding the
circumstances in which its holders would contemplate
its use and in explaining its actual use would help
reassure other States that its holders are wielding that
power responsibly.

Agreement on an informal code guiding the use
of the veto would be a welcome initiative. It was
described by the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Spain as obligations of conduct, and we agree.

Those entrusted with the privilege and
responsibility of serving on the Security Council,
whether as permanent or non-permanent members, can
effectively discharge their duties only with the support
and cooperation of all other Member States - those
same States that elect non-permanent members and
whose adherence to the Charter underpins the
Council's authority and its legitimacy. We
non-members * the "P-l78" - have much to
contribute to the Council's work, and we have every
right to expect transparency, meaningful opportunities
for participation and, above all, effective decision-
making from the Council.

New Zealand acknowledges the genuine
improvements made in the Council's working methods
since the first open debate, in 1994, and, again, we
compliment those responsible. It is in all of our
interests that we now move to complete that work by
seeing today's discussions translated into more
meaningful action and into more consistent practice.

After all, this is not just a Council for its five
permanent members. It is not just a Council, pro tem,
for its non-permanent members. It is our Council, too.

