Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation is pleased to welcome you, Sir,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece, to the
Council to preside over today's debate. We would like
to express appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr.
Kofi Annan, for his statement, as well as to the Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Guehenno, for his briefing.

The concept of humanitarian crises is a broad
one. The Security Council, as the organ of the United
Nations bearing the primary responsibility for
international peace and security, should, as a matter of
course, play a lead role in conflict prevention and
management. Effective conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as post-conflict reconstruction, are
the primary functions of the Security Council in
response to humanitarian crises. In its future
undertakings, the Council should attach greater
importance to the question of how to help conflict
areas maintain stability and how to get them back on
track towards sustained development so as to prevent
relapses into conflict.

In this context, I would like to raise a number of
issues.

First, the rule of law and justice in law
enforcement are necessary prerequisites for a peaceful
transition. They are also a fundamental guarantee for
the consolidation of lasting peace. In areas emerging
from conflict, ensuring the rule of law and justice
should become an integral part of the overall effort to
achieve peace and stability, protecting the fundamental
interests of local populations and serving the overall
interests of social stability. All the participants in post-
conflict reconstruction efforts should abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter and universally
recognized norms of international law, and should
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
countries concerned. Only in that way can the relevant
efforts be considered justified, win the credibility and
trust of the recipient countries and genuinely promote
post-conflict peacebuilding.

Secondly, most humanitarian crises take place in
less-developed areas and are closely linked with
poverty and underdevelopment. In such areas, the end
of a conflict does not necessarily mean the arrival of
peace. Usually we are faced with grave challenges in
terms of finance, technology and lack of human
resources. The United Nations should mobilize timely
international resources and provide technical
assistance, playing a greater role in that respect, in
order to help the countries concerned to implement
their disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes and intensify their efforts to strengthen
the justice sector.

In providing assistance to the countries
concerned, the international community, in particular
the donor community, should fully respect local
history, cultural traditions and legal structures, respect
the ownership and decision-making capacity of local
populations and avoid becoming involved in internal
conflicts. Instead of issuing orders, it should provide
guidance in keeping with the realities and needs on the
ground. The focus should be on building the capacity
of local areas and populations rather than on imposing
a predetermined model of governance.

Thirdly, in responding to humanitarian crises, the
Security Council should strengthen coordination and
cooperation with the affected regions and subregions to
help enhance their capacity to deal with such crises.
The African continent should not only be the focus of
United Nations conflict prevention activities; it should
also be the focus of the Organization's post-conflict
peacebuilding efforts.

The Security Council should not only help the
African countries concerned with post-conflict
peacebuilding; in keeping with the realities and
specific needs on the ground, it should also strengthen
the continent's regional and subregional organizations
by providing them with logistical, financial and
technological assistance in order to improve their
overall capacity for post-conflict peacebuilding.

China supports the establishment of a
Peacebuilding Commission, which we hope will
become functional as soon as possible. We hope that
that initiative will promote post-conflict peacebuilding
efforts and foster lasting peace and stability. It should
also have a direct impact on United Nations efforts to
coordinate post-conflict peacebuilding activities. We
hope that the parties concerned will reach agreement
on the details of the initiative as soon as possible.

China endorses the presidential statement drafted
by the Greek delegation. We are grateful to that
delegation for its efforts.

