Mr. Dunn (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Wittig for his briefing and his
commitment to peacebuilding and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). I also wish to thank Ambassador
Gasana for his leadership this year, as well as the
Chairs of the Peacebuilding Commission's country-
specific configurations, who facilitate the PBC's work
in the field and in New York. The United States
continues to support the Commission wholeheartedly.

Promoting sustainable peace is at the heart of the
United Nations work. The Peacebuilding Commission
continues to gain strength as an institution. It plays a
crucial role in several important ways, calling our
attention to countries emerging form conflict, offering
advice, and proposing strategies to build sustainable
peace after the guns have fallen silent. We commend
the Commission for its efforts to address many of the
shortcomings identified in last year's annual review,
and we appreciate the progress it has made this year, in
particular in the countries on its agenda.

We commend the Commission's efforts to
alleviate the administrative burden on those it hopes to
help by drawing more from existing strategic planning
processes and documents. We saw this in Sierra Leone,
where the Commission aligned its engagement with the
Government's agenda for change and leveraged the
expertise and experience of international actors and
regional bodies to tackle poor governance, youth
unemployment and widespread drug trafficking. We
saw it again in the Central African Republic, where the
Commission tailored its strategic framework to
correspond to the country's poverty reduction strategy.
We saw it in Burundi, where the Commission worked
with international stakeholders to ensure free and fair
elections and where the Commission's work to support
political dialogue among the ruling party and
opposition elements has proven particularly important
as Burundi has solidified its peace.

We also applaud the Commission's quick start in
Liberia. Liberia was added to the PBC's agenda within
six months of that country's request, and an innovative
statement of mutual commitment was endorsed by the
Commission and Liberia's Government. Liberia has
already, with the PBC's help, begun construction on the
first of five regional security hubs to address the root
causes of conflict at the community level and help
transfer security management from the United Nations
peacekeeping mission to the Government of Liberia in
the coming years.

We also appreciate the efforts of the Working
Group on Lessons Learned, which shares and
disseminates information and success stories on high-
priority areas on the Peacebuilding Commission's
agenda. We urge the Working Group to continue to
foster meaningful dialogue and to link its discussions
and findings more directly to programmes in the field.
Such ties are essential if the valuable lessons put forth
by the Working Group are to be incorporated into the
Commission's ongoing work.

Despite considerable progress, the Commission
still faces real challenges. In order to better serve as the
leading authority on peacebuilding, the Commission
must work harder to link ambitions in New York with
programmes and national leadership in the field. It must
also improve coordination with international
institutions on needs assessments and programmes in
post-conflict countries. The PBC should continue to
promote national ownership by focusing early on
developing national capacities and measuring the
impact that peacebuilding has in the field.

We also believe that the Commission should work
more closely with its key partners, in particular the
international financial institutions. This will allow the
Commission to build on the experience and knowledge
of partner institutions and work towards common goals
to create sustainable peace. We must also work to
achieve a coherent vision and to coordinate efforts
across all players in countries with a United Nations
peacebuilding presence. A key aspect of achieving this
vision is working closely with leadership within
countries emerging from conflict. As the Commission
continues to grow and add more countries to its
agenda, it is even more critical that it possess the
peacebuilding capacities to advance international peace
and security and improve the prospects for success in
post-conflict countries.

The time is now, as more countries are turning to
the United Nations for resources and assistance in
dealing with conflict. The Commission must continue to
build on the progress it has made to help the countries
on its agenda build peace that will truly endure.

