The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Colombia.

I would especially like to express that it is an
honour for us to meet with Deputy President Zuma, the
Facilitator of the peace process in Burundi. I must
especially thank him, on behalf of my country, for his
briefing and his very valuable information. To him, and
through him to the Government of President Mbeki, I
would like to acknowledge everything they are doing to
contribute to peace in Africa in the chairmanship of the
African Union. That contribution is enhanced by the
facilitating management of President Nelson Mandela
and the agreement reached on a transitional
Government.

In the case of Burundi, we share in the
satisfaction of other delegations that a ceasefire
agreement has been reached between the Government
of President Pierre Buyoya and the rebel group of the
Forces for the Defence of Democracy (FDD) led by
Mr. Nkurunziza. We feel that an important obstacle to
reconciliation among the people of Burundi has been
overcome, although we know that there are still many
others in the arduous path towards peace.

After two years on the Council and two visits to
the country, we have seen first-hand the stamina for
peace. We therefore believe that there is considerable
room for action by the international community,
African countries in particular. There are promises of
international assistance for the socio-economic
reconstruction of the country. There is the possibility of
imposing international sanctions on the National
Liberation Forces (FNL). An agreement has been
reached establishing an African mission to verify and
monitor the ceasefire.

My delegation would like to ask Deputy President
Zuma for more detailed information on that African
mission, particularly on its composition. Would it be
comprised exclusively of African countries, or might it
perhaps include personnel from elsewhere? What
would be its relationship to a possible United Nations
peacekeeping mission? I would also like to hear his
opinion on the FNL's attitude towards the ceasefire and
about what kind of sanctions might be envisaged, to be
imposed by countries members of the Regional
Initiative - if that sort of details has been considered.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to Deputy President Jacob
Zuma to respond to the observations that have been
made and to make any final comments he has.

