The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.

I would first like to pay tribute to Foreign Minister
Alfano for his briefing today in his capacity as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). It is a privilege to
see him back in the Council during the second year ofour
split term. The cooperation between the Governments
of Italy and the Netherlands during our split term on
the Council for 2017 and 2018 is a great example of
European cooperation and political leadership.

Today I will focus on three points - the OSCE
as a regional security organization, the OSCE as an
organization for dialogue and the situation in Ukraine. As
a crucial regional organization, the OSCE complements
the work of the Security Council on the basis of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. It plays a
central role in early warning, conflict prevention and
resolution in the region. It also plays a crucial role in
the quest for peaceful settlements of the protracted
conflicts on the territories of Georgia, Moldova and
Azerbaijan, which must be resolved in accordance with
international laws and OSCE commitments.

My second point concerns the OSCE as an
organization for dialogue, whereby it offers its
57 participating States a unique platform for
promoting peaceful solutions to conflicts in Europe,
based on commonly agreed principles. Through its
comprehensive security approach, the organization is
able to deal with all the dimensions of security, including
its political, military, economic, environmental, and
human aspects. Its field offices and independent
institutions 4 the High Commissioner on National
Minorities, the Representative on Freedom of the
Media, and the Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights - play an important role in that regard
that I would like to highlight. In this way, the OSCE
provides space for dialogue within all three dimensions,
and does so in an inclusive manner.

That brings me to my third point, the situation in
eastern Ukraine. The ongoing foreign interference in
Ukraine constitutes a serious violation of the founding
principles of the OSCE. I reiterate my country's full
commitment to the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. We call on all the parties involved to
fully implement the Minsk agreements. That should
begin with the withdrawal of heavy weapons and a
sustainable ceasefire. The OSCE's role in the Trilateral
Contact Group and the Special Monitoring Mission are
crucial to the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
It is absolutely essential that the Special Monitoring
Mission be allowed to do its important work without
impediments. The monitors must have full, safe and
unhindered access to all parts of the conflict zone. Any
obstructions of the Mission's work or threats to its staff
are unacceptable and must stop immediately.

In the context of Ukraine, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands would like to recall resolution 2166 (2014),
which demanded that those responsible for the downing
of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 be held to account
and that all States cooperate fully with the efforts to
establish accountability. We mourn the victims of
the downing of MH17 and would like to express our
sympathy with their families and loved ones.

In conclusion, today is 8 March, International
Women's Day. In that context, I particularly welcome
Mr. Alfano's words highlighting the importance of
gender equality, in line with the 2004 OSCE Action
Plan for the Promotion of Gender Equality. We greatly
appreciate Italy's active role in initiating a network of
Mediterranean women mediators, through which we
believe it will move the OSCE forward in that area. As
OSCE Chairperson-in-Office, we believe that Italy will
build bridges as successfully as it did during its time on
the Council. We pay tribute toits leadership both at the I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

OSCE and the United Nations. The meeting rose at 4.45 pm.
