The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 5/2005/320, which contains the special
report of the Secretary-General on elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council takes note of the
joint decision reached by the two houses of the
Parliament of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on 17 June 2005 to extend for a period of
six months, renewable once, the transitional
period that was to expire on 30 June 2005, in
accordance with the provisions of the Global and
All-Inclusive Agreement signed in Pretoria on 17

December 2002 and with article 196 of the
Transitional Constitution.
"The Security Council calls on all Congolese
parties to respect this decision, which aims to
allow the elections provided for by this Agreement
to take place in satisfactory logistic and security
conditions. It encourages the Congolese people to
mobilize for and conduct the electoral process in a
peaceful manner, and urges in particular the
candidates and political parties to refrain from any
action that might disrupt this process. It takes note
in this regard of the recommendation contained in
the special report of the Secretary-General on
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
dated 26 May 2005 (S/2005/320) that all political
parties should sign and commit themselves to
respect the agreed code of conduct for the electoral
process. The Council urges all parties and
transitional institutions to make every effort to
respect scrupulously the timetable for polls
developed by the Independent Electoral
Commission, and in particular to begin
preparations for the referendum on the draft
constitution as soon as possible.

"The Security Council welcomes progress
made so far in the preparation of the elections, in
particular the adoption and promulgation of the
referendum law, and the start of voter registration
in Kinshasa, which marks a historic and
important step in the electoral process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Council
calls on the transitional authorities to accelerate
those reforms remaining to be carried out, in
particular drafting of the electoral law and
integration of the security forces.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of elections as the foundation for the
longer-term restoration of peace and stability,
national reconciliation and establishment of the
rule of law in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It calls upon the Congolese authorities to
exercise efficient, transparent and comprehensive
control over State finances, ensuring that there is
no impunity for those responsible for acts of
embezzlement or corruption. In this regard, the
Council encourages the Congolese authorities to
continue consultations with their international
partners, in full respect for the sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to put in

place credible arrangements to strengthen support The Security Council has thus concluded the
for good governance and transparent economic present stage of its consideration of the item on its
management." agenda.

This statement will be issued as a document of the The meeting rose at 5.30 11/11.

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/27.

