Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the Australian initiative to hold an open
debate on counter-terrorism today. We welcome your
coming to New York, Madam President, to preside at
this meeting. I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon;
Ambassador Quinlan, Chair of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities; and
Ambassador Murmokaite, Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism, for their briefings.

The international community is presently facing
a resurgence of terrorism, with its new means and
manifestations. We have seen rampant, violent
extremist activities, the return of terrorists who were
trained abroad and the use of the Internet by terrorist
organizations to engage in all acts of terrorism.
Terrorist organizations are resorting to international
financing and information technology and is recruiting
young people, thereby causing greater harm. We face a
grim, uphill fight against terrorism.

In the face of the new threats and challenges
posed by terrorism, the Security Council swiftly
adopted resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014), which
reflect the will and determination of the international
community to fight terrorism. The international
community should enhance its sharing of information
and successful experiences, scale up capacity-building
and join hands in maintaining international peace and
security. I would like to stress the following points.

First, the fight against terrorism must have one
standard. Terrorists ignore fundamental human rights
and challenge the bottom line of human civilization.
They are the common enemy of humankind. Any
terrorist act, regardless of when, where or by whom it
is committed, constitutes a grave, inexcusable crime.
All countries should cooperate in the fight without
employing double standards or selectivity. Nor should
they link terrorism with any ethnic group or religion.

Secondly, in the fight against terrorism, we
must abide by international law and the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
We must respect the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the countries concerned, and
the United Nations and Security Council should play a
leading role. Only in that way will we maintain unity
and improve the coordination of our actions. Countries
should accelerate implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and resolutions 2170
(2014) and 2178 (2014), and adopt integrated measures
to tackle both the roots and symptoms of terrorism and
eliminate its breeding ground.

Thirdly, our fight against terrorism must be
targeted more effectively. With the development of
cyber information and technology, the Internet has
become an important channel for terrorists to carry
out their activities. Cyberterrorism has become
increasingly harmful to the international community;
it is the new topic and challenge in our fight against
terrorism. The international community must, on the
one hand, continue to deal with traditional strategies
and ways of combating terrorism, and, on the other,
take rigorous steps, based on the characteristics of the
Internet and cyber-terrorist activities, to tackle the
terrorist organizations' use of the Internet to publish
terrorist audio and video, spread extremist ideology and
finance, incite, plan and carry out terrorist activities.

The United Nations counter-terrorism mechanism
must use innovative approaches and initiatives to
effectively implement the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly. China
looks forward to the 2015 special meeting of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee on preventing the use
of the Internet and social media by terrorists to incite
terrorism and recruit terrorists. The meeting will
promote strong actions on the part of the international
community and pragmatic cooperation against
cyberterrorism.

China faces a direct and realistic threat from East
Turkestan terrorist forces, headed by the East Turkestan
Islamic Movement. In recent years, it has continued to
incite and organize terrorist activities, which threatens
both China's national security and regional security
and stability.

In May this year, China's President Xi Jinping
stressed that China will fight terrorism at both the
national and the international levels, and seeks to
strengthen international cooperation against terrorism.
China will continue to strictly implement the relevant
Council resolutions, strengthen its legislation on
counter-terrorism, combat terrorism in accordance
with the law and severely punish such terrorist crimes.
China will continue to actively take part in and promote
bilateral and multilateral cooperation against terrorism,
strengthen information-sharing and assist developing
countries both materially and in capacity-building
within its capabilities.

On 17 and 18 November, China hosted a workshop
on combating cyberterrorism within the Global
Counterterrorist Forum in Beijing, at which
discussions were held on ways and means to prevent
and fight cyberterrorism and strengthen international
cooperation and capacity-building. We are willing
to enhance exchanges and cooperation with the
international community and promote new progress in
international cooperation in the fight against terrorism
in order to maintain world peace and stability.

