Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like to begin by
extending my thanks to Special Representative Leila
Zerrougui, Ambassador of Kuwait Mansour Ayyad
Alotaibi and Ms. Justine Masika Bihamba for their
important and very informative briefings.

The upcoming months will be critical in preserving
all efforts made by international, regional and national
actors in stabilizing the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Poland commends the progress made in the
technical preparations of the elections. However,
we are still deeply concerned by the distrust among
political actors over several crucial issues, mainly the
implementation of the confidence-building measures
and opening of the political space. A lack of genuine
commitment and goodwill on the part of all the political
actors might undermine the free and credible electoral
process. Poland calls upon the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to ensure that the
elections are organized on time and with the requisite
conditions of transparency, inclusivity and security.

In that context, we emphasize the importance of the
timely invitation of international electoral observers.
The peaceful and timely transfer of power in January
2019, as set out in the electoral calendar and in accordance
with the Congolese Constitution, is a prerequisite for the
stabilization of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Poland welcomes the commitment by regional partners
to support the electoral process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

While praising the efforts taken by the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
international actors to contain the Ebola virus outbreak,
we remain gravely concerned about the humanitarian
situation, which is driven by the destabilizing actions
of foreign and domestic armed groups. Their activities,
including violence against civilians, illicit trafficking,
trade exploitation and smuggling of natural resources,
have a negative impact on the security, economy and
development of the country. We therefore call for
the full implementation of the arms embargo, travel
ban and assets freeze, as they are an integral part of
the fight against those type of crimes. Poland is also
worried by the continuing increase in human rights
abuses, including sexual violations. We call upon
the Government to strengthen measures to improve
security, fight the impunity of the perpetrators of those
crimes and protect victims.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Poland's support
for the recommendations proposed by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2018/655). We praise the
important work carried out by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Special Representative
Leila Zerrougui. There is no doubt that in the wake of
the upcoming elections the role of the Mission is ever
more important.

