Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): At the outset, allow me
to convey my sincere congratulations to you, Madam
President, and to your friendly country, Italy, on presiding
over this important Security Council Ministerial meeting. I
would like to take this opportunity to convey to your
Excellency, the honourable Foreign Ministers, and the
representatives of the Security Council member States, the
warm greetings of my Minister, His Excellency
Mr. Youseuf Bin Alawi Bin Abdullah, the Minister of State
for Foreign Affairs of Oman, along with his best wishes for
the successful conclusion of this meeting. Had it not been
for prior engagements, he would have been amongst us here
today.

My delegation would like also, Madam President, to
acknowledge the excellent work and able leadership of your
Ambassador, Paolo Fulci, who has led the Security
Council's activities this month and the discussion that
resulted in the consensus on the important presidential
statement to be adopted today at this Ministerial meeting
under your wise leadership.

The United Nations was founded 50 years ago in order
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
which had already brought untold sorrow to mankind. On
this basis, the international community emphasized in the
Charter of the United Nations the principles of basic human
rights, justice, coexistence and the non-use of military
force, which should be observed at all times and costs.
These objectives can be brought about only by fostering
sound international cooperation, in the best interest of
economic and social development for the benefit of
mankind.

In this context, and in order to pursue these
objectives, the United Nations system and other
specialized agencies have been strenuously working
together towards achieving the noble objectives enshrined
in the Charter of this Organization.

The Security Council, the body primarily responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
has played a significant role in these undertakings, a role
which, lately, has expanded in quality and quantity to the
point that it has made peace-keeping not only an
acceptable international mechanism but also an
indispensable tool for resolving many conflicts throughout
the world. The United Nations peace-keeping forces have
played a remarkable role in Namibia, El Salvador,
Cambodia and Haiti, to give but a few examples.

Despite the success of the United Nations peace-
keeping forces, the many obstacles and stumbling-blocks
that have stood in the way of the successful discharge of
the forces' mandates, in for example Somalia, Rwanda,
Liberia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina, clearly attest to this
fact. In the light of these difficulties and of the financial
constraints the United Nations faces today at one of the
most critical junctures of its existence, we believe that it
is the duty of the international community to learn from
past experience and to utilize the capacities of some of
the existing regional organizations with greater
determination and commitment to resolve the outstanding
issues, in accordance with the purposes and principles set
forth in Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations.
This would necessitate, as a paramount principle that
should be observed at all times, that the Security Council
should conduct a thorough study and review before it
establishes any peace-keeping operation, as such
operations should be engaged in with the clear-cut
consent of the parties concerned with regard to time
limits, objectives and mandates and within the capabilities
and resources of the United Nations organs concerned.

With regard to preventive diplomacy, we believe that
the "Supplement to 'An Agenda for Peace'", prepared by
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, contains
many elements that are helpful to the current discussion
on the revitalization and restructuring of the role of the
United Nations in peace-keeping. Furthermore, we are of
the view that the statement made on 21 February 1995 by
the President of the Security Council with regard to that
Supplement, along with the statement made on
transparency and coordination between the members of
the Security Council, the Secretariat and the troop-
contributing States, are steps in the right direction aimed

 

at enhancing the work of the United Nations, in strict
compliance with its Charter.

The peace we all aspire to, as set forth in the Charter,
has not yet been achieved. In the Middle East, in spite of
the fact that the Arab parties and Israel have turned to
dialogue and negotiation after many decades of war and
hatred, the much-awaited peace has not materialized,
particularly on the Syrian-Israeli and Lebanese-Israeli track,
and progress is still lacking, though we remain hopeful that
the dynamics of the ongoing peace process will enable it to
clear all the hurdles that might stand in the way of
establishing a just and lasting peace in the region. Israel,
which occupies Arab lands in Palestine, Syria and Lebanon,
must assume full responsibility in ensuring the success of
this process, which is based on resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 425 (1978) and on the principle of "land for
peace". Along the same lines, international efforts to help
Iraq through its current crisis have suffered a major set-
back as a result of the Iraqi Govemment's reluctance and
its concealment of much important information from the
Special Commission until recently.

In this context, we should remind ourselves that
collective security is not restricted to military conflicts;
other dangers, such as terrorism, fanaticism and extremism
threaten international peace and security. These negative
phenomena have one objective: to destroy the principles of
tolerance and the rule of law. Our commitment to collective
security, as called for in the Charter of this Organization,
should be enlarged to deal with such phenomena in order
to allow nations to carry on with their economic and social
development.

The sweeping changes and challenges that we have
witnessed recently in many parts of the world necessitate a
collective response from all of us. Our high-level meeting
today provides an opportunity to exchange views in this
venue in order to address and deal with these new
challenges that pose a threat to international peace and
security.

In confronting these new challenges, whether through
resolving longstanding regional problems or through
bridging existing economic and social gaps, it is imperative
that the United Nations focus its efforts, now more than
ever, on finding the needed solutions and compromises. We
believe that this international Organization has the potential
and the capacity to do more, which would enable it to fulfil
its expected role. We understand the difficulties that might
face the United Nations, but these can be eased through our
collective efforts to restructure this Organization and to
seek new and cost-effective means that will spare it from
becoming involved in every issue, large and small, around
the globe.

My country believes that all Members of the
Organization should rise above their differences and
shoulder their responsibilities in order to show their true
intentions and stand for a common peace that will take
the United Nations into the twenty-first century, in which
sustainable development will become integral to all
nations in the search for a peaceful, secure and bright
future for succeeding generations.

