Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia wishes to thank Mr. Zahir
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing. I would
also like to welcome and thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Ambassador Ivica Daeic'. Bolivia
also listened with interest to the statement made by
Ms. Vlora Citaku.

Bolivia reiterates its call for the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999), including full respect for the
territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of
the Republic of Serbia. Based on that understanding
and pursuant to the resolution, Bolivia considers it
important to focus its participation in today's meeting
on the following points upon which I will comment
in my statement: first of all, the duty of the parties to
comply with the commitments they have undertaken
in the framework of the European Union-facilitated
dialogue; secondly, the importance of UNMIK's
work on easing tensions between the parties; thirdly,
enabling the return of internally displaced persons to
their homes; and, fourthly, combating impunity.

With regard to the first point, we call on the
parties to fulfil the commitments they have made in
the European Union-facilitated negotiations. In that
context, we are already working towards a peaceful
resolution through dialogue, while respecting the need
to negotiate in accordance with international law in
order to achieve solutions that promote progress and
stability in the region. Accordingly, Bolivia urges the
parties to comply with what was agreed to four years
in the Brussels Agreement on the establishment of an
association/community of Serb-maj ority municipalities,
which aims to ensure the security and human rights of
Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija. We believe that progress
in fulfilling that agreement is essential to achieve a
peaceful settlement between Pristina and Belgrade.

Bolivia values the efforts of the European Union
(EU) and supports the initiative of the EU High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy with regard to the informal meeting held in
Brussels on 3 July, which resulted in the agreement
between the parties to start a new phase of the dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade and acknowledging the
importance of implementing the agreements already
reached. We believe that these efforts need to be made
in order to achieve a lasting peace, keeping in mind
that the Serbs and Kosovars could go a long way in
resolving their differences by refraining from making
statements using bellicose or inflammatory rhetoric.
By the same token, we believe that the dialogue
facilitated by the European Union is an opportunity
to build trust between the parties and find mutually
acceptable solutions. This process requires a firm
commitment focused on confidence-building measures
without excluding the participation of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the United
Nations and other international organizations.

Secondly, we commend the work of UNMIK and its
joint efforts with local authorities and representatives
of the Kosovo community to protect the rights of
communities, promote inter-community reconciliation,
establish confidence-building measures and facilitate
the return of internally displaced persons, including
the organization of the first United Nations Kosovo
Youth Assembly, pursuant to resolution 2250 (2015),
on youth, peace and security. Bolivia values UNMIK's
work undertaken in compliance with its mandate under
resolution 1244 (1999). We encourage the parties
to continue to work together to build trust, maintain
good offices, ease tensions and use peaceful measures
to promote consensus-based solutions to safeguard
peace in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and support political dialogue and respect for
human rights.

With regard to internally displaced persons, we
take note of the statement issued by the Spokesman
for the Secretary-General announcing his decision to
establish a community-based trust fund for the benefit
of the Roma, Egyptian and Ashkali communities that
have suffered from lead poisoning as a result of their
relocation to internally displaced persons camps in
northern Kosovo. We regret that the return of internally
displaced persons to certain areas of the province of
Kosovo has continued to be postponed. We call on the
parties to cooperate and pool their efforts to assist in
this process and ensure the safe return of the displaced
to their homes.

Finally, with regard to the special court for
Kosovo - the Kosovo Specialist Chambers - we
believe that this is a positive step in favour of justice
and reconciliation, which represents a key part of
Kosovo's challenges. The persons responsible for war
crimes should be brought to justice regardless of their
status. It is a moral imperative that all victims should
obtain satisfaction when it comes to their right to the
truth, justice and redress.

