Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I want to
express our special thanks to Special Representative
Kubis for his comprehensive briefing on the latest
developments in Iraq, to congratulate him on a
successful three years and nine months of service, and
to thank him for his exception leadership of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) during
this pivotal chapter in Iraq's history. On a personal note,
having worked with him in Iraq for the first half of his
tenure, I wish to thank him for his tireless efforts in
very challenging circumstances and for his consistent
wise counsel and friendship over these years. His
ability to engage with Iraqi stakeholders from all walks
of life has illustrated for all of us UNAMI's vital role
in facilitating critical political dialogue and showed
the great potential that UNAMI has to make positive
impact in Iraq. We, along with the rest of the Security
Council, also look forward to working closely with his
successor, Special Representative-designate Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, when she begins her tenure
in December.

Since the Council's last UNAMI briefing (see S/PV.8324), Iraq has a new President and Prime
Minister, which deserves the Security Council's
congratulations. Iraq's new Government is poised to
make a serious of important decisions that will set the
course of the country's history for decades to come. We
encourage the new Government to focus on tackling
corruption and delivering essential services to all of
its people, including its many diverse communities of
all ethnicities and faiths. We also call on Iraq's new
leaders to promote the participation and representation
of women at all levels.

The United States has pledged to work closely
with President Salih, Prime Minister Abdul-Mahdi and
Council of Representatives Speaker Al-Halbousi to
deliver stability, security and prosperity for all Iraqis.
Much work remains to be done and bold leadership will
be required. The credibility of the new Government
hinges on providing access to jobs, clean water and
electricity. It is vital that the Government deliver on
those essential services as swiftly as possible.

We also call on the new Government to ensure
the voluntary, safe and dignified return of internally
displaced persons who suffered so greatly from terror
at the hands of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams
(ISIS). The atrocities committed by ISIS cannot go
unpunished, and we call on the new Government to
work closely with the newly established United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/ISIL to swiftly begin
evidence-based investigations on the ground, as
mandated by resolution 2379 (2017).

As Iraq continues to grapple with terrorist threats,
even after the defeat of ISIS, we must remember that
no threat of violence can reverse the spirit of the
Iraqi people. We are encouraged by the stories of the
many Iraqis who have returned to their homes and are
beginning to rebuild their communities. The UNAMI
mandate underscores the importance of supporting Iraq
and meeting the needs of all Iraqis, including women,
youth and members of all religious and ethnic groups.
We strongly encourage Iraq's new leaders to work
closely with UNAMI to address the unique needs of
those groups and individuals as part and parcel of the
broader national and community-level reconciliation
effort that Iraq needs to undertake. Iraq's new leaders
should also work closely with UNAMI to help create
the conditions that will allow the Iraqi people to shape
their own future, free of outside interference.

Iraq has once again entered a key moment in its
history, making major strides towards a more stable,
secure and democratic future. Now Iraq's leaders have
the task of showing that they can deliver on the high
expectations of their people. The United States stands
ready to support Iraq in achieving that goal.

