Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique): At the outset, I
would like to join preceding speakers in extending to
you, Mr. President, my sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of September. We thank you for
convening this meeting and affording us the
opportunity to take part in the debate. We would like to
extend our congratulations to your predecessor for the
excellent manner in which he guided the work of the
Security Council last month.

We warmly welcome the presence of the National
Council of Timorese Resistance (CRNT) Vice
President, Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, a Nobel Peace Prize
laureate in recognition of his role in the struggle for the
self-determination of his people.

One year has elapsed since the people of East
Timor, in a free and fair referendum, took the historic
decision to vote for the independence of the territory.
Since then, positive developments have taken place in
the territory as a result of the determination of the
people of East Timor to live in an environment of
peace and stability and to begin the daunting process of
national reconstruction. With the support of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), the Timorese are engaged in the promotion
of a national political dialogue which will contribute
towards national reconciliation and create the basis for
the future government of the territory.

We are equally pleased to note that there has been
significant progress in the restoration of basic social
services. We are encouraged by the reopening of a
large number of schools despite the difficult conditions
under which they operate. The public health care
system is slowly recovering, with the support of the
United Nations, donor countries and non-governmental
organizations.

We believe that the establishment of the
transitional administration will go a long way in
constantly improving the living conditions of the
people as well as in laying the foundations for an
independent East Timor.

We are gravely concerned over the continued
violence and destabilizing activities of the armed
militias, violating East Timor borders, attacking United
Nations peacekeepers and seriously undermining the
repatriation of more than 100,000 refugees. The recent
attack by the militia against the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees office in Atambua, which
resulted in the murder of three international workers
and the destruction of the office, is a clear
demonstration of the violent acts perpetrated by the
militias.

While paying homage to those brave international
workers who chose to care for and to aid the people of
East Timor, we cannot accept the continuation of such
acts of violence, which create an environment of
instability. We would like to appeal to the Government
of Indonesia to take all necessary measures to stop
these activities by the militias. This should be done
with a great sense of urgency, in order to alleviate the
suffering of the East Timorese people and to allow
international workers to assist them. We note the
information that the Government of Indonesia has
initiated the process of disarming the militias. We hope
this process will proceed speedily and effectively and
will culminate in the disbanding of these forces of
instability.

We register our profound gratitude and
appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Transitional Administrator of
East Timor, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, not only for
his important report today, but also for his relentless
efforts and dedication to the cause of peace and
stability in East Timor. Under his leadership, UNTAET
is doing a remarkable job in creating all the necessary
conditions for the independence of the territory, so long
awaited by the people of East Timor and the
international community. As a Portuguese speaking
country and as the current Chairman of the Community
of Portuguese-Speaking Countries, Mozambique will
continue to make its modest contribution to UNTAET
and the transitional process so that we can soon
celebrate the entry of independent East Timor into our
Community as the eighth member.

