Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener,
for her enlightening briefing to the Security Council,
as well as for her commitment and untiring work to
find a lasting solution to the crisis in Rakhine state. I
would also like to welcome the presence among us of
the Foreign Secretary of Bangladesh.

France remains very concerned about the situation
of the Rohingya, whether they are still in Rakhine
state or living as refugees in camps in Bangladesh.
Despite some announcements, which are first steps,
the actions of the Myanmar authorities on the ground
remain insufficient. France hopes for more progress,
particularly in three priority areas.

The first priority is humanitarian support for the
Rohingyas and the internally displaced persons still in
Arakan and for refugees in camps in Bangladesh. The
Burmese authorities must immediately establish safe,
full and unhindered humanitarian access to Rakhine
state for the United Nations and all humanitarian
actors. While the renewed tensions observed in early
January following the attacks by the Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army certainly illustrates the complexity
of the situation, it remains essential to work on ways
to establish permanent humanitarian access in order
to assist the people still in Rakhine state. Rohingya
internally displaced persons must be allowed total
freedom of movement and full access, without
discrimination, to basic services. Those essential
conditions for the voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable return of the Rohingya refugees have thus far
not been met. We commend the exceptional generosity
of the authorities and the people of Bangladesh, as
well as the outstanding work done by United Nations
agencies and humanitarian organizations.

The second priority continues to be the fight
against impunity. We still have no guarantee that the
commission of inquiry set up last summer is truly
able to carry out independent, credible and impartial
investigations. That is what we are seeking. The
conclusions ofthe fact-finding mission, presented to the
Council in October (see S/PV.8381) are unambiguous.
We must act accordingly by cooperating fully with
the International Criminal Court and the investigation
mechanism created by the Human Rights Council.
Serious violations against civilians, including women
and children, cannot go unpunished. In that regard, we
hope that the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila
Patten, will soon be able to report back to the Security
Council on her recent visit to Burma. It is also essential
that the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict be able to adopt conclusions on Burma and
the other situations on the Security Council's agenda,
and that the Council's recommendations be followed up
with concrete action to benefit children and the fight
against impunity.

Finally, the third priority concerns the
recommendations of the Annan Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State, in particular those on citizenship and
equal rights. Despite the establishment of a committee
to implement those recommendations, there has thus
far been no tangible improvement in the situation of the
most vulnerable communities. The Burmese authorities
must demonstrate, through concrete measures, their
willingness to restore trust between communities and
provide a lasting solution to the crisis. Those measures
should include effective access to public, health-care
and education services for all persons belonging to the
Rohingya community and freedom of movement for
all communities.

For all those reasons, and echoing the remarks of
previous speakers, particularly my British colleague
and friend, France believes that the Security Council
must remain fully mobilized to ensure close monitoring
of the implementation of its presidential statement
of November 2017 (S/PRST/2017/22). The dialogue
established between the United Nations and the Burmese
authorities, particularly since the arrival of Special
Envoy eight months ago, must now be translated into
a concrete improvement in the situation of the affected
populations. In that regard, France reiterates its full
support for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
in the pursuit of her mandate.

In conclusion, I would like to express to you,
Mr. President, and your team, our most heartfelt thanks
and congratulations on your excellent presidency
throughout the month of February.

