Mr. Bale (Congo) (spoke in French): On
21 February, the Security Council held an open debate
(see S/PV.6717) on the impact of transnational
organized crime on peace, security and stability in
West Africa and the Sahel region. Today, the Togolese
presidency has convened another debate on peace and
security in Africa, this time to consider the problem of
maritime piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. We welcome
this timely decision, which places the issue of piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea in the context of the logical
extension of last week's debate from a perspective that
should lead to a concerted, comprehensive approach to
this threat to peace and security in this part of the
African continent.

While there may not seem to be any links
between the subject of the two debates, last Tuesday's
debate showed that transnational crime and piracy -
the latter being one manifestation of the former - is
largely fuelled by the illicit circulation of weapons and
narcotics, large-scale armed banditry and illegal
immigration.

The report of the Secretary-General (see S/2012/45) on the assessment mission, whose
relevance I commend, highlights the main
characteristics of maritime piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea. It also helps us to better grapple with this
problem as part of a dynamic approach involving the
other security challenges largely besetting African
countries, in particular those of the Gulf of Guinea.
The report specifically points to the threats to the vital
interests of our countries and to our responses to those
security challenges.

The State of security in the Gulf of Guinea
presents various challenges to peace and stability in the
region. Threats stemming from uncontrolled industrial-
scale overfishing, the insecurity provoked by pirates
and that surrounding maritime navigation, and
insecurity across borders all entail loss of human life,
the taking of hostages, armed robbery, the destruction
of economic infrastructure, diverting oil shipments,
disturbances to maritime trade and even environmental
hazards at oil installations. While their consequences
are quite clear, they do not provide a full picture of the
effects of such criminal actions, especially on
community policies and on neighbouring countries
lacking a coastline.

A reading of the assessment mission's report
leaves one with the impression that there is a need for
and effective functional synergy between the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) aimed at combating maritime piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea. The Gulf of Guinea Commission
should act as the link between the two organizations. In
that regard, we welcome the meeting held in Abuja, as
well as the one scheduled to take place next March. I
would like to limit my statement to ECCAS member
States of the Gulf of Guinea and share with the Council
their response in meeting the host of challenges, which
could in the future give rise to broader efforts to the
entire area of the Gulf of Guinea.

In 2009, ECCAS member States adopted a
maritime security plan (SECMAR) to secure their vital
interests at sea, to be implemented by the Regional
Centre for Maritime Security in Central Africa
(CRESMAC), which is based in the coastal city of
Pointe-Noire in the Congo. CRESMAC, which will
serve as the future nerve centre for the Central African
strategy to fight maritime piracy, has the main mission
of ensuring ECCAS member States' control over the
maritime space. The implementation of SECMAR and
CRESMAC's future operationalization reflect the
undeniable leadership of our States in undertaking
concerted, collective action this scourge.

It has been determined that an exceptional
financial contribution of approximately $1.4 million is
needed to launch CRESMAC and begin work in the
three zones identified by the strategy. An ECCAS
good-offices mission has been established to secure
those funds. However, effectively operationalizing the
Centre is still a challenge owing to the difficulties
associated with its financing and functioning. In the
meantime, the Multinational Coordination Centre of
Douala has been called upon to fill the gaps as much as
possible.

With the initial $600,000 in financing provided
by the Congolese Government, construction is now
under way to build CRESMAC's facilities on land that
has been provided free of charge. The Republic of the
Congo's individual involvement also extends to partial
financing of equipment for the centre.

By 1963, when maritime piracy was not as
widespread as it is today, Congolese law already
qualified piracy as a crime under our merchant marine
code. Congo's commitment to combat this scourge and
all its ramifications has therefore been ongoing, both at
the national and at the regional and international levels.

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
my Government's gratitude to the different bilateral
and multilateral partners in support of our countries'
individual and collective efforts to combat the scourge
of maritime piracy. I call on them to continue their
commitment in this undertaking, specifically by
supporting ECCAS member States in their desire to
effectively and immediately launch the activities of
CRESMAC, which is a key link in the cooperation
chain set up to fight maritime piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea.

Congo's support for the initiative to organize a
summit on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, with the goal
of putting in place a collective, comprehensive strategy
to eradicate this scourge, reflects the legitimate and
pressing aspirations for peace, security and stability for
our peoples and States, without which our peoples
could never work towards true and lasting
development.
