Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea thanks
you, Madam President, for convening today's important
meeting. We also thank Mr. Mark Lowcock and Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen for their useful briefings.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, while
the conflict in Syria might make fewer headlines
eight years later, it certainly remains one of the most
complex humanitarian crises in the world, as proved
by the statistics just provided by Mr. Lowcock and
some of the delegations that took the floor before me.
The ongoing harsh offensive by the Syrian army is
significantly increasing tensions in Idlib and parts of
the neighbouring cities of Aleppo, Hamah and Latakia.
The situation is deteriorating rapidly, with extremely
high levels of violence continuing to hamper the
humanitarian response, and in particular the provision
of food aid to more than 20,000 people in some areas
of Idlib. In addition, those displaced in camps, such as
Rukban and Al-Hol, remain in inhumane conditions.

While it is true that we must support local efforts
to eradicate terrorist threats, we remain deeply
concerned about the plight of civilians who are faced
with continuous bombardment. There are many civilian
victims and, in that context, Equatorial Guinea believes
that it is important that all parties directly involved in
the conflict comply with all agreements reached on
Idlib, aimed both at continuing to fight terrorists and at
ensuring the safety of civilians.

We believe that, even in the fight against terrorism,
we must always ensure respect for international
humanitarian law. With regard to protecting health
centres and medical personnel in Idlib, we insist that the
allies of the parties must be more involved in order to
prevent the deterioration of the situation. Furthermore,
the parties to the conflict must be reminded that any
attack, including attacks on education centres and
health facilities, considerably undermines efforts
to resolve the crisis and poses a serious threat to the
security of the region.

In that regard, Equatorial Guinea joins the support
expressed for the Secretary-General's initiative to
establish an internal board of inquiry at Headquarters
to investigate a series of incidents in north-western
Syria. We have high expectations for the work of the
board of inquiry. We hope that the Council will be
provided with a comprehensive report on the issue in
the coming weeks.

With regard to the political process, the Government
of Equatorial Guinea believes that all the necessary
conditions now exist for the successful convening of the
constitutional committee, which would make it possible
to initiate direct consultations among Syrians on the
parameters for the future of their country, as envisaged
in resolution 2254 (2015).

As every delegation, including those of the Syrian
Government and the armed opposition, agreed on
and finalized the composition of the constitutional
committee in the last round of consultations held in
Nursultan earlier this month, there is no doubt that
it is possible and feasible to move towards a political
solution, above and beyond the military truce established
specifically in the areas most committed to the process,
such as the north and north-west of the country.
We also recall the overriding obligation of the
parties to continue to provide unwavering support
to the Special Envoy for the successful conclusion
of the process, without forgetting the need to resolve
the problems on the battlefield first, before creating
a strengthened institutional framework to restore
political stability and peace in Syria.

I wish to conclude my statement by reiterating
the obligation that falls to us members of the Security
Council to continue our efforts and urging the
negotiating parties to resolve all other matters relating to
the committee's rules of procedure as soon as possible,
as well as facilitating the beginning of its work.

