Peru welcomes the holding of this quarterly open debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine. We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing. Peru is following with deep concern the progressive deterioration of the political and humanitarian conditions that underlie the question of Palestine. The inflexibility of positions, the absence of dialogue between the parties and the ongoing violence have led to an impasse in the peace process. We cannot but deplore the continuing fatalities among the civilian population and the pronounced deterioration in security conditions for millions of Palestinians and Israelis. The parties must cease all acts of violence and investigate and punish all violations of human rights and international humanitarian law. Peru, guided by its commitment to multilateralism, international law and the peaceful resolution of disputes, supports the solution involving two States with internationally recognized and secure borders, to be negotiated directly between Israel and Palestine, on the basis of the 1967 borders. Such negotiations must also determine the final status of Jerusalem. We recognize Israel's right to preserve its own security and existence through the exercise of legitimate self-defence, provided that it takes place in accordance with the principles of distinction, proportionality and precautions. The human rights of Palestinian citizens, including those of minors, cannot be ignored. To that end, we deem it urgent to put an end to the increased practices of settlement-building, the demolition of buildings and evictions in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, in line with resolution 2334 (2016). Such practices are contrary to international law. They seriously jeopardize the territorial integrity of the Palestinian State and undermine the possibility of reaching a solution based on the existence of two States. We also emphasize the urgent need to continue meeting the basic needs of the people of Gaza, as poverty and marginalization create fertile ground for those who would promote violence and terrorism. We encourage the continued provision of the crucial support that the United Nations and its agencies have been providing to face the serious socioeconomic consequences resulting from the blockade to which the population is subjected, which has been exacerbated by the impact of the coronavirus disease. We also look forward to a more fluid cooperation between Israel and Palestine to provide an effective response to the pandemic. We also consider it vital to redouble our efforts with a view to advancing the intra-Palestinian reconciliation process, as it would ease the humanitarian situation and provide an impetus for the resumption of dialogue with Israel. We welcome the rapprochements registered last September, and we hope that they will lead to the holding of presidential and legislative elections. We deem it essential that the Council be capable of reaching a minimum consensus and expressing its views when the situation on the ground so warrants, demanding that the parties comply strictly with their obligations under international law, international humanitarian law and human rights. This must necessarily be accompanied by concrete examples of restraint and commitment to peace on the part of the leaders of both parties. Hate speech, incitement to violence, resort to terrorism, laws that promote discrimination, and anti-Semitism must definitely be put aside. We welcome the willingness shown by various countries to utilize their good offices, particularly those that have historically participated in this process. We highlight the central role that the Quartet is called upon to play and the relevance of the Arab Peace Initiative. We would like to conclude by expressing our full support for Mr. Mladenov in his efforts to prevent any further escalation and promote dialogue between the parties, and also by reaffirming our commitment to finding a solution to the question of Palestine, which will contribute to the achievement of a sustainable peace in the region.
