Mr. Richardson (United States of America): The
United States supports this draft resolution to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Preventive Deployment
Force (UN PREDEP) in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. We congratulate the mission, the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, Mr. Henryk Sokalski, the
mission Force Commander, Brigadier General Bent
Sohnemann, and the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Macedonia. They have ensured that
UNPREDEP plays an important and highly effective role
in promoting stability in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and in the region. The mission has been an
unequivocal success.

We take satisfaction in the preservation of peace and
stability in the region and in the gradually improving
situation there. The stabilization in Albania, including
through the efforts of Italy and the rest of the international
community, is especially welcome, although the situation
remains fragile.

All these developments have permitted the recent
reduction of UNPREDEP's military force by 300 troops.
This reduction demonstrates our intention to move towards
an exit strategy for the mission in a measured and
responsible way which preserves and builds upon the
achievements of the international effort.

We remain deeply concerned, however, that
significant risks remain in the region and on the borders of
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. There is
ample evidence of increasing violence and tension in
Kosovo, continuing incidents along the Albanian border
and persistent problems related to border demarcation
issues. These factors underline that now clearly is not the
time to remove, or further reduce, the military
component of this highly successful mission.

We fully support the Secretary-General's intention
to consult with the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, with interested organizations and with
interested Member States in working toward options for
an appropriate successor security mechanism which will
ensure that the enormous gains made by UNPREDEP are
not jeopardized when the Mission's mandate ends.

