Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Kalomoh for his excellent introduction of the
progress report of the Secretary-General on Central
Africa (S/2004/52). When we considered the report of
the Secretary-General on West Africa (see S/PV.4899),
I could not help drawing a parallel with Central Africa
and noting the striking similarities between those two
parts of the African continent. At that time, I stressed
the importance ofa regional approach, which we feel is
the only one that can encourage the emergence of a
climate of lasting peace and stability able to lift the
countries of the region from the crises that undermine
them and whose transborder ramifications are obvious.

I do not need to dwell on the considerable
progress made in restoring peace and security in the
countries of Central Africa, in particular in Burundi
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Last week,
we had an opportunity to assess the progress made
towards national reunification and the establishment of
the authority of national Government in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and to note the encouraging
signs of the normalization of that country's relations
with its immediate neighbours.

In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
efforts made to help the transitional authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to speed up the
establishment of an integrated and unified national
army and to establish a national police force. But at the
same time, we voice our concern at the absence of
clarity and progress in creating a national plan defining
the modalities for achieving this twofold objective,
which is closely linked to the fate of the process of
demobilizing and reintegrating Congolese combatants.

My delegation also expresses its concern at the
delay in completing the work on the legislation that is
essential for the future of the peace process and the
transitional institutions, in particular with regard to the
establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission,
the drawing up of electoral districts - which is of
prime importance for the elections scheduled for June
2005 - media laws, the fight against corruption,
human rights and combating impunity.

With respect to the situation in Ituri and the
Kivus, which continues to poison relations between the
various protagonists in the peace process in the
country, my delegation welcomes the redeployment of
the forces of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to
that triangle where Congolese and foreign combatants
are concentrated. We are encouraged by the results
achieved in a relatively short span of time, in particular
with respect to the return of foreign combatants to their
countries of origin. We believe that strengthening the
arms embargo will greatly contribute to efforts to
pacify that part of the country. We take note of the
links among arms trafficking, the illegal exploitation of
natural resources and the continuation of the conflict
and support the three-tier mechanism now before the
Council for monitoring the embargo against arms
flowing to that part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

In Burundi, after the signing and gradual
implementation of the ceasefire agreement, new
prospects for the return of peace and security have
emerged. The African Mission in Burundi (AMIB) has,
in particularly difficult circumstances, helped greatly to
stabilize the situation in the country. Important
progress has been made, but numerous challenges
remain before the holding of elections scheduled for
next November at the latest.

It is high time the United Nations took on a role
in Burundi. We believe that this should take the form of
a peacekeeping mission to replace AMIB and support
the peace process in the country until it is completed.

The example of MONUC's outstanding
contribution to peace-building in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Mission's assistance in
the process of preparing for elections and establishing
rule-of-law institutions encourages us to advocate a
greater international presence in Burundi, where the
progress made in restoring peace remains very fragile
because of the precarious economic and social
situation, which is exacerbated by the flow of refugees
and displaced persons and by the repatriation of
combatants.

My delegation therefore welcomes the holding of
the forum ofthe development partners of Burundi, held
in Brussels on 13 and 14 January 2004. We hope that
donors will speed up the release of pledged funds so
that the transitional authorities can undertake reforms
for restoring and strengthening peace in Burundi.

My delegation welcomes the initiative of the
Secretary-General which on 25 September 2003
brought together heads of State and senior
representatives of countries of the region, and we
welcome the adoption by the participants in that
meeting of a declaration on the principles of good-
neighbourly relations and cooperation. That initiative
strengthens our conviction that efforts should be made
in the framework of a regional action strategy,
something which has not so far been adequately
explored by the international community.

From that perspective, my delegation considers
the planned international conference on the Great
Lakes region to be an irreplaceable framework for
seeking solutions to the conflicts and the instability of
the countries of Central Africa and for consolidating
the peace process under way in the region.

My delegation expresses its satisfaction at the
progress made towards holding this important event in
November 2004 in Tanzania, and it encourages the
countries of the region to continue their efforts to
create the best conditions for success, including by
initiating a substantive debate enabling the conference
to achieve the desired results. My delegation welcomes
the progress made at the meetings of the country
coordinators for the countries concerned, in particular
the progress made at the 19 December 2003 Nairobi
meeting, which established the conference's structure,
composition, objectives and topics. My delegation
shares the opinion that the four themes of the
conference are interdependent and of equal importance,
and that they deserve to receive equal, priority
treatment in the preparatory process.

Finally, I welcome the establishment on 4
December 2003, under the chairmanship of Canada and
the Netherlands, of the Group of Friends of the Great
Lakes region and express my support for the Secretary-
General's recommendation to provide additional
resources for the Office of the Special Representative
ofthe Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region.

