The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Indonesia.

At the outset, Indonesia would like to thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing. We have taken
note of her seventeenth report to the Security Council,
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) on Libya. Indonesia
joins others in showing our deep concern for the
situation in Libya, and today I would like to bring three
points to the Council's attention.
First, like others, Indonesia calls for the cessation
of hostilities in Libya. We also call for all parties to
come back to the negotiating table with a view to
achieving a peaceful future for the country. We heard
promises less than two months ago about preparations
for a Libyan national conference in April. That date has
come and gone. Peace is still nowhere to be found. The
international community, including the Council, should
work together to give Libyans a chance to finally
experience peace again. We are also concerned about
the large number of grave violations of international
law and of serious, multifaceted crimes, as Prosecutor
Bensouda just informed us, such as murder, sexual
violence, human trafficking and violence against
migrants. We join the Prosecutor's call in her 16 April
statement to all parties and armed groups involved in
the fighting to fully respect international humanitarian
law and take measures to protect civilians.

Secondly, Indonesia calls for humanitarian relief
during the month of Ramadan. It is very worrying that a
month after armed conflict began in Tripoli, the World
Health Organization reported this week that 432 people
have died, 2,069 people have been wounded and more
than 50,000 have had to flee their homes. Every day of
violence means that more people are killed, injured or
displaced. That must stop. Efforts should be made to
help those in need in order to save innocent lives.

That leads me to my third and final point, which
relates to the ICC's proceedings. Indonesia is committed
to pursuing justice in Libya, which is part of broader
efforts to achieve long-lasting and sustainable peace in
Libya. While peace cannot be complete and sustainable
without justice, justice cannot prosper in the absence of
peace. The rule oflaw must be respected. For Indonesia,
the priority at hand is to cease all remaining hostilities
and continue the peace process previously set up. Any
action taken by the international community must be
carefully monitored in order to ensure that it does not
provoke further violence, thereby endangering lives
and jeopardizing the quest for peace. On that note, the
referral of the situation in Libya to the ICC should not
prevent the competent Libyan authorities from invoking
their jurisdiction to investigate gross violations of
human rights and bring the perpetrators to justice.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Libya.

