Mr. Jurica (Croatia): May I start by joining
others in welcoming to this Chamber Mr. Vuk Jeremie,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Serbia, and Mr. Skender Hyseni, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kosovo. I would
also like to thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

I would like to begin my statement by underlining
that we deem it a simple fact that the Republic of
Kosovo has come into being as a newly established
State, that this is important, and that it is an important
contribution to world peace and to security and
stability in South-East Europe.

Ensuring Kosovo's independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity is fundamental to achieving
long-term and irreversible stability in that corner of the
European continent and to seeing it fully integrated
into a stable and prosperous European future.

In this regard, we applaud the European Union
for continuing its efforts to advance the European
perspective for all the countries of that region, based
on their reform efforts and individual
accomplishments. The European Union has proven to
be a major force for positive change and a motor for
much-needed reforms. We also expect that the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) will ensure and aid in further solidifying
Kosovo's independence and sovereignty, as well as
offer its assistance in the development of democracy
and the rule of law as the most visible and symbolic
proof of its engagement. We welcome the decision of
the Secretary-General to proceed with the further
reconfiguration of UNMIK and thus facilitate the
deployment of EULEX throughout Kosovo.

Croatia signed an agreement with the European
Union on 24 November 2008 enabling my country to
participate in EULEX. By doing so, we have added our
support for regional stability in South-East Europe and
in this way complemented our long-standing offer of
assistance, experience and know-how.

Finally, we reiterate our call on the authorities of
both countries, Serbia and Kosovo, and to all citizens
of Kosovo, regardless of their ethnicity, to continue to
cooperate with the United Nations, NATO and the
European Union in order to ensure continued peace,
security and stability.

In conclusion, I would like to express our desire
to see both countries - the Republic of Serbia and the
Republic of Kosovo - invest substantive efforts into
building good-neighbourly relations between the two
nations.

