Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United States would like to commend the work of the
Committee Chairs, Ambassadors Wittig, Puri and
Sangqu, for their exceptional efforts and strong
leadership.

As we look back on the past decade, the
Council's sustained commitment to promoting the
implementation of resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) has helped to cement a global
consensus against terrorism in all its forms. As a result,
we now have stronger legal and policy tools for
fighting terrorism at both the national and regional
levels.

Even though Osama Bin Laden no longer directs
the Al-Qaida organization, we remain gravely
concerned that Al-Qaida and its affiliates continue to
carry out unconscionable acts of terrorism in diverse
regions of the world. The Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities must continue to be vigilant and to adapt to
that evolving threat. We particularly encourage the
Committee, with the support of its Monitoring Team, to
rededicate itself to ensuring the full implementation of
the 1267 assets freeze, arms embargo and travel ban.
We envision swift and credible responses to reported
non-compliance, as well as the provision of training
and capacity-building support. We also welcome recent
major improvements in the fairness and transparency
of the Committee's work, and once again commend the
Ombudsperson for her hard work and diligence.

We continue to strongly support the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and its Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) in monitoring
and promoting the implementation of resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005). We are particularly pleased
that the work of CTED has evolved in recent years to
become more hands-on and practical in its focus. In a
spirit of innovation and collaboration, CTED should
continue to strengthen its work at the bilateral,
subregional and regional levels to facilitate capacity-
building assistance. We believe that the new United
Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism is already
helping to focus the Organization's system on
improving coordination on counter-terrorism issues.
We also think that the appointment of a United Nations
counter-terrorism coordinator, as proposed by the
Secretary-General, can help foster a more strategic and
coordinated United Nations approach to those issues.

In such an environment, we hope that there will
be further opportunities for the CTC and CTED to
address some of the critical civilian counter-terrorism
challenges of today. For example, more work remains
to be done in countering the increase in kidnapping for
ransom as a means of financing terrorism and other
criminal activity. It poses a threat to all nations and
their citizens. As a first step to eradicating that practice,
we need to help ensure that terrorist hostage-takers
cannot enjoy the benefits of ransoms.

As we discussed in last month's Security Council
meeting on illicit cross-border trafficking (see S/PV.6760), the United Nations must also improve its
ability to help Member States to secure porous or
unguarded borders that allow terrorists to travel with
impunity. The United Nations has a role to play in
helping States to strengthen the capacity of civilian
courts to prosecute and convict terrorists. The United
States is pleased to continue to support CTED-led
projects that bring together practitioners at the regional
and subregional levels to address common counter-
terrorism challenges.

This year, under our presidency of the Group of
Eight (G-8), the United States has promoted the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in both the
Global Partnership and the Non-Proliferation Directors
Group. The G-8 continues to work closely with the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) to find meaningful ways to respond to requests
for assistance from Member States, including by
engaging with international governmental
organizations that are able to provide programmes and
training.

In September 2011, the United States hosted the
first country visit by the Committee and its Group of
Experts to review our whole-of-Government approach
to preventing the proliferation of chemical, biological
and nuclear weapons. We are pleased to see that other
States have similarly invited the Committee to conduct
such visits and to share their best practices for
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). We hope that
that trend continues.

To ensure continued progress, the United States
strongly encourages other Member States and regional
organizations to contribute to the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Trust Fund for Global and
Regional Disarmament Activities. The implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) does more than address
proliferation issues. It also benefits Member States by
focusing on broader security concerns, such as border
controls, trafficking in drugs and weapons, maritime
security and public health, all of which contribute to
the maintenance of international peace and security.

We are pleased with the progress made by the
Committees under the capable leadership of the Chairs.
The Council's counter-terrorism efforts will guide and
reinforce the actions of Member States to deter
terrorism, including the threats posed by Al-Qaida and
its affiliated groups, as well as proliferation efforts by
non-State actors.

