Ms. Sellassie (spoke in French): I am pleased to
inform the Security Council of the latest developments
in the Sahel. The particular and sustained attention
that the Security Council devotes to the Sahel as a
region with unique characteristics allows us to take
an approach that integrates the regional dimensions
of the challenges. Without such an approach, conflicts
and crises would be resolved in one country only to
reappear in another.

In the realm of governance, the Sahel region
continues to suffer from a lack of basic services, social
exclusion and barriers to trade and investment. The
recent outbreak of the Ebola epidemic in Mali may
prove to be one shock too many for the region. That
new challenge deserves all our attention. It is vital for
the countries of the Sahel to develop the necessary
capacities to prevent the spread of the epidemic.

(spoke in English)

The crisis in Burkina Faso and the persistent
conflict in Mali attest to the fact that our efforts in the
Sahel will not be productive unless the countries of the
region commit to a certain standard of governance. The
security situation in the Sahel continues to be impacted
by the crises in Libya, northern Nigeria, northern
Mali and the Central African Republic. The persistent
allegations that the Islamic State has set up training
camps in Libya are particularly worrisome. If the
situation in Libya is not quickly brought under control,
many States of the region could be destabilized in the
very near future.

In Mali, despite progress achieved in the
inter-Malian talks in Algiers, the security situation
in the north has deteriorated, with the intensification
of deadly attacks targeting peacekeepers and
communities along the border with the Niger. It is
encouraging that the recent meeting of the African
countries contributing troops to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), hosted by the Niger, concluded
that there was a need to strengthen regional security
cooperation mechanisms. I am also pleased that the
Council has held a brainstorming meeting to consider
options to address those challenges, including through
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.

The unspeakable Boko Haram atrocities in northern
Nigeria have become a major threat to some Sahel
communities and countries. An estimated 100,000
people have fled to the Diffa region of the Niger
and some 10,000 more are in Chad and Cameroon.
Perhaps more alarming are the recent allegations that
Boko Haram is recruiting rebels among the refugee
populations.

The interconnections between terrorist and
criminal networks in Libya, Mali and northern Nigeria
are becoming clearer. Those networks provide the
markets for the exchange of weapons, fighters and other
forms of illicit trade, including drug trafficking. It is
estimated that close to 20,000 firearms from Libya have
crossed into the Sahel, and the greater part of the 18
tons of cocaine, worth $1.25 billion, that are dumped in
West Africa transit through the Sahel region. It is worth
noting that the profits from that illicit trafficking by far
exceed the security budgets of most countries of the
region. In view of the complexity and regionalization
of threats, my Office intends to work more closely
with MINUSMA, the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya and other relevant United Nations entities in
order to enhance regional analysis and programming.

Furthermore, particular attention needs to be paid
to the thousands of migrants who cross the Sahel and
the Sahara en route towards Europe and the Middle
East. Unfortunately, that practice of migration will only
increase in the prevailing security and humanitarian
conditions and can only lead to increased loss of life
and the recruitment of desperate migrants into armed
groups. More disturbing is the fact that 60 per cent of
the human trafficking victims detected in the region
are children.

Humanitarian indicators across the Sahel remain
disquieting. Five million more people have become food-
insecure since the last reporting period. The number
of children affected by acute malnutrition in the Sahel
also increased from 5 million in January to 6.4 million
today. Ofthose, 1.6 million require treatment for severe
malnutrition. In addition, spiralling insecurity and
conflicts have displaced 3.3 million people, representing
a twofold increase from 1.6 million in January. With
just over $1.1 billion provided by donors to date against
a $1.9-billion appeal, humanitarian interventions in the
Sahel remain underfunded.

Since assuming office in May, I have focused
on engaging with key stakeholders with a view to
gaining an understanding of their perspectives, taking
stock of the progress made and identifying existing
challenges. I have urged leaders and Heads of State in
Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger
to address challenges affecting the Sahel through a
regional approach and have pledged the support of the
United Nations to implement initiatives in the Sahel.
I have been engaging with major partners working on
the Sahel to emphasize the importance of coordination
and coherence. Building on those consultations, and
following up on the visit of the Secretary-General
to the Sahel last year, I convened a meeting of major
partners in November that resulted in the establishment
of an International Contact Group on the Sahel. In
order to enhance regional ownership of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, I have been
engaging with Governments in the Sahel and regional
organizations to seek convergence with their priorities.

Since my last briefing (see S/PV.7203), progress has
been achieved in terms of mainstreaming the priorities
of the strategy into existing programmatic frameworks.
Allow me to highlight a few examples. Under the
resilience pillar, the European Union-led Global
Alliance for Resilience Initiative partnership, with a
pledged contribution of €1.5 billion from the European
Union for 2014-2020, continued to provide a critical
framework for regional cooperation on resilience. The
country resilience priority plans for Burkina Faso, Mali,
the Niger and Chad will be reviewed in mid-December.
Meanwhile, a World Bank-United Nations Fund for
Population Activities programme of $207 million to
manage population dynamics in the Sahel is being
considered for approval.

Under the governance pillar, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) has been supporting
Mali in mainstreaming social cohesion in the delivery
of social services, and has trained 300 community
mediators. It has also been supporting the Niger in
promoting durable development and inclusive growth.
UNDP has been building the capacity of Government
institutions in Mauritania and the Niger on conflict
prevention, the protection of human rights and
transparent electoral processes. At the regional level,
UNDP and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate have jointly embarked on a study to assess
the perceptions of communities living in border areas
with respect to the drivers of radicalization, insecurity
and violent extremism in eight Sahel countries.

Under the security pillar, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime has been supporting the
development of accessible, efficient and accountable
criminal justice systems in the Sahel to combat illicit
trafficking, organized crime, terrorism and corruption
in the region. The United Nations Office for West Africa
has also supported the Lake Chad Basin Commission
in the development of a regional counter-terrorism
strategy.

I am also glad to report that several non-United
Nations partners continue to implement initiatives in
the Sahel that complement the broad objectives of the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. In
January, the World Bank launched the new multi-donor
Sahel Adaptive Social Protection Trust Fund. With initial
grant funding of $75 million, the programme will assist
more than 1.5 million people in Burkina Faso, Chad,
Mali, Mauritania, the Niger and Senegal. In October,
the Board of the African Development Bank approved
a $240-million programme to enhance the productivity
ofthe agro-silvo-pastoral and fishery sectors, including
through investments in rural infrastructure, in Burkina
Faso, Chad, the Gambia, Mali, Mauritania, the Niger
and Senegal.

1 am pleased to report that a regional approach to
addressing security threats in the Sahel is also being
promoted by the African Union through the Nouakchott
Process for the operationalization of the African Peace
and Security Architecture in the Sahel.

Given the deterioration of the political and
security situation in the region and its adverse impact
on humanitarian and development gains, the need for
sustaining Security Council attention to the Sahel is
greater than ever. Since my appointment, my Office has
made great strides in terms of helping put together the
necessary structures and coordination mechanisms to
ensure a more coherent approach of the United Nations
system and the international community at large in the
Sahel region.

Despite these important and necessary steps, the
Sahel region continues to face multifaceted challenges to
peace and development. The situation calls for stronger
commitment on the part of Governments of the region
to improving governance and undertaking changes that
are required for the achievement of the objectives of the
strategy, including by working towards greater regional
cooperation and economic integration.

(spoke in French)

On the basis of all this, my priorities for the
coming months will be, first, to support the accelerated
implementation of national and regional projects, in
close collaboration with regional partners. Secondly, I
shall help to strengthen the coordination of assistance
from the international community to the Sahel,
including through the International Contact Group
on the Sahel. Finally, I will seek to promote regional
ownership by strengthening cooperation with the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Ministerial Coordination Platform and the Group of
Five Sahel.

