Mr. Fifield (Australia): At the outset, I wish to express my sincere condolences to the many countries and families who lost loved ones on Ukrainian International Airlines flight 752. To echo the words of Australia's Foreign Minister, Senator Payne, we know what it feels like to be a country that is searching for lost loved ones at this time. In that vein, I also wish to take the opportunity to thank my colleagues in this Chamber and their Governments for their concern and support during our current bushfire challenge in Australia. I warmly congratulate Viet Nam on taking up its position on the Security Council and on holding the first presidency of 2020. I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate on maintaining international peace and security. As we commemorate the seventy- fifth anniversary of the United Nations, Australia recognizes the ongoing importance of the Charter of the United Nations in terms of peace and collective security, development and human rights in what is an ever-changing and ever more complex world. The Charter forms a central foundation of the international legal framework that Member States enjoy the benefits of today. However, we cannot look at the Charter in isolation. The international rules we have today are built on the Charter and the current moment is one where States and civil society need to use their voices to support multilateralism and the rules-based order. From freedom of navigation to chemical weapons to accountability for serious international crimes, we need to ensure that the norms we have built on the Charter's foundations are upheld on land, at sea and in cyberspace. Built in the shadows of the Second World War, the Organization's central tenets and responsibilities for Member States, as articulated in the Preamble, are to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, to practice tolerance and live together in peace and to unite our strength to maintain international peace and security. However, in recent years, the strain upon the international rules-based order has continued to intensify. This is a collective problem that requires a collective solution. We need to ensure that the fundamental norms reflected in the Charter are protected - for all States Members of the United Nations and for the millions of individuals who look to the United Nations to protect their lives and their human rights. The credibility of the United Nations system depends on its willingness and capacity to do so. That, in turn, is dependent on Member States. Upon seeing the warning signs, the United Nations must use its political authority and the preventive tools at its disposal to address potential conflicts and seek de-escalation. The political will of Member States is central to enabling that. Members should be alert to these signs and should be able to flag them in order to ensure that fundamental norms are respected for the benefit of all. Australia continues to advocate for the implementation of the principles of the responsibility to protect across the United Nations and encourages current and future members of the Security Council to recall it during the Council's deliberations. As we consider the contribution of the United Nations Charter and the frameworks and norms that have flowed from it, we renew our call for greater cooperation within and outside the United Nations, for increased focus on effectiveness at the field level and for the use of preventive tools. And from Member States, we need a recommitment to collective security that can enable the system to adapt to new challenges. Against that backdrop, Australia welcomes and urges the fullest possible implementation of the ongoing system-wide United Nations reforms to improve the Organization's effectiveness in contributing to sustaining development and sustaining peace. In that way, we can demonstrate our practical commitment to the Charter in the world today.
