The President: The Security Council will now

begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I

have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council recalls its resolution
1970 (2011) and all subsequent resolutions on Libya.

"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment
to the sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and national unity of Libya.

"The Security Council reiterates that two years
after the signing of the Libyan Political Agreement,
on 17 December 2015 in Skhirat, the Agreement
remains the only viable framework to end the
Libyan political crisis and that its implementation
remains key to holding elections and finalizing the
political transition. The Council emphasizes the
continuity of the Agreement throughout Libya's
transitional period and rejects incorrect deadlines
that serve only to undermine the United Nations-
facilitated political process.

"The Security Council reaffirms its endorsement
of the United Nations Action Plan for an inclusive
Libyan-owned political process under the leadership
of the United Nations, as presented by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ghassan
Salame, in New York on 20 September 2017, in
order to deliver the establishment of stable, unified,
representative and effective governance under the
framework of the Agreement.

"The Security Council supports the sequencing
of the Action Plan set out in the Chairperson's
summary of 20 September 2017 and endorsed
by the Security Council, including a limited set
of amendments to the Agreement, welcomes the
progress already made under this process and looks
forward to further implementation of the Action
Plan, including preparation for elections.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
important role played by Mr. Faiez Mustafa Serraj,

Prime Minister and President of the Presidency
Council of the Government of National Accord of
Libya, as well as other Libyan leaders, in promoting
national reconciliation.

"The Security Council strongly urges all
Libyans to redouble efforts to work together in a
spirit of compromise and to engage urgently and
constructively in the inclusive political process,
noting that further delay would only prolong
the suffering of the Libyan people. The Council
reiterates the importance of the meaningful
participation of women throughout the process.

"The Council welcomes, in this regard, the
launch of the registration campaign by the High
National Elections Commission.

"The Security Council urges the Government
of National Accord and all Libyans to work towards
the peaceful conclusion of the transitional phase.
The Council reaffirms its strong encouragement
to the House of Representatives to draft and
approve a new electoral law and encourages
continued progress towards finalizing a new
Libyan constitution.

"The Security Council recalls paragraph 5
of resolution 2259 (2015) and reaffirms that any
attempt, including by Libyan parties, to undermine
the Libyan-led, United Nations-facilitated political
process is unacceptable. The Council underscores
that Libyans should decide their own future without
foreign interference.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of unifying and strengthening Libya's
armed forces under civilian oversight and, in that
regard, takes note ofthe meetings held in Cairo that
have aimed to achieve that goal.

"The Security Council further underscores
the importance of Libya's national economic
institutions, which must continue to function for
the benefit for all Libyans, and reiterates that the
Government of National Accord must exercise
sole and effective oversight over these institutions,
without prejudice to future constitutional
arrangements pursuant to the Libyan Political
Agreement, in accordance with Libyan law.

"The Security Council condemns recent
violence across Libya, reiterates that all parties must
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law as applicable and underlines the need for
those responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of
human rights to be held accountable.

"The Security Council further condemns all
acts of terrorism in Libya and urges all Libyans
to unite in their fight against terrorism under a
unified, civilian Government.

"The Security Council underscores that
there can be no military solution to the crisis
and reaffirms the need for all parties in Libya to
exercise restraint and refrain from any violence or
actions that could undermine the United Nations-
facilitated process. The Council repeats its call on
all Libyans to respect the ceasefire, as called for
in the joint declaration issued after the meeting in
Paris on 25 July 2017."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2017/26.

The meeting rose at 3.25 p.m.
