Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President. I am particularly pleased to see a
diplomat of your talent, your competence and your
experience taking over at the head of the Council,
whose summer break seems not at all to have lightened
our agenda or reduced our responsibilities, from
another brilliant diplomat, Ambassador Wang of China,
who, through the remarkable manner in which he
carried out his term of office, has done credit to the
Organization.

Actually, if there were to be one region in the
world that would draw the urgent attention of the
Security Council in the month of August, it would be
the Middle East, where we see under way a tragedy
that is fraught with threats and perils, in the face of
which the international community would seem once
again to be especially powerless and helpless, if not
resigned.

From rejection to rejection, from repression to
repression, from one crisis to another, frustration has
ended up taking hold over hope, and the dynamic for
peace, which very recently seemed hopeful, has today
been broken for good.
The spirit of Oslo - which had continued to be
felt despite the odds and in spite of the accumulated
disappointments, backsliding, non-respect for
commitments entered into, exactions and brutalities
committed against people without defence and
assassinations targeting Palestinian militants - has
become so frayed these past weeks that it seems
surrealistic to continue to talk about a peace process
and even more so about its eventual resurrection.

The untold repression against the Palestinian
people, which has been besieged with its back to the
wall, submitted to all types of intimidation and
humiliation, deprived of its freedom of speech and
movement, bombarded with shells and rockets and
missiles and given over to the deadly madness of tanks
and fighter planes and helicopters, has defeated the
final hopes for peace and has installed lasting violence,
disarray and anguish in the region.

It is in spite of the appeals to moderation and
restraint that have increased in recent weeks from all
capitals throughout the world, from Moscow to
Washington, Brussels to Pretoria, that the Israeli
leaders continue, without any second thoughts or
remorse, their campaign of terrorism against the
Palestinian people, by pillaging their houses and their
property, assassinating their children and threatening
the Palestinian Authority, which they continue to
weaken and destroy while insisting that it continue to
contain and suppress the hopes of its people.

No public or private place and no religious or
secular site have been spared. The site of the
Palestinian Authority in Abu Dis, the police
commissariats, the public buildings and private
residences, and most recently the Orient House, a
highly symbolic place of the Palestinian soul and
identity, if there ever was one, have all been targeted,
destroyed, closed or occupied by Israeli forces of
aggression. Everything today has become a pretext for
incursions and aggressions against Palestinian cities,
incapable of defending themselves against the
onslaught of troops and of tanks and artillery, which
each and every time suffocates and stifles them.
Actually, a number of these cities and localities are
now in a state of siege and might at any time be
pillaged or destroyed or occupied in violation of the
Oslo agreements and the subsequent agreements signed
by the Palestinian Authority, to which Israel,
unfortunately, seems to attach as little importance as it
does to the reproaches on the part of the international
community occasioned by its policy of terror and
repression.
The situation as it prevails today in the Middle
East is particularly alarming, and, if we are not careful,
it might point to an even broader and more dangerous
conflagration, that is to say new tragedies and new
perils for a part of the world that has already been
sorely tried by wars and conflicts that have only given
rise to death, destruction and desolation.

The logic of confrontation can still, however, be
reversed. It would only require that the international
community, that is the Security Council, which the
Charter has entrusted with the responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, decide
finally to act promptly, firmly and with determination
as required by the seriousness of the situation.

It should, first of all, call for the full and urgent
implementation of the recommendations of the
Mitchell report, whose relevance the international
community as a whole has praised and whose validity
it has emphasized, and for the strict observance of a
ceasefire, which is the key to the rapid establishment of
impartial surveillance machinery.

It should then send as soon as possible
international observers with a view to supervising to
the effective respect of the ceasefire and ensuring the
protection and security that the Palestinian civilian
population needs.

It must also require that the Orient House and the
offices of the Palestinian Authority be restored without
delay and without conditions to their legitimate owners
and that an end be put to aggression, incursions and
punitive expeditions against Palestinian cities and
communities.

It must then also finally see to it that Israel
scrupulously and fully comply with the provisions of
the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.

Moreover, greater involvement on the part of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, who enjoys
the esteem and confidence of the parties involved,
might be useful and timely and help to reduce Violence
and tension in the region, and Algeria can only
encourage that most earnestly.

This is what this Council must accomplish so that
the entire region will not fall into Violence. A final
settlement to the Palestinian issue can, however, only
be reached through the respect for international
legitimacy and the principle of land for peace,
solemnly agreed to in Madrid, and consequently
through the restoration of the Palestinian people's
national legitimate rights, including its right to the
creation of its own independent State, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital.

The Security Council must act, and act quickly.
That is its role and its responsibility. The Council's
credibility depends on this, as does the future of a
region that, during this dangerous summer as never
before, finds itself at a crossroads.

