Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I
would also like to pay tribute to Mr. Negroponte, who
presided over the Council's activities during the month
of August.

The Council is meeting once again to discuss
Israel's contempt for international law. It is truly
regrettable that this may not be the last such meeting.
With complete impunity, Israel, the usurping occupying
force, has persisted in its criminal, brutal acts.
Defiance and contempt have become the official policy
of the Sharon Government. You, Sir, may recall that
this Council has met more than once in the past year as
a result of acts such as those that Israel is committing
today. The deplorable repetition of this pattern leads us
to question the real role of the Security Council, which
is supposed to seek to ensure international peace and
security.

Does the Council not believe that the continued
acts against the Muqata'a in Ramallah threaten
international peace and security? Do Council members
not believe that something should be done to put an
end to continued Israeli aggression and arrogance?
Does not the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular its Articles 34 and 36, require the Council to
adopt adequate measures in such situations? What does
the Council expect, now that Israel has tightened its
grip on the official headquarters of the Palestinian
National Authority, cutting off water, electricity and
telephone service from the building? Does the Council
not believe that such Israeli actions are serious enough
to warrant taking action to put an end to them? And
how can we explain the dubious silence about what is
happening? Does it reflect a kind of complacency
towards the usurper and occupier, or is it an admission
of the Council's inability to shoulder its responsibilities
under the Charter?

Israel is not only attacking the headquarters of the
Palestinian Authority; it is also deliberately and
systematically committing aggression against the
provisions of the Charter and violating Council
resolutions that it does not respect. Israel is confident
that the Council will not find ways to enforce those
resolutions. The occupying force's belief that it is
above the law and the assurances it receives that it will
always get the protection it needs prompt Israel to fine-
tune its efforts to invent new kinds of violations daily.

Empty expressions of compassion will not go far
under such circumstances. The Security Council should
shoulder its responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. It should take measures to deter
Israel, the occupying force, from continuing on the
path of violence, injustice and terror, for which all that
State's capacities are harnessed. Forcing Israel to
withdraw immediately and unconditionally from all
Palestinian cities is a step - albeit a first small step -
on the road that the Council should take with a view to
achieving a just and peaceful settlement of the Middle
East crisis. The Council should hasten to adopt the
resolution introduced by the Arab Group. That is the
least it can do to preserve its authority.

