Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): It is symbolic that you are presiding over the
Security Council's meeting on International Women's
Day, Madam President, and we congratulate you and all
the women of the world on this holiday. We remember
your Permanent Representative's appeal for seeing as
many women as possible at today's meeting, and we can
see evidence of that in this Chamber. The absence of
women in my delegation in no way signifies disrespect,
let alone dislike. In Russia 8 March is an official
holiday. Today all our women have the day off, and we
are working for them.

We would like to thank Mr. Yamamoto for his
thorough report on the current state of affairs in
Afghanistan and Ms. Sarabi and Ms. Safi for their
interesting briefings. For our part, we would like to
make the following comments.

We are still very concerned about the security
situation in Afghanistan. The Security Council's
mission to Kabul confirmed the fact that the situation
on that front continues to be very difficult. Towards the
end of January, unfortunately, the country was rocked
by a series of bloody terrorist attacks that took the
lives of around 200 Afghan civilians and injured more
than 400. The various terrorist organizations have not
slowed down. Their terrorist activity continues, they
are mounting systematic attacks in various parts of the
country and they have maintained full or partial control
of a significant percentage of its territory.

One of the serious factors in the deterioration
of the situation is the activity of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Jihadists are consistently
adding to the numbers of militants in the north of
Afghanistan, turning the region into a springboard
for further expansion, including into Central Asia.
One particularly alarming phenomenon is ISIL's
establishment in Afghanistan of an impressive network
of militant training camps, whose trainees include
citizens of Central Asian States and Russia. It is
regrettable that there has still been no investigation
of the fact that unmarked helicopters are transporting
ISIL members and supplying them with weapons in the
north of Afghanistan. This problem cannot be ignored.
The situation should be thoroughly investigated and
this practice ended immediately. Clearing the country's
northern regions of terrorist elements will need far
more decisive measures.

We supported resolution 2405 (2018), proposed
by the Netherlands, on extending the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), taking into account the importance of the
United Nations presence there. The Mission does a great
deal for the country, but it is by definition incapable
of being a panacea for all of Afghanistan's problems.
We hope the resolution will improve its effectiveness.
It is nonetheless regrettable that during the agreement
on the text a number of the Russian delegation's key
concerns were ignored, particularly those relating to
ISIL's strengthening of its positions in Afghanistan,
which I just mentioned. As experience has shown,
attempts to minimize the scale of these problems can
have disastrous consequences.

The terrorist threat and the narcotics problem
are inextricably linked. Drugs represent a significant
financial source for Afghan terrorists. According to the
Afghanistan Opium Survey 2017 of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, last year there was a
significant increase - more than 60 per cent - in the
area under drug cultivation in Afghanistan, and opium
production increased by more than 80 per cent, reaching
a record level, including in the northern provinces.
The drug trade also continues to be a serious problem
in Afghanistan itself and in its neighbours. We urge
the military presences there to give greater attention
to this issue, including by cooperating with regional
organizations such as the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO). We should remember that the
Kanal operation, conducted under the auspices of the
CSTO, has been blocking Afghan drug-smuggling
routes since 2003, and thanks to it, hundreds of tons
of illegally trafficked drugs and thousands of firearms
have been seized. Law-enforcement agencies from more
than 20 states and many international organizations
worked together to make it happen.

The fact unfortunately remains that the prolonged,
large-scale presence of foreign contingents in
Afghanistan has not led to an improvement in
the military and political situation. Moreover, the
expansion of the authority of foreign military personnel
has brought an increase in civilian casualties, and there
is data on this in United Nations reports. We believe
that putting the emphasis on force alone is a mistake.
We see no alternatives to a political process aimed at
achieving sustainable national reconciliation, and ifthat
process is going to be effective, it should be inclusive.
Attempts to marginalize specific countries in the
region are counterproductive. The outside stakeholders
should encourage a culture of good neighbourliness and
cooperation, and an understanding of the importance of
the regional dimension of the Afghan settlement.

We believe firmly that the key to stabilization in
Afghanistan resides in negotiation efforts that can
pave the way for the launch of a national reconciliation
process, led by the Afghans themselves, as soon as
possible, and we are ready to assist with this. The
principle of honest and equal partnership, taking the
interests of all regional stakeholders into account,
which serves as a basis for the Moscow format and
the mechanism of the resumed SCO-Afghanistan
Contact Group, is optimal for launching the negotiation
process. We support Uzbekistan's initiative to hold a
ministerial conference on the Afghanistan settlement in
Tashkent on 26 and 27 March. We view it as part of the
development of the Moscow format and the activities
of the SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group. We note the
results of the second meeting of the Kabul Process on
28 February and the call to the Taliban by President
Ghani of Afghanistan to begin a dialogue. We hope that
the political appeals will be followed by practical steps
to achieve that.

Afghanistan is on the threshold of a new election
cycle. We support ensuring that parliamentary and
presidential elections, which should be a powerful
unifying factor for the Afghan people, are held on time.
In order to do that, all of Afghanistan's political forces
should hew to a balanced line that avoids polarizing
society and infringing on national minority rights.
Resolving the Afghan conflict, as with crisis situations
in other parts of the world, requires that the key players
ensure that their efforts genuinely intersect, and we are
ready for that collaboration.

