Mr. Zambrana Torrelio (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Japanese
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
meeting, and Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
for presenting the quarterly report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in South Sudan (S/2017/1011).
We also welcome and thank the Special Envoy of
the Intergovernmental Authority for Development
(IGAD) for South Sudan, His Excellency Mr. Ismail
Wais, for briefing us in detail about the progress in
the preparations for the holding of the high-level
revitalization forum.

I shall briefly touch upon three points at today's:
the political process, access to humanitarian aid, and
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).

First, my delegation expresses the support of the
Government of Bolivia for IGAD's initiative and
the work carried out by Mr. Wais. We reiterate that a
sustainable solution to the conflict in South Sudan must
take place through a free and sincere political process
and through an inclusive dialogue that consolidates the
fulfilment of the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. The
efforts being made by regional organizations are
crucial and need the support of the international
community; however, above all, real commitment by
the Government and the opposition groups in South
Sudan is what is required.

In that connection, we believe that the inclusiveness
being demonstrated when it comes to the high-level
revitalization forum is very encouraging. We know that
there is still a lot ofwork is to do, but the fact that direct
interaction with all the parties has been initiated and that
those parties show interest in the forum is something
that we should underscore and continue to foster. We
encourage the parties to continue actively taking part
in the revitalization forum and to take advantage of
that opportunity so that the South Sudanese people can
establish a dialogue that allows for, first, a restoration
of a permanent ceasefire; secondly, the development
of a realistic time-frame for the holding of democratic
elections at the end ofthe transition period; and, thirdly,
the full implementation of the peace agreement.

With regard to access to humanitarian aid, we
regret the current situation and we are concerned
about the alarming statistics concerning displaced
persons who constantly face food insecurity. We hope
that we will not face a famine situation, and therefore
believe that priority should be given to guaranteeing
a propitious operational environment for humanitarian
workers and for UNMISS. That cannot simply be just
a call in a statement - it is crucial that Government
and opposition forces comply with the order issued
by the President Salva Kiir on 9 November, in order
to guarantee the security of humanitarian workers and
their free movement throughout the territory, as well as
enabling people who are urgently in need to be able to
access humanitarian aid. Along those lines, we commend
the work of the United Nations Mine Action Service,
which, during the reporting period under consideration
deployed dozens of mine-clearance teams to determine
and demine highways and landing strips with the aim of
providing security and humanitarian access.

As to my third point - with regard to the renewal
ofthe UNMISS mandate - my delegation supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General for a two-
month extension while the strategic review is concluded.
We hope that, with the progress in the deployment
of the regional protection force, it will be possible
to extend and guarantee a more robust presence for
UNMISS patrols in areas of major conflict, such as the
Equatorias, the Bahr el-Ghazal region and the Upper
Nile. We also hope that such an extension will provide
for greater flexibility ofmovement for UNMISS so as to
prevent clashes between the parties and to be able to act
in a timely manner in order to reduce tensions between
communities. We believe that the strengthening of the
three-level strategy for the protection of civilians is
also a very important point to take into account.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
appreciation to the United Nations team and to
UNMISS for the important work they do in South
Sudan in fulfilling the noble task of saving lives and
looking after the welfare of millions of South Sudanese
people, who have already suffered almost five years of
conflict in their country. That is why we urge all the
parties involved and the international community to
support this commendable work as well as the high-
level revitalization forum, so as to prevent the civilian
population from continuing to bear the consequences
of the conflict.

