Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We welcome you,
Mr. President, to the Council and it is a pleasure to see
you presiding over this important meeting. My
delegation expresses its appreciation to Special
Coordinator Mr. Robert Serry for his briefing to the
Council. South Africa associates itself with the
statement to be delivered later on by the representative
of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We
also thank the Ambassadors of Palestine and Israel for
their statements.

Following President Obama's statement during
the general debate this past year, we had hoped that the
Palestinians' final status would be resolved by this
September and that during this year we would welcome
yet another new Member State to the United Nations,
in addition to South Sudan. President Obama's
statement created a strong expectation within the
international community that an enabling environment
would be cultivated, within which final status
negotiations between Palestine and Israel would take
place, culminating in the resolution of that decades-
long conflict. Sadly, however, owing to intransigence
and lack of political will, peace and a sustainable
resolution to the conflict seems more elusive than ever.

It was disappointing that the recent meeting of
the Quartet in Washington, DC, failed to provide a
clear road map showing the way forward. It is
imperative for the Quartet to work urgently with the
parties within parameters that essentially include a
decision on the borders of the two States based on the
4 June 1967 lines, with mutually agreed swaps;
security arrangements; a just, fair and agreed solution
to the refugee question; and fulfilment of the
aspirations of both parties with regard to Jerusalem.
South Africa stands ready to work with its partners to
support the Quartet in this process.
Furthermore, if the parties wish to reach an
amicable and mutually beneficial agreement on the
final status issues, there is certainly no gain in
suspending negotiations. A return to negotiations by
both parties, without preconditions and without altering
final status issues is therefore more than ever critical.

This will require the parties to indicate, through both
words and actions, that they are committed to a
negotiated process and to reaching a mutually
acceptable outcome. Israel's continued disregard for
international law and the decisions of this Council, the
General Assembly and the International Court of
Justice, by continuing to build illegal settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, remains a serious obstacle to peace. These
actions are aimed at changing the facts on the ground
and will make agreement on the final status issues
much more difficult to achieve, mainly because they
make the realization of a contiguous Palestinian State
nearly impossible.

Violence by any side, including rocket attacks
against Israel and its disproportionate response, is no
way to advance the aspirations of either side.

Over 60 years have passed since the 1947
adoption of resolution 181 (II) in the General
Assembly on the United Nations partition plan for
Palestine, and over 40 years have passed since the
adoption of Security Council resolution 242 (1967). As
we are all aware, resolution 181 (II) recommended the
partition of Palestine into two independent States, and
resolution 242 (1967) laid the basis for the border
between the two States - yet we continue debating
matters already decided and agreed upon by those
bodies.

It is South Africa's view that we need to focus on
the implementation of those decisions. The State of
Israel has recently celebrated its sixty-third
anniversary, yet the State of Palestine, recognized by
many of us, remains outside the membership of this
Organization. We welcome the Palestinian efforts to
seek United Nations recognition for their State. We can
fully appreciate the frustration expressed by the
Palestinian people in their quest for statehood.

South Africa fully supports the recent decision of
the African Union taken in Malabo, Equatorial Guinea,
which called upon its:

"... Members States, especially those Members of
the United Nations Security Council, to support
the Palestinian efforts during the next session of
the United Nations General Assembly to obtain
full membership to the United Nations for the
State of Palestine based on the 1967 lines with
East Jerusalem as its capital, and URGES all
Member States which have not yet done so to
recognize the State of Palestine to do so as soon
as possible".

It is our view that instead of using our efforts to
deter Palestinians from exercising their Charter-given
right to self-determination, we should exert efforts
towards finding a resolution on final status matters, so
that the two independent States, Israel and Palestine
can exist side by side in peace.

We support Palestine's continued efforts at State-
building, and in this regard we welcome the signing of
the reconciliation agreement between Fatah and
Hamas. We urge Israel and the international
community to respect this internal sovereign decision
of the Palestinians and focus on the peace process. We
encourage the Palestinian parties to work together on
implementing the reconciliation agreement. We further
call on the international community to extend unbiased
support to the Palestinian Authority in its effort to
build institutions in an unfettered manner.

South Africa remains deeply concerned about
Israel's continued blockade of the Gaza Strip, and joins
the international community's demand that Israel end
the illegal blockade that continues to exacerbate the
suffering of ordinary civilians. The blockade and
imposed restrictions violate international humanitarian
law, including article 23 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and contradict the will of the international
community, as expressed in various Security Council
resolutions.

In conclusion, we reiterate that, in our search for
a solution to the Palestinian question, it is now, more
than ever, clear that we must not lose sight of the
broader regional questions to which Palestine is
inextricably linked. We therefore call on the
international community to accelerate efforts towards
the holistic resolution of the Middle East crisis,
including the Lebanese and Syrian tracks.

