Mr. J a'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me congratulate you, Sir,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and on success in leading the deliberations
of the Council.

Having listened to the statements made by our
colleagues just now, I cannot help but compare them.
The comparison indicates that some of our colleagues
know what they are talking about and what is happening
in Syria by virtue of being politically involved on the
ground and following developments in the situation
in Syria. Meanwhile, others who have spoken have
no experience on the ground and do not know what
is happening in Syria. They base their statements
primarily on fabrications of the media and information
based on intelligence, which present an image of events
in Syria that is unrelated to counter-terrorism and
depicts a humanitarian crisis that has been caused solely
by the Syrian Government. As I begin my statement,
that comparison is very important to keep in mind, so
that some colleagues can be made aware that seven
years into the terrorist war imposed on my country, it is
time to abandon posturing, lies and misleading.

I listened very carefully to the briefing by the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark
Lowcock. I wish him success in implementing his noble
mission as the head of the Office of Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. I assure him that we are most
willing to cooperate with any sincere effort to address
the humanitarian situation in my country, as long as the
purpose is to help the Syrian people without seeking to
exploit their pain for interventionist agendas.

Since the beginning of the terrorist war against
my country, the Syrian Government has continued
to cooperate with the United Nations and its various
agencies to deliver humanitarian assistance to the
people who need it, based on the guiding principles
for humanitarian assistance, in particular General
Assembly resolution 46/182. The main such principle is
the need to respect Syrian sovereignty, which has been
upheld by all Security Council resolutions on Syria.
While the issue of sovereignty is extremely important,
some forget to mention it. With all respect, I say to my
colleague Mr. Lowcock that he committed that sine
today by not mentioning cooperation with the Syrian
Government at all in his briefing, as if the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
were cooperating with ghosts in Syria and not with
the Government.

Following the issuance of the forty-third
report (S/2017/794) of the Secretary-General on the
humanitarian situation in Syria, we believe that now is
the time to move from a state of denial to recognition
that the root cause of the crisis in my country is the
emergence and proliferation of armed terrorist groups,
at the forefront of which are Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front
and their affiliated groups. Those groups are summoning
tens of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters, who are
supported from abroad. They are spreading throughout
neighbourhoods and villages in Syria, using civilians
as human shields and promoting barbaric ideologies.
That has been borne out by the report (see S/2015/358)
of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team established pursuant to resolution 1526 (2004).

In blatant violation of international law, some
States have also imposed unilateral arbitrary economic
measures against the Syrian people, which has led
to hardship in living conditions and an exacerbation
of Syrians' suffering in all areas - economic,
social, humanitarian and health. My colleague the
Ambassador of the United States has just said that
her Government has allocated $860 million for Syrian
refugees in the neighbouring countries of Jordan,
Turkey and Lebanon. Would it not have been better to
use that money to help the refugees to return to their
home country of Syria - to rebuild schools, hospitals
and roads - instead of pressing to keep them outside
Syrian territory?

A few days ago, we met with Mr. Lowcock and we
very clearly conveyed to him the Syrian Government's
concerns with, and observations on, OCHA's recent
performance. We did so based on our hope of building
a transparent, professional and objective relationship
that leads to achieving our common objectives, that is,
to help the Syrian people meet their needs, to provide
assistance to everyone who needs it and to rehabilitate
infrastructure so that refugees and displaced persons
may return to their homes once security and stability
have been restored throught the efforts of Syria and its
allied countries and friends.

First, the relationship that we hope to achieve
with the United Nations and its humanitarian agencies
is a lawful relationship that respects the guiding
principles for humanitarian assistance. Second, it is
an ethical relationship based on the non-politicization
and non-exploitation of the humanitarian situation to
exert pressure on the Syrian Government. Third, it
is a relationship of partnership and cooperation that
recognizes the efforts of the Syrian Government to
deliver assistance and to overcome the barriers that
obstruct assistance delivery. Fourth, it is a realistic
relationship that recognizes that the real reason behind
Syrian suffering is international terrorism, in addition
to the unilateral and arbitrary collective economic
measures imposed by the United States, the European
Union and other countries against the Syrian people.
Fifth, it is a credible relationship that recognizes that the
illegal actions of the so-called international coalition
are increasing the suffering of Syrians through killing
thousands of civilians and destroying infrastructure.
Sixth, it is a credible relationship that recognizes
that dubious sources and sources linked to terrorist
organizations cannot be relied upon in assessing the
humanitarian situation in Syria. And it is a relationship
that rejects treating Syrian pain as a commodity,
recognizes that donor conferences are just for show, and
rejects the exploitation of this humanitarian situation by
donor countries to implement their political agendas,
and calls upon them to fulfil their commitments.
The proportion of pledged assistance is yet to exceed
33 per cent. It is also a relationship that acknowledges
that the linking by some countries of financing for
the humanitarian response with political conditions
contradicts with rules and principles of humanitarian
work and undermines the role of the United Nations in
this domain.

Two years ago, I drew the attention of the Council
to an aerial strike by the so-called international
coalition - and I mean by that American aircraft - on
a school for disabled chidren in Raqqa, killing dozens
of them. And now I hear my female colleague levelling
accusations that the Syrian Air Force attacked a
school for students with special needs in the same
area. The relationship I am talking about must not
only aim to alleviate the suffering or any form
of blackmailing, but must also be based on trust,
partnership, cooperation, dialogue, professionalism and
credibility - not on the basis of imposing conditions
that violate Syrian sovereignty.

Sincethebeginningoftheso-calledcrisis,theSyrian
Government has spared no effort in being involved
in sincere efforts to improve access to humanitarian
assistance. As an example, my country recently accepted
and approved the Resident Coordinator's proposal
to establish a mechanism that includes the Syrian
Government, the Russian Federation and the United
Nations to promote coordination among humanitarian
actors active in Syria, as part of the humanitarian
response plan and the plans for joint convoys. We also
agreed to review and implement measures to deliver
assistance to the de-escalated areas. That mechanism
held its first meeting in Damascus on 19 September.

The Syrian Government stresses the importance
that humanitarian assistance not be limited to
destabilized areas; they must also reach areas liberated
by the Syrian Arab Army and its allied and friendly
forces, particularly in Deir ez-Zor, eastern Aleppo and
other places. We very much appreciate the important
assistance provided by the Government of the Russian
Federation and the Islamic Republic of Iran. Some want
to fight Russia in Syria, Iran in Syria, and our allied
forces in Syria.

I also listened carefully to the briefing by Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura. I
would like to point out that, speaking in the general
debate at the General Assembly a few days ago (see A/72/PV.19), Syria's Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs stated that the policy of
the Syrian State since the beginning of the terrorist war
imposed on us has been based on two major pillars,
namely, counter terrorism and working diligently and
consistently to achieve a political solution that ends
the bloodshed and restores stability, in continuation
of the national reconciliation process that has proven
successful, having allowed thousands of displaced
persons and refugees to return to their homes. To
a great extent, that has contributed to improving the
living conditions oflarge numbers of Syrians, who have
suffered too much from terrorist crimes.

My country's Government has demonstrated a
serious commitment to the Astana and Geneva paths.
We have attended seven rounds in Astana and seven
rounds in Geneva. And yet some still say that the Syrian
Government is not serious about its enegagement in the
political process. What the hell were we doing in each
of those seven rounds? My country views positively
the Astana path and the resulting identification of
de-escalated areas, in the hope that we will reach a
real end to hostilities, including separating terrorist
groups such as Da'esh, Al-Nusra and others from those
groups that have agreed to join the Astana path. What is
wrong about that? Is it not compatible with the Security
Council resolutions?

In the same vein, my country's Government
reaffirms its commitment to the Geneva process
and seeks to advance it. The Syrian Arab Republic
delegation participated in every round of the Geneva
talks, seriously and responsibly. We recently had a very
useful round with the Special Envoy and his team, where
we focused on two main topics: combating terrorism
and meetings between constitutional law experts.

In conclusion, my country's Government reiterates
that it will continue to relentlessly combat international
terrorism across the entirety of the territory of the
Syrian Arab Republic - I repeat, all of its territory. We
stress our long-standing position that the solution to the
crisis in Syria is a political one based on intra-Syrian
dialogue, under Syrian leadership and without external
intervention or preconditions.

