Ms. Sison (United States of America):
Mr. President, your presence and that of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Libya, Mr. Mohamed Siala,
underscore the importance of this briefing. We also
thank Special Representative Salame' and Ambassador
Skoog for their briefings.

The United States joins the many others around
this table in offering our full support for Special
Representative Salame's many efforts. The United
States commends all of his work to reinvigorate the
political process in Libya and to help the Libyan people
achieve political reconciliation. It should be clear from
this meeting today that he has the strong backing of
the Security Council. There is a real opportunity here
for Libya to turn the page on years of strife. Libya's
leaders can put the country on the road to greater
stability and economic prosperity by fully engaging
with the United Nations political process. Now is the
time for all political actors to show leadership and to
take decisive steps towards peace.

We as members of the Council must also use all
of our collective influence to support Libyans on
that path. Of course, the road to peace is not always
direct, and any mediation process will face setbacks.
We are confident that those obstacles can be overcome
through the international community's unified support
to Special Representative Salame' and the United
Nations-facilitated political process. All of us must
speak in one voice in emphasizing the central role of
the United Nations. We look forward to maintaining
close cooperation with Special Representative Salame
as he continues to implement the action plan that the
Council unanimously endorsed.

We also recognize the leadership of Prime
Minister Faiez Serraj and the Government of National
Accord in advancing political reconciliation in Libya.
As the United Nations action plan rightly envisions,
the ultimate goal must be to help Libyans prepare for
elections that will be broadly accepted. Elections should
take place when the political groundwork is in place and
when security conditions allow. Political dialogue is
the only way forward in Libya. Any attempt to impose
a military solution will only further destabilize Libya,
play into the hands of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham and other terrorist groups, and undermine efforts
to address the challenge of migration.

The Libyan people have suffered for far too
long. Libyans have made clear that they are tired of
insecurity and of spoilers undermining political
transitions. Spoilers in Libya must not block or delay
reconciliation any longer. That includes any attempt
to undermine the integrity of the Libyan Government
and Libya's core economic institutions. Some parties
have asserted that the Libyan Political Agreement
expires on the two-year anniversary of its signing
on 17 December. The international community must
reject those claims definitively. They will benefit no
one but political spoilers who think that, by dragging
their feet and running down the clock, they can bypass
the United Nations-facilitated political process. The
Libyan Political Agreement remains the only valid
framework throughout Libya's transitional period. We
all want a swift political resolution to the conflict, but
imposing false deadlines will backfire.

Special Representative Salame announced the
United Nations action plan in September. We must
ensure that he has the time and support necessary
to implement it. Any political and security vacuum
will only undermine the reconciliation process and
further destabilize Libya. We are concerned about
recent increases in fighting in certain parts of Libya.
The United States is particularly concerned about the
recent air strike in Derna, which is a city in dire need of
immediate and unfettered humanitarian access. We also
join the Government of National Accord in condemning
the uncovering of a mass grave in Al-Abyar, where
36 people were found shot to death. Those who are
responsible for Violations of international humanitarian
law and violations and abuses of international human
rights law must be held accountable. The United States
is also concerned about the tense security situation in
western Libya, including in Zawiyah and Warshafanah.
Any destabilizing military activity could escalate
quickly into significant armed civil conflict.

Finally, turning to sanctions, we want to focus
on the challenge of illegal smuggling of crude oil
and petroleum products from Libya. The Council, at
the request of the Government of National Accord,
has repeatedly condemned those illicit transactions.
Earlier this year, the Council designated two vessels,
the Capricorn and the Lynn S, for their involvement
in illegal fuel smuggling. Those vessels remain
sanctioned. Therefore, we remind all Member States,
particularly those in the Mediterranean and the Middle
East, that those vessels must not be permitted to enter
their ports. We also reiterate that the flag States of
those vessels must fulfil their obligation to direct the
ships not to load, transport or discharge their cargo.

Looking ahead, the United States believes
that now is a crucial opportunity for Libyans to
make real progress towards political reconciliation.
Special Representative Salame' and the international
community are aligned behind that objective. Now is
the moment for Libya's leaders to engage in good faith
with the Special Representative. The United States will
work to mobilize the international community against
anyone who disrupts the United Nations process, but we
hope that Libyans will be able to put their differences
aside for the sake of their country's future. It is long
past time for Libya to rebuild its institutions and its
economy. The United States urges all Libyans in the
east, west and south to come together in a shared effort
to ensure Libya's security and prosperity.

