Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her report and for her
briefing today.

The situation in Darfur remains a serious concern
with an increase in violence and insecurity over the
reporting period. The number of people affected by the
conflict continues to grow with 2 million now displaced
in the long term and more than twice that number
in need of humanitarian assistance. This, combined
with reported attacks on humanitarian workers and
peacekeepers, reinforces the need for all sides to reach
a political solution and allow immediate unfettered
humanitarian access.

It also, as the Council has discussed today in
the context of the mandate renewal of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), emphasizes the need for a strong
international response. The Prosecutor's report
highlights many of the issues. The United Kingdom
is especially troubled by the increase in the level of
violent deaths by civilians and the significant increase
in reported aerial bombardments. As the report also
highlights, the legal immunity of the Government of
the Sudan's rapid support forces is a particular concern.

The report also picks up on ongoing sexual and
gender-based violence. It is particularly disappointing
that despite ongoing calls to allow UNAMID unfettered
access to investigate the reported mass rape at Thabit,
this still has not happened. The United Kingdom
continues to call on all parties to refrain from violence
against civilians and to end the abuses and violations of
both human rights and international humanitarian law.
We welcome the recommendations of the United Nations
Special Rapporteur for Violence against Women and
the United Nations independent expert for the human
rights situation in the Sudan that those responsible for
human rights violations and abuses should be brought
to account.
Against this backdrop, we regret that the Prosecutor
is unable to carry out the full investigation due to lack
of cooperation by the Government of the Sudan and
that the tenth anniversary of Darfur being referred to
the Prosecutor has passed and no arrests have been
made. This reflects the fact that the Government of the
Sudan has persistently failed to meet its obligations
under resolution 1593 (2005). In doing so, it obstructs
the pursuit of justice for the victims of crimes carried
out in Darfur. We renew our call on the Government
of the Sudan to cooperate fully with the International
Criminal Court (ICC).

The United Kingdom is also disappointed that
President Al-Bashir continues to travel with impunity
with specific regard to his travel to the African Union
summit in June. As the ICC's decision makes clear
and as noted in the report of the Prosecutor, there
is no ambiguity or uncertainty with respect to the
obligation of States parties to the Rome Statute to
arrest and surrender him to the Court. We were also
disappointed that Abdel Rahim Hussein and Ahmed
Haroun accompanied President Al-Bashir on trips
overseas during the reporting period, and we note the
26 June decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber finding
non-compliance by the Republic of the Sudan through
failure to arrest Abdel Rahim Hussein.

The United Kingdom strongly supports the ICC
as a Court working to deliver justice to victims, many
of them African, of appalling crimes by holding
perpetrators to account and putting an end to impunity.
African States played a central role in the creation of
the Court. African support and expertise continue to
be vital to enable the Court to deliver its mandate of
delivering justice for victims and tackling impunity. We
call on all ICC States parties to meet their obligations
under the Rome Statute and on the Government of the
Sudan to meet its obligations under resolution 1593
(2005). We call on the Council to take effective follow-
up action in relation to non-cooperation with the Court.
Having referred the situation in Darfur to the Court, we
must support it in fulfilling that mandate.

