Mr. Martin: When I briefed the Council for the first
time after Libya's declaration of liberation last October
(see S/PV.6639), I said that its people may seek lessons
from us in the detail of democracy, but they can offer
lessons in its spirit. On 7 July, that spirit was displayed
in a manner that deeply impressed all observers. Libyan
men and women, young and old, amassed in queues at
polling centres to cast their votes and then displayed
their inked fingers with the pride and emotion ofpeople
who had so long been denied democratic freedoms,
many of whose families had suffered and sacrificed
loved ones for the right they were at last able to
exercise. Where violence threatened the poll, it was the
determination and the courage of the voters themselves
that successfully resisted it.

Starting from a complete dearth of electoral
experience and a hugely demanding timetable, the
organization of the elections was an extraordinary
accomplishment. A total of 2,501 candidates, including
84 women, took part as individuals in the majoritarian
race, while 1,207 candidates, including 545 women,
contested the proportional representation race on the
lists ofpolitical entities. The campaign period proceeded
smoothly, with no conflicts between candidates or their
supporters, very few allegations of misconduct, a spirit
of goodwill among political entities, and observance of
the voluntary code of conduct that the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) had helped to
facilitate.

The period leading up to the polls was, however,
marred by violent incidents, mostly concentrated
in the east of the country, as a number of
grievances - principally the allocation of seats - were
advanced as justification for seeking to disrupt the
elections. Efforts to sabotage electoral preparations
included a fire that destroyed ballot papers for 46
polling centres two days prior to election day, and on
the eve of the poll a helicopter transporting electoral
materials was fired on, killing one electoral official.
Materials en route to polling centres faced road blocks.

But the Higher National Electoral Commission
and its dedicated staff persisted in the face of such
challenges. Ballot papers were reprinted that same
day under the United Nations contract and flown in
from Dubai. Polling centres that were unable to open
on time remained open late or opened the next day.
Attacks on polling centres on election day - notably in
Benghazi - failed to derail the poll. The determination
of Libyans to exercise their hard-won right to vote
helped to overcome all attempts to deprive them of it.

There was reason to fear that the local conflicts on
which I reported in my last briefing (see S/PV.6768)
could have affected the election in the localities
concerned. Indeed, that fear was enhanced by a fresh
resurgence of fighting in the Nafusa Mountains between
the Zintan and Mashashiya tribes, and in Kufra. But
all situations were sufficiently stabilized for polling to
take place on 7 July, except for two polling centres in
Kufra. There, concerted efforts - in which UNSMIL
was closely involved - led to agreement between
the Tabu leadership and the Electoral Commission to
enable voting on 10 and ll July. That was a further
indication of the commitment of the Commission to
an inclusive election, which had led it to put in place
special measures for internally displaced Tawerghas,
Tuaregs and Mashashiyas to be able to vote.

The Commission and Libyan civil society are also
to be commended on the transparency of the election.
Over 20,000 domestic observers and party agents were
accredited, as well as 180 international observers.
The statements of domestic observer groups, as well
as preliminary statements from the African Union,
the League of Arab States, the European Union and
the Carter Center, have been generally positive, with
helpful recommendations for future electoral processes.
Following a high level of registration of 2.8 million
voters, over 1.7 million - some 62 per cent - cast
their votes. Women mobilized as candidates, supporters
and civil society activists throughout the electoral
process, with many activities to develop skills and
share experience, often supported by the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Subject
to the certification of the results, it appears that 33
women have been elected to the 200-member National
Congress, 32 on the lists of political entities and one as
an individual candidate.

The Council is right to have recognized already
the remarkable work of the Higher National Electoral
Commission. The relationship between the Commission
and the integrated United Nations electoral support
team, which peaked at some 55 international electoral
staff, deployed in Benghazi and Sabha as well as
Tripoli, has been exemplary. The experience gained
in what I have called the detail of democracy has been
of immense future value to the new Libya. We are
discussing how that capacity can be carried forward
and further developed with United Nations support in
the period ahead.

The Electoral Commission released partial
results as soon as they were available, and last night
was able to announce full preliminary results. Only
a small number of complaints have been lodged, but
the Commission's decisions must be ruled upon by the
courts within a 14-day period, if fully appealed, before
the Commission can certify the final results. Then the
National Transitional Council (NTC) will convene the
first meeting of the National Congress, and will itself
be dissolved, while the National Congress will proceed
to hold its inaugural session. UNSMIL and UNDP have
been providing support to the NTC's preparations to
facilitate the transition and stand ready to support the
new members and secretariat of the National Congress.
That will be the first peaceful and democratic transfer
of power in Libya. Its new political leaders must then
reach agreement on the formation of a new Government
and on the process for drawing up a new constitution.

In order to meet concerns in the east of Libya that
it was allocated fewer seats in the National Congress
than the more populous west, the NTC decided
that the constitution should be drafted not by the
National Congress itself, but by a separate 60-member
constitutional commission, with equal representation
from Libya's three historic regions. It further assured
the east that it would choose its own 20 representatives,
and then, on the eve of the National Congress election,
decided that the members of the constitution-making
body should be directly elected on a regional basis.
If the new National Congress upholds that decision,
it would significantly lengthen the timeline for the
constitutional process.

The overwhelming success of the elections has
shown that the majority of the Libyan people, including
in the east, were determined to take part in Libya's
first democratic steps, and UNSMIL was consistent
in its messages to actors in the east to desist from any
acts of violence. But the strength of feeling regarding
past marginalization of the east is widely shared there
and requires political solutions. There is now a new
opportunity to channel the debate on representation
and governance structures through a political dialogue
and the constitution-making process. Already Libya's
emerging political forces are opening the doors for
such dialogue. United Nations efforts to support
the constitution-making process and to ensure a
coordinated approach by the international community
are already under way and will include such direct
assistance to the constitution-drafting body as may be
requested, programmes to promote civic education and
public discussion of constitutional issues, and technical
support for the eventual referendum.

Even more urgent than launching the constitution-
making process is the task of reaching sufficient
agreement in the National Congress on the formation
of a new Government, with a new prime minister to be
chosen within one month from its first meeting. The
interim Government is expected to remain in office
until the new Government is formed and is preparing
a smooth handover. New ministers will begin with a
better legacy than the institutional void that greeted
their predecessors, but there is no underestimating
the challenges and the expectations that the new
Government will face.

Foremost among those is security - the issue
which all agree was uppermost in the minds of voters.
Contrary to some reporting, Libya's revolutionary
brigades do not seek to remain in separate existence
and to challenge State authority, but a Government
with full legitimacy and a longer time-horizon has
been awaited to address their future. Libya's citizens
overwhelmingly want the rule of law to prevail, in a
weapons-free environment, where police respond to
crime and only State authorities arrest and detain
suspects. Where local conflicts erupt, they want the
rapid deployment of neutral, trusted security forces to
maintain peace while underlying causes are addressed.
Especially in the south, they want Libya's borders to be
secured against the trafficking of persons, drugs and
weapons.

Meeting those challenges will require a more
systematic and comprehensive look at the overall
national security and defence structure, beyond ad
hoc or short-term initiatives in support of the police or
the armed forces. That must include the development
of a national security strategy, improved inter-agency
coordination and cooperation in the security sector,
and the avoidance of fragmenting command and
control structures among agencies. The efforts to date
to integrate revolutionaries and brigades have lacked
an overall concept and coordination, and need urgent
review as part of the security reform agenda for the
police and defence forces, including integrated border
security and management.

Under resolution 2040 (2012), UNSMIL has
been mandated to assist the Libyan Government in
developing police and security institutions that are
capable, accountable, respectful of human rights and
accessible and responsive to women and vulnerable
groups. Over recent months, UNSMIL has worked
with the Libyan authorities and international partners
towards the development of a first-ever defence
white paper for Libya. The white paper will serve to
identify the main risks and threats facing Libya, and
to lay out the principal military tasks, doctrine and
vision, civilian democratic oversight, overall command
and control issues, and basic structure of the armed
forces, including their relationship with the Ministry
of Defence and the future parliament. To that end,
UNSMIL facilitated two strategic planning workshops
with Libyan and international experts, in May and
July, where participation included the Deputy Prime
Minister, the Minister of Defence, the Chief of Staff,
the Deputy Minister of the Interior, senior defence staff
and representatives of other ministries. Key tasks in
the months ahead will be the building of a functioning
Ministry of Defence that can fulfil its civilian oversight
and planning role; ensuring joint command and control
of all defence forces, including for borders and strategic
installations; reviewing the existing legal framework
governing the defence forces; providing inputs to the
constitutional process; and developing quick-training
options for the armed forces and senior defence
officials. With the immediate priority of election
security now behind us, UNSMIL is proposing to assist
the Ministry of Interior in conducting an equivalent
strategic review, towards the modernization of the
Libyan police force. That review will complement the
current assistance and advice of UNSMIL on police
training and administration.

The lack of advances in the area of border security
and management remains of deep concern to the
international community and to Libyans. While the
integrated border management assessment has now
been completed by the European Union, progress in
this critical area has been inhibited by internal Libyan
disagreements over command and control structures
and a lack of coordination and cooperation between
the different security agencies. As a result, there
exists no integrated concept for border security. The
protection of the southern border remains a priority
for Libyans, in view of concerns over arms, drugs and
human trafficking, irregular migration, and the spread
of transnational organized crime throughout the Sahel.
However, the Government has yet to fulfil its expressed
intention to develop an integrated southern border
action plan. Such an approach would help galvanize
bilateral and multilateral assistance and minimize the
risk of fragmentation in the security sector.

The clearance of explosive remnants of war and
the accounting, safe storage and control of weapons
remain key concerns in many communities throughout
the country. Through the United Nations Mine Action
Service, UNSMIL has been working closely with the
Libyan armed forces and certain brigades to develop
safe arms and ammunition storage areas. Efforts in that
area have also been inhibited by unclear allocations of
responsibility and lack of coordination among various
Libyan actors. UNSMIL has been working with the
Office of the Prime Minister to develop arrangements
that would coordinate all Libyan and international
efforts in the areas of mine action, small arms and light
weapons, ammunition storage and related chemical
and nuclear materials. UNSMIL has also urged
the Government to establish clear and transparent
coordination procedures for the purchase or gifting of
international security assistance, including weapons
and equipment, to various security bodies.

Closely related to the issue of security is that
of justice. Progress, in that regard, has also been
disappointing, and a new Government must bring
stronger efforts. More robust prosecuting authorities,
functioning and protected courts, and an expanded
and better trained judicial police are essential to
overcome multiple challenges: the need to bring to
justice within the law those accused of serious crimes,
and thus discourage and prevent unlawful arrests
and detention; the need to review the cases of those
detained since the end of the conflict and release those
against whom there is no evidence, at the same time
as commencing fair trial proceedings against those
whom there is evidence of the worst crimes; and the
need to take into proper State custody those still held
by the brigades and protect the physical integrity of any
detainee anywhere in Libya. The capacity to do justice
is essential to reconciliation - not just as a matter of
theory or principle, but as a very practical matter of how
to resolve recent local conflicts. UNSMIL continues to
give priority to its support in those areas. When human
rights violations have been widespread, criminal justice
needs to be complemented with a wider truth-seeking
process. UNSMIL is supporting the fact-finding and
reconciliation commission in taking the initial steps
towards implementing its mandate.

Amid continuing human rights abuses, there are
also positive pointers to the defence of human rights
in the new Libya. The Supreme Court struck down
the law passed by the NTC entitled "Criminalizing
the Glorification of the Dictator", which would have
threatened the freedom of expression. The nascent civil
society, particularly ofwomen's groups, which has been
energized by the elections, could increasingly find
cause in human rights advocacy. UNSMIL continues to
provide support to building civil society's capacity to
monitor and report on violations, as well as to provide
support to victims. Among newly elected members of
the National Congress are individuals with records as
human rights defenders.

Of course, Libya faces many challenges in addition
to those of security andjustice. Among those challenges
are the development of the institutions of a modern
State, while changing the outlook of an old and bloated
bureaucracy; the diversification of the economy and the
creation of employment opportunities, especially for
the youth, while fighting corruption in the management
of the nation's wealth; and the proper regulation of
migrant labour in a manner that is to the advantage of
Libya and its neighbours, while respecting the human
rights of migrants. The successful election has further
enhanced expectations, but these are tasks that will
extend far beyond the term of the next Government.

Resolution 2040 (2012) anticipates a possible
review and adjustment of the UNSMIL mandate after
engagement with the new Libyan Government in order
to ensure that it continues effectively to support Libya's
specific needs. Such engagement is unlikely to be
able to begin before September, although, of course,
we are already in dialogue with the new political
actors. There is no reason to think that the areas of the
UNSMIL mandate will cease to be valid or that Libyan
authorities and civil society will cease to be open to
United Nations assistance in the areas where we are
already active: support to the further stages of the
democratic transition; promoting the rule of law and
human rights; restoring public security; and countering
the illicit proliferation of arms. There may well be
additional requests for support to UNSMIL and to the
United Nations country team. The Mission concept of
flexibility, using a range of modalities to mobilize the
surge capacity of technical expertise, was designed to
be able to respond accordingly throughout 2012.

The fifth element of the mandate, namely, support
to Libyan efforts to coordinate international assistance,
has two requirements beyond the capabilities of
UNSMIL: the coordination capacity of the Libyan
authorities themselves and their desire to deal with the
international community in a coordinated manner; and
the commitment of international actors to cooperate in
a framework of United Nations-led coordination. Such
efforts have been relatively strong in some areas, such
as electoral support, and the sectoral working groups
established by the Ministry of Planning and supported
by the United Nations should be a valuable legacy to
the new Government. They have been weaker in other
areas, notably the security sector, where bilateral
interests are strong. At a time when a new context will
present new needs and opportunities for the sharing of
international experience and best practice, I believe
that Libya will be best served by the recommitment
of all concerned to the United Nations playing the
central role in supporting Libyan efforts to coordinate
international assistance.

I expect this to be the last time that I briefthe Council
on Libya. When I first travelled to Benghazi last year
to meet the National Transitional Council (NTC) and
to discuss possible United Nations assistance to Libya
once the fighting ended, I could not have imagined how
far Libya would have come by today. In their new mood
of holding their leaders strictly to account, Libyans
have sometimes been strongly critical of the NTC and
the interim Government, and I have been frank today
about some of the issues yet to be adequately addressed.
However, at this moment of a peaceful and democratic
transition to the new authorities, Libya stands well in
comparison to any post-conflict context.

Since polling day, I have had meetings with
Chairman Mustafa Abdul Jalil and Prime Minister
Abdurrahim El-Keib. Both expressed their warm
appreciation of the role of the United Nations in the
transition. In conveying that to the Council, I put on
record my own appreciation of the open and constructive
relationship that the United Nations in Libya has had
with them and their colleagues. I also thank members
of the Council for the unanimous support that I have
always felt that they have given to the work of UNSMIL.

