Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to begin
by expressing our gratitude to the briefers for their
valuable information.

It is obvious that any peacekeeping operation
relies on appropriate force generation to be able to
deliver on its Security Council mandate. My delegation
therefore considers the issue of ensuring strategic force
generation to be an integral part of the comprehensive
reform of United Nations that the Secretary-General
has outlined. The establishment of the Strategic
Force Generation and Capacity-Building Cell and the
Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System has been
a significant step forward in the implementation of
the recommendations of the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/682).
The 2015 leaders' summit got the registration of
pledges by troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and
police-contributing countries (PCCs) off to a good
start, and the subsequent Defence Ministerial Meetings
in London and Paris gave that initiative an important
additional impetus. Ukraine is proud to be among
those who joined the pledging process from the very
beginning. In addition, my country, as a participant
of all of those meetings, will also take part in the
Vancouver Defence Ministerial Meeting next month.

The establishment of the Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System has provided peacekeeping
operations with force generation ability, flexibility and
predictability, three things they had been badly in need
of for a long time. As a result, where equipment and
expertise are concerned, peacekeeping operations are
becoming better adapted to carrying out their mandated
tasks. However, as the concept note points out, there are
still many opportunities for improving the efficiency of
mandate delivery on the ground. In that regard, I would
like to highlight several ways whereby the Council
could contribute to strengthening force generation for
peacekeeping operations.

The Council should take dialogue with TCCs and
PCCs to a new level, both through its Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations and by continuing formal
and informal consultations during the establishment
and renewal of operation mandates. In that regard, we
were pleased to note the meeting of the Working Group
held just a few days ago with the participation of the
members of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, a good move, fully in line with revised
presidential note S/20l7/507 and resolution 2378 (2017),
on peacekeeping reform, which we adopted just a few
weeks ago.

Missions should be provided with clear, coherent,
achievable, sequenced and, at the same time, resilient
mandates drafted in accordance with the core principles
of United Nations peacekeeping. To that end, the
Council should receive timely, frank and substantive
reports from the Secretariat as well as details of the
Secretary-General's bold initiatives and options for a
reformed United Nations peacekeeping presence. In
that regard, Ukraine supports the Secretary-General's
plans for restructuring the peace and security pillar of
the Secretariat, and we expect that this will also result
in improvements in the strategic advice given to the
Council. It is clear that we will have to closely monitor
and assess practical progress in every single mission's
implementation of its mandate, identify those that
need restructuring and view every mandate through
the perspective of supporting a political solution to the
conflict in question.

With regard to capability gaps, due attention should
be paid to securing the proper funding and providing
sufficient aviation assets, both combat and cargo,
as well as making use of advanced intelligence and
modern technologies. When the Council is considering
a mandate's establishment or renewal, it should engage
more actively with the parties to a dispute and the
host country with a view to securing the operation's
use of appropriate modern technologies. It should also
support and facilitate the strengthening of operations'
intelligence capabilities in order to improve their
situational awareness. All those aspects are critically
important to ensuring the security and mobility of
peacekeeping personnel.

Last but not least, United Nations peacekeeping
operations must be provided with properly trained and
equipped personnel, capable of taking robust action to
execute their mandate on the ground and ready to do
so. Impartiality should also continue to be a priority
principle when the composition of a peacekeeping
operation's personnel is being considered. For its
part, the Security Council should closely monitor the
implementation of resolution 2272 (2016) and continue
to support the Secretary-General's initiatives in the
area of peace and security, including on eradicating
sexual violence in United Nations peacekeeping.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Ukraine
will do its utmost to continue to be a reliable partner
of United Nations peacekeeping endeavours, even
at times when my country may itself require United
Nations peacekeeping assistance in the light of ongoing
foreign aggression.

