Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): Let me first
congratulate Mexico as the President of the Security
Council for the month of June and commend its
initiative in organizing today's debate. Thailand shares
the concerns of the international community regarding
children and armed conflict and wishes to share the
following views.

First, we wish to note the progress made by the
Council on the issue and welcome the mainstreaming
of a child-conscious approach in political,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions. With the
recent inclusion of two new triggers - namely, the
killing and maiming of children and sexual violence
against children - we hope that children around the
world will be better protected.

Still, to effectively address the issue, States have
the primary responsibility for protecting and promoting
the rights of the child in their respective jurisdictions.
The international community and the United Nations
have an important supportive role to play in ensuring
that States meet their basic human rights obligations
and in empowering them to build an environment
where violence against children is unthinkable. The
international community needs to invest more in areas
that can make a real difference, such as education,
basic health care, poverty alleviation, the rule of law
and good governance.

Secondly, better coordination among all parties
concerned is crucial. Cooperation between United
Nations agencies and the Governments concerned
needs to be based on mutual respect and sincere
dialogue. Closer coordination and greater coherence
among the relevant United Nations forums and
agencies are also needed. Each forum and agency has
its own unique strengths and constraints. With better
coordination and coherence among those diverse
instruments and an integrated and holistic approach,
the United Nations system as a whole should be able to
better respond to the challenges.

Thirdly, on the part of Thailand, we wish to
reaffirm our strong commitment to protecting the rights
of the child. Thailand has long been a State party to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two
Optional Protocols. Indeed, we have been at the
forefront of efforts to make the Convention more
effective and responsive. We have worked hard to
ensure universal access to 15 years of quality education
and a safe learning environment for our children. We
have also invested heavily in measures to promote and
protect the rights of children and their development.

Fourthly and finally, utmost care should be
exercised in the preparation of the Secretary-General's
reports on children and armed conflict. The Secretary-
General needs to ensure that information collected and
communicated in the production of the reports under
his name is accurate, objective, reliable and verifiable
by the United Nations system. The scope of the reports
should be confined to situations of armed conflict, as
defined by international law. Also, there should be
more accountability and transparency in the listing and
de-listing of parties to conflicts in the annexes of the
reports of the Secretary-General. Reference to
countries where there is no situation of armed conflict,
in accordance with applicable international law, and
sweeping generalizations about their situations are
unwarranted, misleading and counterproductive.

Information provided by United Nations agencies
on the ground and by the Governments concerned
should be fully taken into account. A consultative and
cooperative approach will ensure that our efforts are
well coordinated and based on reliable information.
Lack of such a cooperative spirit may have unattended
consequences on the ground, which may harm the very
children we wish to protect.

