Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Special
Representative Jan Kubis for his briefing this morning
and recognise his instrumental and indispensable
contribution to Afghanistan's transition, as well as
the important role played by the entire United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) team
and the wider United Nations. At this critical juncture,
that role remains central. As always, I also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his briefing.

Three months ago, we congratulated the Afghan
people, who - despite the persistent threat of violence
by terrorists and insurgents - had made clear their
desire for a democratic future by voting in great
numbers. The presidential candidates must now to live
up to the expectations of their own people. The timely,
peaceful, and credible resolution ofthe electoral process
is vital to Afghanistan's future stability and prosperity.
The candidates must honour their commitments to
accept the outcome of the full election audit, abide by
its results and work together to form a Government of
national unity. If the political impasse is not resolved
promptly, Afghanistan's successful transition is at risk,
and that must not happen.

UNAMA and international observers have played
a vital role in supporting the Independent Election
Commission and the Independent Electoral Complaints
Commission throughout the full election audit. We
commend the United Nations for the rapid deployment
of more than 120 election experts. The international
community acted in good faith in responding to the
request from Afghanistan for international supervision
of the audit, and my own country, Australia, was also
pleased to support the audit, which was unprecedented
in its scale and depth of scrutiny.

As we know, the formation of a new Government
will clearly mark a defining point for Afghanistan.
The international community is looking ahead to
the framework for supporting Afghanistan beyond
2014. We welcome the recent NATO Wales Summit
Declaration on Afghanistan, which sets key markers for
NATO support for Afghanistan beyond 2014, including
the desirability of Security Council endorsement
for the post-2014 International Security Assistance
Force successor mission. Australia is ready, with our
partners, to work with the new Government to cement
arrangements for the international community's
ongoing support for Afghanistan.

The latest Secretary General's report (S/2014/656)
notes an increase in insurgent activity during the period
of political impasse. We have also seen an increase in
civilian casualties, the vast majority of which have been
perpetrated by anti-Government forces. Recent attacks
involving large numbers of fighters are a particularly
worry. We are encouraged that Afghanistan's army and
police have been able to respond effectively, including
in the provinces. The growing capacity of the Afghan
National Security Forces was also demonstrated
throughout the election period. It is vital that those
forces continue to develop and sustain their capabilities,
particularly in provincial areas.

Australia remains committed to supporting
Afghanistan's security forces and institutions, and will
provide $300 million over the next few years for that
purpose. Australia also remains ready to contribute to
the post-2014 NATO-led non-combat mission to train,
advise and assist the Afghan National Security Forces.
We urge the new Afghan Government to conclude the
necessary legal arrangements for that mission as an
immediate priority.

The implementation of the commitments and
reforms agreed at the 2012 Tokyo Conference will
also be critical for a stable Afghanistan, which, as
we all know and have repeatedly said, is necessary
for sustainable economic and social development.
Afghanistan has implemented important legal reforms
to combat terrorism, the financing of terrorism, money
laundering and human trafficking. We recognize
that Afghanistan's current economic challenges are
a significant concern, and further efforts to tackle
corruption and promote fiscal sustainability are an
urgent priority.

It is also imperative that the incoming Administration
make progress in implementing the national action
plan on women, peace and security. Women's
active participation in Afghanistan's political and
reconciliation processes - and more primordially,
recognition of and respect for their human rights - will
be a critical test of whether Afghanistan can hope to
have a successful future, and whether it will continue
to attract international support. We continue to urge
the full implementation of the law on the elimination of
violence against women so as to build on the gains of
the last decade. We welcome progress with the action
plan for the prevention of underage recruitment, and
look forward to its full implementation. The incoming
Government must also support a strong and independent
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission.

UNAMA will continue to play a key role in
support of Afghanistan beyond the transition, including
through its good offices, in promoting human rights
and improved governance, in donor coordination and
in facilitating humanitarian assistance. It is clear the
Afghan people desire a democratic and accountable
government. The challenges Afghanistan faces on
the road to a more peaceful and secure future are
equally clear. Australia, along with the international
community, is committed to supporting Afghanistan
throughout that transition. We envisage doing so in
close partnership with a responsive, transparent and
accountable Afghan Government.

Finally, I want to acknowledge the personal
contribution, leadership and empathy of Jan Kubis as
he concludes his mission, and thank him for what he
has done to help Afghanistan embrace a new future. I
also want to thank him for his support to Australia as
pen-holder on Afghanistan in the Council, and we wish
him every continued success.

