Indonesia welcomes today's adoption of resolution 2518 (2020) on the safety and security of peacekeepers. We appreciate China's efforts in facilitating the negotiations, and we thank the members of the Council for their constructive engagement despite the difficult situation related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Indonesia voted in favour of the resolution. For us, the safety and security of the Blue Helmets will always be a top priority. Peacekeepers are operating in increasingly complex and dangerous security environments, which put their lives at risk. Just recently, Indonesia lost one of its soldiers who was serving in the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. While acknowledging some progress in reducing the number of peacekeeping fatalities, Indonesia is of the view that much more remains to be done. Indeed, one peacekeeper lost is still one too many. This resolution is an important step towards enhancing the safety and security of peacekeepers. It calls for measures to enhance operational health support and to ensure adequate medical facilities and qualified personnel, including for casualty evacuation. Indonesia also welcomes the resolution's appropriate recognition of the importance of training and capacity-building in the area of safety and security. We believe that well-trained and well-equipped peacekeepers will be in a better position to carry out their tasks professionally and safely. The resolution also highlights the importance of avoiding caveats, promoting community engagement, improving situational awareness, and the use of technology to enhance the safety and security of peacekeepers. Indonesia believes that, in adopting this resolution, the Security Council is sending a strong and clear message to all of our peacekeepers that we care and are fully committed to improving their safety and security. In conclusion, we salute the peacekeepers for their invaluable work in pursuing peace while risking their lives. Let us honour their dedication and sacrifices by ensuring improvement in safety and security for them.
