Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine joins the
other Council members in welcoming the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2315 (2016). We are grateful to
the United Kingdom delegation for preparing the text
and are ready for further active engagement on the issue,
including as a member of the relevant Coordination and
Drafting Group.

Ukraine also aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

I wish to express my delegation's appreciation to
High Representative Valentin Inzko for his leadership
of the Office of the High Representative and for
his contribution to the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. I wish to stress that, despite the attempts
of one Council member to question the authorities,
under the provisions of the Peace Agreement as was
already mentioned, the High Representative is the final
authority in theatre regarding interpretation of the
said Agreement on the Civilian Implementation of the
Peace Settlement.

We are alarmed at the fact that the political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has deteriorated.
Serious disagreements between the parties persist
on many important issues. As a result, Bosnia and
Herzegovina was unable to meet the requirements of
the 5+2 agenda necessary for the closure of the Office
of the High Representative.

At the previous Security Council meeting on the
subject, in May (see S/PV. 7688), the majority of the
Council members, including my delegation, expressed
concerns over the statements made by Republika Srpska
authorities on possible referendums. My delegation
then underscored that any referendum that contradicts
the provisions of the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Dayton Agreement is illegitimate.
Unfortunately, appeals by Council members fell on
deaf ears. Ukraine strongly condemns the holding of
a referendum by the authorities of Republika Srpska in
clear contravention of two final and binding decisions
of the Constitutional Court.

I fully agree with the High Representative that that
move causes unnecessary tensions and poses a grave
challenge to the rule of law. It has serious implications
for peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We also fully share the High Representative's concern
regarding the decoration of a number of war criminals
sentenced by the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. The referendum is the continuation of
the policy of Republika Srpska aimed at challenging
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including by threats of separation.

In that light, it is unfortunate that despite the
obvious fact that the referendum is an exceptionally
dangerous development for the region, one Council
member defends this decision and supports the Bosnian
Serb leaders in their defiance of the authority of the
central bodies of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In fact,
the authorities of Republika Srpska abuse the special
status granted to their entity by the Dayton Agreement.
Instead of full compliance with the Peace Agreement
to everybody's benefit, they actually undermine the
common State, thus blocking Bosnia's political and
economic development.

That is a very irresponsible policy - irresponsible
towards the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
people of Republika Srpska, who have found themselves
living in self-imposed isolation. Just imagine - a new
generation has grown up in the country since 1995,
and many of them have never been outside Republika
Srpska. There are several famous bridges in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, including the old Mostar bridge and
the bridge on the Drina in Visegrad, the very one to
which Ivo Andrie referred in his book The Bridge on
the Drina:

"Of everything that man erects and builds in his
urge for living, nothing is in my eyes better or more
valuable than bridges. They are more important
than houses, more sacred than shrines. Belonging
to everyone and being equal to everyone, useful,
always built with a sense, on the spot where most
human needs are crossing, they are more durable
than other buildings and they do not serve anything
secret or bad".

With this message from Ivo Andric' in mind, I believe
it is more important to build new bridges in Bosnia and
Herzegovina than to burn existing ones.

I would like to remind the Republika Srpska
authorities that any referendum must be conducted
in a way that is consistent with the Constitution
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and cannot violate the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Ukraine would also like to reaffirm its strong
commitment to the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and urges the parties to
avoid further statements and actions that could make
the situation even more difficult.

Now, on a positive note, Ukraine welcomes
the progress achieved in Bosnia and Herzegovina's
European Union (EU) integration process, which
is reflected in the European Council conclusions of
20 September 2016. We consider the EU decision
to submit an opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina's
application for new membership as an important
step towards Bosnia and Herzegovina's European
integration. It is vital to continue efforts to implement
the Reform Agenda, which includes socioeconomic
issues, the rule of law and public administration
reforms. It is also important to demonstrate progress in
the functioning of the judiciary and in the fight against
corruption and organized crime, and the fight against
radicalization and terrorism.

Ukraine welcomes the EU's readiness, as confirmed
in the conclusions of the EU Foreign Ministers on
17 October, to continue to play an executive military
role in supporting the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities in the maintenance of a safe and secure
environment under a new Security Council mandate.
In that respect, we also positively note the EU's request
that the High Representative present a strategic review
in autumn 2017 as the basis for a discussion on options
for the future of the operation. It is extremely important
to intensify efforts and fully implement the 5+2 agenda.

In the meantime, it is vital to support the actions and
reforms needed to reach that milestone and to provide
all necessary support to the High Representative as he
fulfils his mandate.

