Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): As an observer of the
African Union, we join in and associate ourselves with
the statements already made by the members of the
African troika and to be made by the Ivorian presidency,
which has so ably and effectively conducted the
stewardship of the Council this month. Mr. President,
please accept our most sincere congratulations.

We also welcome Ambassador Da Silva, Permanent
Representative of Guinea-Bissau, to the Chamber. We
commend Mr. Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, and Mr. Vieira for their insightful
briefings on the latest developments in Guinea-Bissau.
We praise their tireless efforts to bring peace and
stability to the country. Please allow me to share some
of our observations and recommendations regarding
the situation in Guinea-Bissau.

We welcome the progress made by all parties
with regard to the stabilization of and restoration of
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau. We highly
appreciate the good offices of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS) and the mediation efforts of regional,
subregional organizations and neighbouring States,
especially the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel and the Guinea-Bissau P5 group
members, whose coordinated efforts are very helpful.
We also welcome the commitments of the international
partners to providing necessary technical, logistical
and financial support to the electoral process.

We acknowledge the decision of the President and
the readiness of the Government of Guinea-Bissau to
undertake and advance the necessary measures for a
timely conclusion of the preparations for the legislative
elections on 10 March 2019 and express hope for their
credible and timely conduct. We expect that all the
stakeholders will demonstrate good political will to
that end. We reiterate that all parties should respect the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Guinea-Bissau.

We also underscore the importance of the presence
of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau in ensuring
stability during the electoral cycle, and we urge the
international partners to continue to support these
regional forces. We call on all parties to promptly
take the steps necessary to implement the remaining
provisions of the Conakry Agreement, which remains
the primary framework for a peaceful resolution of
the conflict. That includes the adoption of the stability
pact and constitutional review. Political stability in
the country can be achieved by reforms aimed at
strengthening the governing bodies. There is a need for
an open and inclusive nationwide dialogue to develop
guiding principles of the reforms.

Ensuring the participation of women and youth in
the political process at every stage and increasing their
economic opportunities are equally important. Besides
the human dimension, the perils of drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime have a multifaceted
impact on the economy, overall security and community
and individual well-being. National engagement
is critical to implementing different international
programmes and projects aimed at strengthening the
security, judicial and law enforcement sectors. It is
therefore necessary to continue strengthening the
national institutional framework and response against
the threats and close cooperation with UNIOGBIS,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and INTERPOL.

We are also worried by the deterioration of the
economic situation. We believe that the most effective
measures for sustainable peace and stability must be
sought to ensure the country's resilience by providing
increased support for the existing development plans
and the United Nations peacebuilding programmes.
Further efforts need to focus on the structural drivers
of instability by reducing poverty; creating better
opportunities for education, employment and health
care; and strengthening local governance. We call
on all donors to provide the necessary funds for
the implementation of all such measures. We also
underscore the important role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in fostering national ownership of a
transition plan and call for preparations to develop an
inclusive and comprehensive peacebuilding plan.

Lastly, we endorse the Secretary-General's special
report on the strategic assessment of UNIOGBIS
(S/2018/1086), and support his proposals on gradual
reconfiguration, a phased drawdown and the exit of the
mission by the end of 2020.

In conclusion, we would like to extend our full
support to the work of Mr. Viegas Filho, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea-
Bissau, and the UNIOGBIS team, and reaffirm our
readiness to cooperate closely with all the relevant
parties to support peacebuilding and consolidation
efforts in Guinea-Bissau.

