Italy thanks the Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for organizing this open debate, which offers the opportunity to discuss crucial topics for the future of the United Nations. Giving substance to the peacebuilding and sustaining peace agenda means looking in a thoughtful way at the future of the United Nations. The United Nations capacity is unparalleled and must be fully exploited by improving synergy and coordination among all its actors at Headquarters and on the ground. Italy believes that increasing its support for the most vulnerable countries remains an absolute priority, and it will also promote such priority in the context of the upcoming Italian presidency of the Group of 20 (G-20) in 2021. The unprecedented challenges posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) must be transformed into opportunities for peacebuilding and sustaining peace at all levels, as well as informing the ongoing review process of the peacebuilding architecture to which Italy remains committed to contribute. We must avoid that hard-won gains in the areas of peace, security, developments and human rights be reversed. In this framework, we should stress, among other things, the importance of further strengthening the existing partnerships between the United Nations and various international financial institutions and regional organizations to develop coherent and comprehensive responses to complex and interrelated challenges. In this effort, it is crucial to involve local communities and the private sector, as well. Only a truly concerted effort at the global level will be effective in dealing with the consequences of the current crisis. The COVID-19 pandemic shows us the need to promote the peacebuilding and sustaining peace agenda through a coordinated and multilateral response in different areas. Global health remains a fundamental precondition for peace, stability and prosperity and interacts with the tripartite peace-humanitarian-development nexus. This is the reason why, from the very beginning of the global emergency, Italy has strongly supported international solidarity, actively advocating for an international alliance to advance the research on a vaccine against COVID-9. As the incoming President of the G-20 and in the framework of our partnership with the United Kingdom in hosting the twenty-sixth United Nations Climate Change Conference, we will strive to ensure that climate action be the foundation of the post-pandemic recovery. We firmly believe that climate change is another key factor that interacts with the peace-humanitarian-development nexus. Climate change did not pause because of Covid-19. Next year there will be the opportunity to build international momentum on climate action through additional major events, including the Food Systems Summit and the World Health Summit, which Italy will host together with the European Commission. In both cases, specific attention will need to be paid to the strong interrelations among climate change, food systems and public health. The pandemic must further push our research towards developing a whole-of- system response based on coordination, partnerships and the flexible use of existing platforms. The Peacebuilding Commission has proactively adapted its programme of work in order to address the challenges of the current situation, and a better-financed Peacebuilding Fund has a crucial role to play in supporting a conflict-sensitive international response to the pandemic, supporting efforts by local communities and fostering a coordinated peacebuilding response to COVID-19. There are several priority areas in which Italy stands ready to contribute. In a state of emergency like the one we are experiencing, it is of the utmost importance that everyone has access to safe, nutritious and sufficient food. In this spirit, Italy is committed to support the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World Food Programme and all relevant United Nations actors in their efforts to prevent a global food crisis, and has been promoting the Food Coalition through the FAO to mobilize expertise, provide policy support, establish a space for dialogue and promote initiatives focused on the creation of more resilient and sustainable food systems. The pandemic has reminded us of the importance of fully implementing the women and peace and security agenda, as well as the youth, peace and security agenda. Women and girls have been particularly exposed to sexual and gender- based violence and to the unequal sharing of responsibilities. We must redouble our commitment to achieving gender parity and ensuring that women participate meaningfully in decision-making processes.
