Mr. Cevik (Turkey): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Angolan presidency for having organized this
meeting, the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2016/218), Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan Mr. Nicholas
Haysom for his briefing, and Ambassador Mahmoud
Saikal for his statement.

Resolution 2274 (2016), which renews the mandate
ofthe United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), has arrived at an opportune time, when
change and transformation are dominating the agenda
of Afghanistan. We welcome the role assumed by
UNAMA in assisting the Afghan people to achieve a
bright future. We will continue to support UNAMA's
activities and efforts in that regard.

The year 2015 was an important time for
Afghanistan. The Afghan National Unity Government,
which we consider to be the symbol of the Afghan
people's unity, completed its first year in power.
During that period, the National Unity Government
undertook important reforms in various fields, from
good governance to drug-trafficking, and economy
to anti-corruption. Although opposition is an integral
part of political life in any democratic country, we
believe that criticism should not be detrimental to the
endeavours of the National Unity Government. The
international community should continue to support
the efforts of the National Unity Government to bring
security, development and prosperity to Afghanistan.

Fifteen months ago, the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces (ANDSF) assumed full security
responsibility for their country. While the current
security situation continues to be fragile and the
increasing number of civilian causalities is an issue
of concern, the ANDSF are resolutely defending
their homeland against any threat. We believe that
the ANDSF will be more successful, based on this
year's experience, while at the same time overcoming
its shortcomings.

The parliamentary elections scheduled to take place
in October will strengthen and advance democratic
institutions and traditions in Afghanistan. To achieve
lasting peace in Afghanistan and stability in the region,
the successful conclusion ofthe peace and reconciliation
process is vital. We welcome and support recent
initiatives to that end, commend the facilitating role
played by neighbouring countries in that respect, and
stand ready to contribute, ifthe need arises. I would like
to emphasize the following three points in that regard.
We hope, first, that all parties will contribute to efforts
aimed at strengthening peace, stability and prosperity
in Afghanistan and in the region; secondly, that the
armed struggle against the Afghan State and people
will come to an end; and thirdly, that reconciliation
is ensured through negotiations. I would also like to
underline that Turkey will continue to support the
Afghan Government's struggle against terrorism.

We welcome various initiatives and projects of
connectivity and cooperation among neighbouring
countries. We believe that those initiatives not only
help Afghanistan to achieve a successfully functioning
economy, but also play a key role in the realization
of major regional infrastructure projects. I would
like to reiterate once again that in order to continue
to build on the achievements of the past 14 years,
the international community's continuing support to
Afghanistan during the transformation decade will be
of the utmost importance.

Before concluding, I would like to underline that
Turkey will continue to support Afghanistan's security
and development efforts at the bilateral and multilateral
levels and stand by its Afghan brothers as long as
Turkey's help is needed.

