Ms. Keita (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the Council
today in the presence of His Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso; the African Union
High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, President
Buyoya; and the European Union Special Representative
for the Sahel, Mr. Angel Losada Fernandez, to provide
an update on the standing-up of the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel); the international
support provided in that regard, including by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA); and the difficulties
faced and possible measures that could be taken in the
future, as requested by resolution 2391 (2017).

The situation in Mali and the Sahel in the broad
sense remains extremely worrisome. The region faces
serious problems, ranging from climate change and
drought to growing insecurity, violent extremism,
the illicit trafficking in persons, weapons and drugs.
As always, it is the civilian population that pays the
highest price. Terrorist groups continue to evolve and
to spread beyond borders, including in Burkina Faso,
the Niger, Benin, Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana and Togo. The
humanitarian crisis in the Sahel is deteriorating, with
an unprecedented number of schools and health centres
that have been closed owing to insecurity. Countless
farmers have missed yet another planting season in the
Niger delta. As a result, more and more people will now
depend on cereals and other food products provided
by the international community. That is compounded
by poor governance and a lack of resources and
employment opportunities for young people, which
create a breeding ground for violent extremism.

The major cross-border initiatives taken by the
region's political leaders to jointly develop solutions to
that security situation demonstrate their willingness to
unite and address the many threats facing their region.
In the same spirit, the G-5 Sahel has taken additional
measures to operationalize the Joint Force after the
devastating terrorist attack on its headquarters last
June. I am particularly encouraged by the resumption
of the Joint Force's operations in January this year.
To date, it has carried out four operations in the three
sectors since the beginning of the year. That is a truly
encouraging development and I commend the Force
Commander, Brigadier General Hanena Ould Sidi, for
his leadership and all the units of the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force for their commitment and sacrifices in the service
of this important cause.

It is now essential to maintain that momentum. I
have urged the G-5 Sahel member States to urgently
accelerate the full operationalization of the Joint
Force so that it can finally reach its full operational
capacity. Effective operations will send a strong signal
to terrorist groups that their encroachment on the lives
of the population will no longer be tolerated and will
be rejected through the collective determination of the
Member States in the region.

Many security operations are currently under way
in the Sahel, often simultaneously. They are being
conducted by the armed forces ofthe G-5 Sahel countries,
either alone or bilaterally, jointly with international
forces or as part of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. In the
future, in order to strengthen command and control
and ensure ownership, it will be important to clarify
the framework within which the various operations of
the G-5 Sahel member States are conducted. In that
connection, I call on the leaders of the Joint Force, in
close collaboration with the Governments of the G-5
Sahel countries, to further clarify the strategic concept
of operations of the Joint Force. I also encourage them
to accelerate the planning process and to develop a clear
strategic plan for the months and years ahead. That will
also facilitate international support.

The establishment of the human rights compliance
framework is another encouraging development.
The few cases of alleged violations that have already
been committed by the Force are detrimental to the
achievement of its military objectives. However, they
also demonstrate the need for such a framework and
for a collective effort of the national armies of the G-5
Sahel member countries, as well as the Joint Force
itself, to actively contribute to its implementation.

Over the past 12 months, the Joint Force has
significantly stepped up its efforts to combat such
behaviour. That cooperation should continue to be
strengthened so that the Joint Force can achieve its
goals in terms of security and protecting the population.
I welcome the initiative taken by the European Union
to play a key role in organizing and coordinating
international support for the establishment of the police
component of the Joint Force. Ensuring compliance
with legal norms, including with regard to detention,
will help to strengthen trust and relationships with
local communities. It is also an essential element in
establishing the rule of law in the region.

(spoke in English)

The United Nations continues to provide
international operational and logistical support to the
Joint Force. I commend MINUSMA for its efforts
undertaken in support of the Joint Force so far and its
swift action and flexibility in responding to requests
for support. However, the Mission's support to the Joint
Force has been limited by a number of factors, including
the hiatus in the Joint Force's operations until January,
but also certain limitations imposed by resolution 2391
(2017). In particular, geographical restrictions imposed
on MINUSMA's support have prevented the five other
battalions of the Joint Force that operate outside of
Mali from benefiting from life-support consumables.
That has proved to be one of the obstacles to the full
operationalization of the Joint Force.

As such, I reiterate the Secretary-General's call
for the lifting of the geographical restrictions on
MINUSMA's support. I also reiterate his call for a
caveat; obviously, MINUSMA's main focus should and
will remain support to the peace process in Mali and,
as such, support to the Joint Force should not add any
additional strain on the Mission's resources or supply
chains. Consequently, the geographical limitations
on MINUSMA's support to the Joint Force should
be removed only for the provision of life-support
consumables and only as long as the Joint Force or a
third party can guarantee the pick-up and transport of
rations, fuel and water procured by MINUSMA.

That proposal notwithstanding, it is evident that
in the long run a different support model for the Joint
Force needs to be envisaged. I call on the members
of the Security Council to consider other options that
will allow for more predictable financial support and
facilitate more effective long-term planning.

I would like to extend my gratitude to the European
Union for its extensive and consistent support for
the Joint Force and for managing the coordination
hub. I also welcome the decision to move parts of
the coordination hub to the Sahel region to enhance
visibility and ownership by the G-5 Sahel as soon as all
the necessary requirements are in place.

I thank all donors that have so generously come
forward in support of the Joint Force, and I urge those
that have made pledges but not disbursed them yet to
follow through without delay. Every contribution makes
a difference, and the predictability of financial flows
will greatly enhance the Joint Force's planning capacity.

In concluding, let me say that even once fully
operational, the Joint Force cannot shoulder the burden
of fighting terrorism and stabilizing the region on
its own. A security-driven approach alone will not
be sufficient to combat violence in the region in a
sustainable manner. It must go hand in hand with our
collective and coordinated efforts and a broader strategy
encompassing poverty reduction, good governance,
development and humanitarian assistance, and security
interventions. The United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel remains a valid framework for such
coordinated action, and I call on partners to support its
operationalization, in particular for climate adaptation,
the empowerment of women and youth, and cross-
border initiatives for peace. I also call on the G-5 Sahel
member States to implement their priority investment
plan without further delay.

The African Union can play an important role in
providing an umbrella for the various security initiatives
in the region, and I welcome the recent resumption of
the Nouakchott process.

Finally, the time for action is now. We all have a
shared responsibility for the Sahel, and we must each
deliver on our part of the promise to help provide much-
needed relief and empowerment to the populations
across the Sahel that need it most.

