Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to thank
Special Representative De Mistura for his very
comprehensive and informative briefing. I would also
like to express my gratitude to all the men and women
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) who have demonstrated a deep
commitment to fulfilling this very difficult mission. I
also thank Ambassador Tanin for his statement.
At the outset, I would like to express my deep
regret over the 1 April attack on UNAMA in Mazar-e-
Sharif. I offer my deepest condolences to the families
of the United Nations personnel who died in that
attack.

As Special Representative De Mistura stated at
the last Council debate on this topic in March (see S/PV.6497), 2011 is a crucial year. It is a year of
transition, leading up to 2014. Japan is determined to
continue to cooperate with UNAMA during this very
important year and beyond.

As stated in the recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2011/381), the security situation in
Afghanistan continues to be challenging. We are
concerned about the security risks that were
highlighted by the recent attack on the Intercontinental
Hotel in Kabul. I express my deep condolences for the
deceased. Security remains a priority that we must
tackle.

Japan supports President Obama's announcement
regarding United States policy on Afghanistan. The
transition is scheduled to start in seven areas this
month. It is indispensable for peace and security in
Afghanistan to conduct a smooth transition during the
drawdown of United States and other international
forces.

The transition and sustainable security are
interlinked with the country's political process and
development. In that context, Japan continues to play
its role in strengthening the Afghan National Security
Forces through assistance to the Afghan police, such as
through our continued funding of police salaries and
efforts undertaken to enhance administrative capacity
in both central and provincial Governments. Japan
recently decided to support the Literacy for
Empowering Afghan Police programme and will start
to train Afghan National Police in cooperation with
Turkey this month.

There remain other concerns. The situation
regarding the Kabul Bank is a serious issue that affects
international donors that are providing funds and the
framework of international assistance as a whole. The
disqualification by the Special Court of
parliamentarians elected last year, and previously
confirmed by the Independent Election Commission,
has resulted in tensions between Parliament and the
Court that may seriously affect the stability and
reconstruction of Afghanistan. This development
comes at a critical time for maintaining solidarity in
the country. We sincerely hope that the Afghan
Government, Parliament and courts will act within
their respective competences and address these issues
properly and expeditiously.

We welcomed the successful Review Conference
of the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration
Programme, held in Kabul on 10 and 11 May. Further
progress in the reintegration process constitutes an
important pillar of the political process. We highly
appreciate the significant roles played in this process
by UNAMA and the countries concerned. Japan is
determined to continue to contribute, as evidenced by
our $50 million contribution to the reintegration fund
for achieving irreversible progress in the Afghan-led
Reintegration Programme.

In that context, the recent adoption of Security
Council resolutions splitting the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions list was a positive step towards promoting
reconciliation in the country. Further progress in the
political process requires Afghan ownership with
continued support of the international community.

For long-term stability in Afghanistan, we have to
accelerate regional cooperation among the country's
neighbours. Japan is ready to play an active role in the
economic development of the broader area, which can
enable surrounding neighbours to pave the way for
integrating Afghanistan into the regional and global
economy.

Despite having been affected by the March
earthquake, Japan is determined to implement our
assistance to Afghanistan which, in view of the
importance of Afghanistan, we committed to in
November 2009. While the drawdown of the military
presence will soon begin, long-term engagement with
Afghanistan is still very important. I would like to
stress once again that coordination between responsible
Afghan ownership and support from the international
community are now more necessary than ever in order
to realize a sustainable economy. This should be based
on a mid- to long-term perspective so that, after the full
transition to Afghan leadership beyond 2014,
Afghanistan can become self-reliant for its economic
development.

I believe that there is a solid commitment by the
international community for the reconstruction of
Afghanistan. We expect further progress during the
Afghanistan conference in Bonn in December. On the
Afghan side, the country needs to strengthen its
capacity for achieving real Afghan ownership and
leadership. A comprehensive review of the UNAMA
mandate and of United Nations support in Afghanistan,
which is requested in resolution 1974 (2011), will be a
very important task for the United Nations in steering
the future course of Afghanistan. UNAMA continues to
play an important role and Japan continues to do its
utmost to contribute to its activities.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
sincere appreciation for the dedication of Special
Representative De Mistura and to reiterate our
commitment to support the efforts of UNAMA.

