Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): Brazil took part in the
consensus leading to the adoption of resolution 1574
(2004) this morning.

I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
your delegation on the initiative of convening this
important - even historic - meeting in Nairobi. We
highly value the fact that for the past two days the
Security Council has been considering issues of great
relevance for Africa, in particular those relating to the
Sudan and Somalia. The Brazilian delegation is
particularly pleased to visit the sisterly country of
Kenya. The fundamental purpose of the Council's
being here in Nairobi is to make its contribution, under
the United Nations Charter, to the peace process in the
Sudan and to a comprehensive political settlement of
the Sudanese situation.

I take this opportunity to pay tribute to President
Kibaki and his counterparts in the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) process for their
remarkable diplomatic work and for their reaffirmation
of African ownership of and responsibility for any
initiatives aimed at enhancing the prospects for
stability and sustainable peace on the continent.

We have heard many authoritative presentations
on and assessments of the current situation in the
Sudan. The improvement of humanitarian and security
conditions, the end of hostilities, stability and a fair
and durable political settlement for the whole country
are stated objectives of all the parties despite their
differences. The Government of the Sudan, the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM) and, of
course, the national mediators have reaffirmed their
good faith and their political commitment to the
prompt implementation of the agreements being
reached.

Taking that into account, and mindful of, the
resolution just adopted, my delegation believes that -
as others have already stated - peace is within reach.
We strongly encourage all parties to conclude the
negotiations, both in Nairobi and in Abuja, in a timely
fashion. No matter how complex the situation in the
Sudan, the current generation of Sudanese leaders has
the opportunity to come to terms with history and with
cultural and religious diversity, as well as to deal with
suffering and long-delayed economic development. A
vision for the future of the Sudan should include the
ideals of multiculturalism, multi-ethnicity and
tolerance, as well as shared power and shared natural
resources.

My delegation wishes to stress the importance of
efforts by neighbouring countries aimed at a
sustainable peace in the Sudan. It is encouraging that
the countries in the region remain firm in their
commitment to assist a peaceful and united Sudan that
is capable of leading its own destiny in an environment
of friendly and neighbourly relations.

The resolution just adopted is based on the
common understanding that the conclusion of the
north-south negotiations is crucial and that few items
still remain to be agreed upon. My delegation
congratulates the parties on their decision today to sign
the declaration on the conclusion of IGAD negotiations
on peace in the Sudan, which reflects their
commitment to reach a final agreement before the end
of this year. Once signed, the agreement must be
promptly implemented. In their efforts to do so, the
parties should benefit from the support of the
international community, which is already committed
to broad participation in the donor conference to be
organized by Norway. My delegation will leave
Nairobi with a stronger belief that the transitional
Government to be established not only will be
committed to solving other conflicts in the country, but
also will be better equipped to find long-lasting and
fair solutions to them.

As our resolution shows, here in Nairobi our
attention - while focused on the north-south
negotiations - was also drawn to the humanitarian
situation in Darfur. We trust that the future talks in
Abuja will be strongly and positively influenced by the
agreements reached in Nairobi under the auspices of
the IGAD peace process. It is the view of my
delegation and of many others that in the absence of a
political solution to the issues of autonomy and power-
sharing, among others, the already dire humanitarian
conditions in Darfur will further deteriorate, as has
actually happened in recent weeks. Whatever the
longer-term prospects may be, continuing humanitarian
assistance to the population of Darfur will be required.

In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms the need
for increased international support for the African
Union in Darfur. We remain sure that the Secretary-
General - to whom we express our profound
recognition for his tireless work - will continue to
keep the Council closely informed about the assistance
to be provided. Given the historic burdens of the Sudan
and its recent past, it seems clear by now that there is
no military solution to the awesome challenges the
country faces. The Council is able to play a beneficial
role and there is room for manoeuvring in our quest for
peace, as the Council is committed to the sovereignty,
unity, independence and territorial integrity of the
Sudan within the framework of the principles of good-
neighbourliness, non-interference and regional
cooperation, as stated in resolution 1574 (2004).

