Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security Chergui
for their briefings.

At present, the situation in Darfur is generally
stable and the humanitarian situation continues to
improve, owing not only to the vigorous and effective
performance of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the full
cooperation of international partners and regional
organizations, such as the African Union, but also
to the active efforts of the Sudanese Government in
maintaining peace and stability in Darfur.

The transitional Government of the Sudan was
established just recently, which will help further
improve the situation in Darfur. The international
community should continue to provide assistance
to Darfur, consolidate gains made and advance the
reconstruction process.

First, the international community should support
the Sudanese Government in assuming the primary
responsibility for maintaining security in Darfur,
assist it in enhancing its own security and governance
capabilities and ensure that the functions of maintaining
security in Darfur are handed over to the Sudanese
security forces in a gradual and smooth manner. China
supports the withdrawal of UNAMID by 30 June 2020,
as scheduled in accordance with resolution 2429 (2018).

Secondly, the international community should
restart the Darfur peace process as soon as possible.
The establishment of the transitional Government of
the Sudan provides a golden opportunity to restart the
peace process in Darfur. China hopes that all parties
concerned in Darfur will seize the current window of
opportunity, effectively renounce military solutions,
restart the peace process as soon as possible and resolve
conflicts and differences through political means, such
as dialogue and consultations, in order to achieve
lasting peace and stability in Darfur.

Thirdly, the reconstruction process in Darfur
should be accelerated. Darfur is currently in a
transitional phase from peacekeeping to peacebuilding,
including early reconstruction and development. The
international community should actively provide
humanitarian assistance and economic support to help
the Sudanese Government settle displaced persons,
build and improve local infrastructure and achieve
independent economic development in Darfur.
China has always supported the Darfur peace
process. As one of the major troop-contributing
countries to UNAMID, China has mad positive
contributions to maintaining peace and stability in
Darfur over the years. China stands ready to work
with the international community and continue to play
a constructive role in achieving peace, stability and
development in Darfur.

