The Secretary-General: United Nations peacekeeping
is an investment in global peace, security and
prosperity. Around the world, Blue Helmets are the
concrete expression of the determination of the Charter
of the United Nations "to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war". The achievements of peace
operations are a source ofgreat pride to us all. When they
fail, it causes us pain and drives us to improve. United
Nations peacekeepers have contributed to a legacy of
stability from El Salvador to Namibia, from East Timor
to C6te d'lvoire and from Mozambique to Cambodia.
Fifty-four missions have completed their mandates and
closed; two more will do so in the coming months. That
is our objective for every peacekeeping mission - to
do the job entrusted to it; to save lives; to prevent mass
atrocities; to set the stage for stability and sustainable
peace; and to close. And, from start to finish, to be cost-
effective. Today's peacekeeping budget is less than half
of 1 per cent of global military spending.

At the start of my first day in office, I laid a wreath
to honour the more than 3,500 fallen peacekeepers
who have given their lives for the ideals of the United
Nations Charter. We owe them a great debt for their
dedication and courage. The safety of peacekeepers
will remain our priority.
(spoke in French)

United Nations peacekeeping operations are very
diverse and are conducted in extremely complex
environments. It is our shared responsibility to enable
them to adapt to our changing world. As the High-
Level Independent Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations clearly stated, our ambitions do not match
our capabilities, and our goals are not commensurate
with the resources available for them. That is Why
peacekeeping operations often seem to be at a
standstill and unable to keep up with the magnitude of
their task. In many cases Blue Helmets are deployed
in places Where peace itself is at stake. At times they
have to face hostility and a lack of cooperation from
host Governments. At times their security is seriously
threatened by terrorism, proliferating arms and the
growth of transnational crime. We also see a disconnect
between political processes and some of our major
operations, which can seem to be at an impasse with no
real prospect of progress.

Those are the challenges we must face together.
In the Secretariat, we must be more effective, more
efficient and more accountable for our actions.

We are counting on the General Assembly to give
us strong political support and to relax the rules and
regulations in order to facilitate our work. We rely
on troop- and police-contributing countries to deploy
dedicated and well-trained personnel. We rely on
countries that are near conflict zones and on regional
organizations to respect their obligations with regard
to peace operations. We rely on the full support of host
countries. Above all, we rely on the Council to show
unity and to adopt clear and achievable mandates.

The United Nations derives its legitimacy from the
trust placed in it by the peoples of the world. However,
that trust has been shaken by the appalling cases of
sexual exploitation and abuse that have tarnished the
image of the Organization as a whole, as well as that of
some of our peacekeeping missions. I have presented
my plan to combat this scourge and I am determined to
implement it, with the support of members.

(spoke in English)

We need a comprehensive strategy that supports
the diverse range of our missions and takes account of
the entire peace continuum, from prevention, conflict
resolution and peacekeeping to peacebuilding and long-
term development. This strategy must be based on two
overriding principles.
First, there is no one-size-fits-all peace operation.
While some missions have straightforward mandates
that focus on separating warring parties or monitoring
ceasefires in a relatively stable environment, others
have more robust mandates, such as to protect civilians
and deal with multiple armed groups. The protection
of civilians will continue to be a key priority for
peacekeeping. We are supporting the African Union
Mission in Somalia, which is backed by a Security
Council mandate. In Mali, while United Nations
peacekeepers are not and should not be directly engaged
in fighting terrorism, they coordinate with counter-
terrorist forces. The Council recently expressed its
support for the regional initiative by Member States in
the Lake Chad basin to develop a multinational joint
task force to combat Boko Haram.

Finally, our political missions are supporting peace
and reconciliation in Afghanistan and Iraq, together
with development agencies and others. All these
operations play a vital role in building and sustaining
peace. But our political strategies, management systems
and administration are not set up to support them
effectively. We must plan for diversity across time and
geography, creating flexibility without additional costs.

Secondly, the success of every mission depends on
an active political process, with the commitment of all
stakeholders, particularly Governments. The Council
has a vital role to play in securing this commitment
and cooperation. I will personally support this goal in
any way possible. I have spoken before to the Council
about the urgency and necessity of a surge in diplomacy
for peace.

We have already made important recent reforms
to peacekeeping. I thank Mr. Herve Ladsous for his
important role, and count on the continued leadership of
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix. We have
increased the number of troop- and police-contributing
countries and improved the generation of forces so
that they can be deployed more quickly. Modern
technologies are improving situational awareness and
analysis. We have decentralized key functions, and
we are strengthening performance management and
accountability. These reforms have reduced the cost
per capita of uniformed peacekeepers by 18 per cent
since 2008, and decreased the number of civilian staff
significantly. But much remains to be done.

In the short term, we must end operations that have
achieved their goals and reform those that no longer meet
needs on the ground. Our missions in Cote d'Ivoire and
Liberia will soon close, and we must consider reforms
and exit strategies for other long-standing missions. In
Haiti, we are ready to transform our mission so that
it will focus on political support, institution-building
and development. In Darfur, the changing situation
on the ground may call for a significant reduction of
forces. Each mission must be considered in its unique
political context. In that spirit, I commend the Council's
unanimous decision last week to renew the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In the longer-term, I see nine areas for reform.

First, I have established a team to examine how
to improve our peace and security architecture, which
will report to me by June.

Second, we need greater efficiency and accountability.
Too many of the rules and regulations of the Secretariat
seem designed to prevent rather than facilitate our
work. I am committed to changing this, and I hope
Member States will support me, including in the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly.

Third, peacekeeping operations need clear, realistic
and up-to-date mandates from the Council, with
well-identified priorities, adequate sequencing and
flexibility to evolve over time.

Fourth, women must play a far more active role in
peace operations, as troops, police and civilian staff.
This is not only because gender parity is essential for
its own sake, but because the involvement of women is
proven to increase the chances of sustained peace, and
to reduce incidences of sexual abuse and exploitation.

Fifth, we need better and more coordinated
planning, control and leadership of our operations
and strategy. The creation of an executive committee
and closer cooperation between the Department of
Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations are aimed precisely at addressing that.
I also plan further decentralization to empower my
Special Representatives.

Sixth, we must increase the use of modern
technology. This will help us to become more flexible
and mobile. I encourage the trilateral arrangements
through which countries with the capacity to do so are
providing training and equipment to peace operations.
But, alongside these arrangements, I count on these
countries to step up their troop contributions.

Seventh, we need to communicate and to increase
awareness that United Nations peacekeeping operations
are a necessity for global peace, security and prosperity,
and that they are achieving results.

Eighth, we need to deepen ties with our regional
and subregional partners. At the African Union summit
earlier this year, I committed to strengthening our
partnership on political issues and peace operations,
with stronger mutual support and continued capacity-
building. United Nations peace operations will continue
to need the vital partnership of the European Union. As
the security of Europe is directly affected by situations
in which peacekeeping missions are deployed, it is
likely that there will be further opportunities for
cooperation. It is equally important to develop our
relationships with subregional organizations including
the Economic Community of West African States,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
others. I call on the Council to consider supporting the
initiative proposed by the Group of Five for the Sahel.

Ninth and finally, these partnerships must be based
on solid, predictable funding. I hope the Council will
consider supporting missions that are backed by a
Council resolution, either with assessed contributions or
by promoting other predictable financing mechanisms.

Peace operations are at a crossroads. Our task is to
keep them relevant with clear and achievable mandates,
and the right strategies and support. Success depends
on our collective efforts. The Council can count on
my full commitment, but I also count on the unity and
support of the Council. I count on it to fulfil its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security in this changing world.

