Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): It is an
honour to have you, Sir, presiding over our meeting
today, and I would like to express our gratitude.

The Secretary-General set the tone for our
meeting with his clear and realistic statement. France is
particularly pleased at the joint participation in our
meeting of the High Representative, Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch; the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Jacques Paul Klein; and the High
Representative for Common Foreign and Security
Policy of the European Union, Mr. Javier Solana. This
event has great symbolic importance and underlines the
exemplary cooperation developing on the ground
between the United Nations and the European Union.

A major restructuring of the international
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina will happen soon.
The last meeting of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Conference, which was held on
28 February, took a very clear position in this regard.
Mr. Petritsch, Mr. Klein and Mr. Solana are involved
directly in the restructuring and will continue to play a
decisive part together in the coming months.

As Mr. Petritsch recalled, the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina still requires the constant attention of
the international community. The momentum of reform
must be maintained, and work to implement the Dayton
Agreements must be broadened. Continuing this
process, begun a year ago by the Government of
Mr. Zlatko Lagumdzija, will require courage,
determination and perseverance. Once completed, it
will open up the door for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
join Europe. The imminent admission of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the Council of Europe will be an initial
stage.

On the matter of priority tasks, ensuring
development in the country is an essential goal. To that
end, it is essential to improve investor confidence in
the safety of the economic environment. In that light,
promoting the rule of law, combating corruption and
impunity and strengthening the independence and
credibility of the judicial system are tasks that must be
at the heart of public action. This requires, inter alia,
full respect for jurisdictional decisions, beginning with
decisions taken by the Constitutional Court. All
members of the executive power that are involved in
this matter at the State level, in the Federation and in
the Republika Srpska, have the responsibility to ensure
compliance.

It is equally advisable to arrest the indicted
persons and refer them to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, beginning with
Karadzic and Mladic. France actively supports the
action of the Stabilization Force (SFOR) on the ground
in this connection. We would urge all responsible
officials in Bosnia and Herzegovina to unreservedly
lend their cooperation to this action.

The international community must be prepared to
support the Bosnian authorities in the best possible way
to carry out the needed reforms. The restructuring
agreed last week by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council (PIC) will certainly be helpful.
Actually implementing the PIC's conclusions must
begin without delay. We would like to thank
Mr. Petritsch and his deputy, Mr. Hays, for the work
they have accomplished over more than a year to
encourage this to happen. The international civilian
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina will be more
compact, more coherent, and thereby more effective.

On the subject of restructuring, I would like to
comment on the future of the International Police Task
Force (IPTF) of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (UNMIBH). At our meeting on
5 December with Mr. Klein, I stressed that, as far as
France is concerned, UNMIBH is an exemplary
peacekeeping operation, with an exit strategy, ready to
hand over at the end of 2002 to a regional organization
that is to follow on with some of its functions. In this
particular case, the organization involved at the
meeting was the European Union, and the offer it made
through the Ministers of Foreign Affairs meeting in
Brussels on 18 February was unanimously accepted by
the PIC Steering Board. I was delighted that the
European Union was thus in the forefront of
institutions actually carrying out the Secretary-
General's ideas on how to develop coordination and
complementarity between the United Nations and
regional organizations. As Mr. Solana said, in coming
months the United Nations and the European Union
will be cooperating closely to ensure a seamless
transition from UNMIBH to the European Union Police
Mission (EUPM).

Within the context of restructuring the
international civilian presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the European Union will strengthen its
role overall in the area of the rule of law, particularly in
helping to strengthen the judicial system. This should
result in better assimilation of European norms and
requirements in the country.

Mr. Petritsch, Mr. Klein and Mr. Solana have told
us what the international community has been able to
achieve in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Since Mr. Petritsch
comes to the end of his term in a few months, I would
like to extend to him our deep gratitude for the success
he has been able to achieve. Mr. Paddy Ashdown, who
will succeed him as High Representative, will, of
course, be able to count on solid support from France
as he continues in the work of implementation the
Dayton Accords. I would like to extend our best wishes
to Mr. Jacques Paul Klein for his excellent and timely
implementation of the UNMIBH mandate to date.

