Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): First, I would like to
thank the Lithuanian presidency for convening this
high-level open debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, with a specific focus on the protection of
journalists. I also thank your delegation for submitting
a concept note (S/2015/307, annex) on the topic. We are
also grateful to Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
for his briefing on the matter.

Under international humanitarian law, journalists
in armed conflict are classified as civilians, and as
such should be afforded the same protection. That norm
was recalled in resolution 1738 (2006), the presidential
statement of 12 February 2013 (S/PRST/2013/2) and
the Council's resolution 2222 (2015), just adopted. It is
also widely recognized that the rule according to which
civilianjournalists engaged in professional missions in
areas of armed conflict must be respected and protected
as long as they are not taking a direct part in hostilities,
constitutes a norm of customary international law
applicable in both international and non-international
armed conflicts.

Indeed, existing rules as well as other important
efforts undertaken at the international level, including
in particular by the Security Council, provide a solid
basis for protection. At the same time, there is a
significant gap between the normative standards and
their implementation. The current state of the protection
of civilians in situations of armed conflict, including
journalists, leaves little room for optimism. Attacks
against journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel in armed conflicts continue, while impunity
for perpetrators remains widespread and represents the
biggest obstacle to ensuring the safety ofjournalists.

We pay tribute to journalists who under dangerous
circumstances bravely perform their duties to inform
the broader public about threats to international peace
and security. The increased brutality of armed conflicts
and the changing nature of warfare and terrorist and
separatist threats nowadays give rise to the need for
greater measures of protection for journalists at the
national and international levels. Apart from preventive
diplomacy efforts and the earliest peaceful settlement
of disputes and conflicts, the best deterrent, is,
undoubtedly, ensuring a speedy end to impunity and
holding to account those responsible for violations of
international humanitarian law. Such violations also
give rise to the right of victims to an effective remedy.
Moreover, as the Secretary-General notes in his most
recent report (S/2013/689), accountability should also
be understood more broadly as encompassing the
political, legal and moral responsibility of individuals
and institutions for past violations.

It is obvious that the problem cannot be addressed
effectively unless there is a willingness on the part of
States and the broader international community to take
all the necessary measures to ensure that the existing
norms and rules are fully respected and implemented
and that those responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law are brought to justice. Commitments
to protection efforts must be free of selectivity and
politically motivated approaches.

The war waged against Azerbaijan by neighbouring
Armenia claimed the lives of tens of thousands of
civilians, including a number ofjournalists who were
killed as a result of deliberate attacks when reporting
from the conflict zone. In its relevant resolutions, the
SecurityCouncilcondemnstheviolationsofinternational
humanitarian law committed during the conflict,
including attacks on civilians and the bombardment
of inhabited areas. However, the perpetrators of those
violations, among them the members of the political
and military leadership of Armenia, continue to enjoy
impunity, and such a situation represents a serious
challenge both to upholding individual rights and
freedoms and to ensuring sustainable peace, justice,
truth and reconciliation. Therefore, the international
community should play a more proactive role when
national authorities fail to take the steps necessary to
ensure accountability.

It is important that the Security Council consistently
maintain its focus on the topic and systematically recall
its demand that all parties to armed conflict comply
fully with their obligations under international law
related to the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
includingjournalists, and that they take all the necessary
measures to prevent attacks against journalists and to
prosecute those responsible for such attacks.

In conclusion, I would like to briefly comment on
the remarks made by the delegation of the United States
with regard to Azerbaijan.

First, the reference to the ongoing criminal case
against Mr. Ismayilova has nothing in common with the
topic of today's open debate, which is the protection of
journalists in situations of armed conflict.

Secondly, the remarks on the aforementioned
criminal case are irrelevant also in the view of the
mandate of the Security Council, an organ on which
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security lies.

Thirdly, the reference to individual criminal cases
continues interference into the responsibilities of the
law enforcement agencies. Attempts to politicize the
investigation of such cases represent a challenge to the
independence of the judiciary in a sovereign State.

Fourthly, it would be more appropriate, in the
context of the topic of today's open debate, if the
delegation of the United States would recall the names
of other journalists from Azerbaijan, among them
Salatin Esgerova, Chingiz Mustafayev, Ali Mustafayev
and Osman Mirzoev, who were killed during Armenia's
aggression against Azerbaijan while performing
their professional duties in the conflict zone. The
perpetrators of the crimes committed against those
journalists continue to enjoy impunity. We have not
noticed that the Government of the United States has
ever cared about those cases.

Finally, I would like once again to commend the
initiative of Lithuania in convening this high-level open
debate to review the implementation of resolution 1738
(2013) and lessons learned.

