Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation voted in favour of
resolution 2100 (2013) in View of the importance of
increasing assistance to the Republic of Mali in its
efforts to deal with a complex and comprehensive
crisis, as well as in response to a request by the
country's authorities, supported by the relevant
regional organizations. In that regard, we would like to
stress that the primary responsibility for resolving the
current problems belongs to Malians themselves. Every
action and task of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
whose deployment was decided on today, must be
directed exclusively at providing assistance to the
Malian authorities.

In the context of the resolution adopted today,
as well as the recently adopted resolution 2098
(2013) regarding the deployment of an Intervention
Brigade within the framework of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we are disturbed by the
growing shift towards the military aspects of United
Nations peacekeeping. What was once the exception
now threatens to become unacknowledged standard
practice, with unpredictable and unclear consequences
for the security of United Nations personnel and their
international legal status.

In that connection, according to the situation clearly
delineated in the Secretary-General's report on the
situation in Mali (S/2013/189), there should be a clear
boundary between peacekeeping and enforcing peace.
That is why we believe that MINUSMA's mandate
excludes offensive or counter-terrorism operations.
Such actions would be counter to the basic principles
of peacekeeping. In the preamble to the resolution just
adopted, the unshakeability of such principles was
once again affirmed.

We believe that using Blue Helmets for the tasks
involved in arresting those accused by the International
Criminal Court, including through the use of force, is
not part of United Nations peacekeeping and carries
a number of risks for the peacekeepers, who could
find themselves required to take part in actions that
should be conducted by specially trained troops. It is
quite clear here that a military solution does not exist
for the Mali crisis. The activity of MINUSMA must
be backed by tangible and palpable political processes,
which would include political dialogue between the
main Malian sides.

