Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (Spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, let me thank the President of the National
Episcopal Conference of the Congo, Monseigneur
Marcel Utembi, for participating in today's meeting,
and Under-Secretary-General Herve Ladsous for his
briefing, which very clearly summarized the report
(S/20l6/ 1130) of the Secretary-General on the situation
in the country. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Maman Sidikou, his entire team
and the personnel of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) should be recognized for their
tireless and invaluable efforts.

I wish to reiterate Uruguay's commitment to
stability and peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, not only as an elected member of the
Security Council but also as a consistent MONUSCO
troop-contributing country for the past 16 years.
Uruguay welcomes the signing of the comprehensive
and inclusive political agreement that was adopted
in Kinshasa on 31 December 2016 and acknowledges
the important mediation role played by the National
Episcopal Conference of the Congo in facilitating the
agreement. In the same vein, we encourage the political
parties that have not yet done so to sign the agreement.
The agreement is a significant step forward in the quest
for a political solution to the crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but, more important, it require
much effort is its implementation. In that regard,
Uruguay hopes that political leaders will continue
displaying a spirit of flexibility and understanding
during the implementation process, which should be
done in good faith and in all aspects.

The main aims of the agreement are, on the one
hand, to ensure the inclusive management of the
executive prior to and during the elections and, on
the other, to ensure the organization of national and
provincial presidential and legislative elections that are
peaceful, credible, inclusive and held without delay, no
later than December 2017. Such elections should give
rise to a peaceful hand-over of power. Stability, peace,
development and the consolidation of constitutional
democracy in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
are at stake. The messages conveyed to the Security
Council mission in November 2016 were clear in
that regard.

Although the recent political developments in
the country lead us to be optimistic about the future,
Uruguay must express its concern about human rights
violations, which, according to the statistics contained
in the report (S/2016/1130) of the Secretary-General,
show a considerable increase in comparison with those
mentioned in the previous report (S/2016/833). The
report indicates that, between January and 30 November
2016, MONUSCO documented 4,599 human rights
violations, of which 2,915 were committed by State
actors and 1,684 by armed groups. As we stated, those
figures show a significant increase in comparison with
the 3,877 violations documented in 2015.

In addition, MONUSCO has also reported a steady
reduction in the political space, with an increasing
number of restrictions on civil and political rights,
including violations of the freedoms of expression
and association. In that regard, Uruguay implores
the Government, as the Security Council has done
on repeated occasions, to respect human rights and
fundamental freedoms and to exercise the highest level
of moderation in response to protests. It also implores
opposition forces to show greater responsibility by
ensuring that their demonstrations are peaceful.

Finally, Uruguay expresses its determination
to support the implementation of the 31 December
agreement and to monitor developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

