Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General;
Mr. Smail Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security; Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing
Director for Africa of the European External Action
Service; and Ambassadors Omar Hilale and Gbolie
Ipo, the Permanent Representatives of Morocco and
Cote d'Ivoire, for their briefings. We would also like to
separately welcome Ms. Sylvie Vale'rie Ba'i'po-Temon,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Central Africans
Abroad of the Central African Republic. We would
particularly like to express our sincere gratitude to
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for his leadership of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA),
in which he has shown himself someone who can
maintain his self-control in any situation, however
critical. It is difficult to overestimate his contribution
to the work of stabilizing the Central African Republic.
We hope that his experience and knowledge will be put
to use in the United Nations system and we heartily
wish him every success in his future endeavours.

We see the holding of direct negotiations between
the Government of the Central African Republic and
key armed groups in Khartoum, under the auspices of
the African Union and with the support of the United
Nations and regional and international partners,
followed by the signing in Bangui on 6 February of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic, as a milestone in the modern
history of the country.

The forum was the result of efforts to harmonize
every peace initiative related to the Central African
Republic, affirming its international partners'
determination to work together in the interests of the
country's normalization for the long term. We want to
emphasize that this important Agreement was made
possible by, among other things, the talks between the
armed groups held in Khartoum in August 2018 and
mediated by Russia and the Sudan, which led to the
decision to establish a united Central African opposition
with the aim of achieving long-term, sustainable peace
in the Central African Republic. Russia's collaboration
in organizing the interactions in Khartoum was designed
to align with the efforts of the African community,
which is making a decisive contribution to unblocking
crisis situations in Africa based on the African Union's
principle of African solutions to African problems.

For our part, we should say that we have listened
carefully to the Secretary-General's call in his report
(S/2019/147). Russia is ready to facilitate the process of
national reconciliation in the Central African Republic
in cooperation with the its leaders, the African Union
and those of the country's international partners that are
involved in the quest for ways to normalize its situation
without hidden agendas or double standards. We will
continue to support the Central African Republic's
authorities in reforming the national security sector,
including by strengthening its military capabilities and
its armed forces' human resources. In a short period of
time Russian military experts have been able to achieve
significant results, training more than 1,000 Central
African troops. We also intend to continue to expand
our humanitarian assistance, particularly in providing
the population with medical services.

We pay tribute to the bravery of the United Nations
peacekeepers and to the memory of those who have
given their lives for the Central African Republic and
for Africa as a whole.

We have consistently advocated that the
international community and especially the Security
Council should support agreements that are reached
through the mediation efforts of the African Union and
other African frameworks, and should provide them
with political, moral and material support. It is clear
that the road to national reconciliation in the Central
African Republic will not be an easy one, as its people
are well aware. However, a critical first step has been
taken to lay a foundation for developing solutions that
can bring the country lasting peace. Supporting that
initiative is our shared goal.

In our view, the current circumstances in the
Central African Republic urgently need constructive
cooperation from all international stakeholders. There,
unfortunately, we have problems through no fault of
ours. Despite the positive opinion of what we are doing
from the country's authorities and people, attempts
are being made to denigrate Russia's efforts in every
possible way. We are sorry to say we saw an example of
such flagrant double standards today in our American
colleague's statement, and I cannot let two of his
criticisms of Russia pass without comment. The Russian
journalists who died in the Central African Republic
were sent there by Mikhail Khodorkovsky, who found
refuge in the West a number of years ago. He failed to
provide them with the necessary protection, except for
a large amount of cash. The Russian Embassy was not
notified about their arrival and was unable to take the
necessary steps with the Central African authorities.
The upshot was that they were robbed and murdered.
What happened is clear and undeniable. However,
we are continuing our investigation together with the
Government authorities, and all who are interested in
the incident will be informed of the results.

There is one more subject that we did not intend to
talk about, but since our American colleagues touched
on it, we feel compelled to. I will have to beg our
French colleagues' pardon in advance. We did not bring
it up. On 12 February, Radio France Internationale
referred in a broadcast to a distorted interpretation of a
United Nations report that Russian military instructors
had allegedly tortured a 38-year-old Muslim market
trader. The distorted facts were denied by the trader
himself, Mahamat Nour Mamadou. He admitted that he
was incited to this provocation by an internal security
attache at the French Embassy in Bangui named
Jacques Razafindranali who was also employed in the
General Directorate for External Security of France's
Ministry of Defence. In his interview with journalists
from Afrique Media, he was quoted as saying,

"I was a Seleka combatant. I lost my thumb in battle.
After I was released, the French approached me and
offered me a large sum of money to say that I had
been tortured by Russians. They said that ifI did
not say it they would kill me. They came a number
of times to check that I was saying everything right.
They promised to take me to France".

Mamadou's words were confirmed by neighbours,
who mentioned the official from the French Embassy
among those who visited. I think no further comment
is needed.

Our American colleagues are evidently in a kind
of provocationist frenzy, and after planning a flagrant
and undeniable act of provocation on the Colombian-
Venezuelan border for 23 February, they have now
gone completely overboard and decided to traffic in
insinuations and the dissemination of fake news right
here in the Security Council. This situation is a clear
illustration of the methods that our Western partners
are using in the Central African Republic. As with
Venezuela and Ukraine, it is not the countries they are
worried about, it is the geopolitics.

Everything in our world is moving and changing.
Only the methods that the United States and States
that support it use to interfere in the affairs of other
countries remain the same - overthrowing regimes
they do not like and showing no aversion to stooping to
the dirtiest political provocations. Russia will never be
resigned to that.

