Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): I would first like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this thematic
debate on terrorism and cross-border crime, which
comes at such a critical and challenging time.
Ukraine welcomes today's adoption of resolution
2195 (2014), on the linkages between transnational and
organized crime and terrorism. Unfortunately, almost
every day we are learning, to our deep sorrow, of
new victims of the terrorist attacks that are occurring
in every corner of the world. That global evil can be
eliminated only through coordinated and decisive
measures on the part of the international community.
Ukraine is deeply concerned about the activities of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the Al-Nusra Front
and other terrorist entities associated with Al-Qaida,
and the negative impact of their presence, their violent,
extremist ideology and the threat that they pose to the
stability of the entire region. Ukraine condemns the
terrorist attacks committed by Boko Haram in Nigeria,
causing hundreds of deaths and injuries, and I would
like to take this opportunity to express my nation's
condolences to the victims of the latest terrorist attacks
in Nigeria and Pakistan.

Ukraine shares the Security Council's position
that terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations,
constitutes one of the most serious threats there is to
international peace and stability, and that any act of
terrorism is criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of its
motivation and whenever or wherever it is committed.
Ukraine supports the central role the United Nations
plays in global efforts aimed at suppressing international
terrorism and promoting international cooperation
in the area. The Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
continues to be central to addressing the evolving
trends of the terrorism phenomenon in an integrated
and balanced way. Ukraine is a party to about 20
multilateral conventions and protocols relating to
counter-terrorism. Its Government is actively engaged
in cooperation on counter-terrorism with many
international and regional organizations, including
the United Nations, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Council of Europe and the
Financial Action Task Force on Money-Laundering, as
well as the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development-GUAM.

Unfortunately, the problem of terrorism has
recently involved my country as well. As the Council
may know, the Government of Ukraine has been
conducting a counter-terrorism operation in the eastern
part of the country since March. It is simply incredible
that terrorism has emerged in a country where United
Nations experts assessed the threat of terrorism as
low just a few months before the Russian Federation's
occupation of Crimea and the establishment of the
Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People's
Republic terrorist organizations. As it has turned out,
foreign factors may have encouraged this evil to grow
rapidly. The situation in the world in general, and in my
country in particular, has shown that the international
community must redouble its efforts in the fight against
terror.

Ukraine is extremely concerned about the flagrant
violations of international counter-terrorism treaties
by various States. The Russian Federation continues
to flout its international obligations concerning
terrorism. In particular, it has completely ignored its
obligations under the 1999 International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and
the 1997 International Convention for the Suppression
of Terrorist Bombings. As the situation in Ukraine has
clearly shown, terrorism can be used as a means of
hidden aggression against a sovereign State. We call on
the international community to continue to take decisive
action aimed at combating State-sponsored terrorism
against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of its
members.

Without adherence to international treaties and
genuine cooperation on the part of all States parties,
any international counter-terrorism efforts, including
those of the Security Council, will be in vain. For
our part, I would like to once again underline that
Ukraine will remain committed to cooperating at the
international, regional and subregional levels with the
goal of making the global environment completely
intolerant of terrorism and its supporters.

