Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank Assistant Secretaries-General Zerihoun and
Simonovie for their briefings.

The Republic of Korea appreciates the dedicated
work of the United Nations human rights monitoring
mission in Ukraine and its informative and
comprehensive report.

The recent report of the United Nations human rights
monitoring mission identified a number of worrying
human rights concerns in Ukraine, particularly in the
eastern region. We note with deep concern that the
human rights situation in Donetsk and Lugansk has
continued to deteriorate with increased violence and
criminal activities by illegal armed groups. We are
particularly disheartened to learn that lawlessness and
violence, including abductions, arbitrary detentions,
torture, harassment and killings are now affecting the
broader population of those regions. Moreover, the
continuing clashes between the armed groups and the
Ukrainian forces exacerbate the situation, resulting in
an increased loss of life, further displacement and the
destruction of vital infrastructure.

In the light of such a volatile situation, we welcome
the efforts of the Ukrainian Government to stop the
escalation of violence and seek a peaceful settlement
as shown in President Poroshenko's peace plan. We
call for the illegal armed groups to reciprocate those
efforts and immediately halt all acts of violence and
lay down their arms. It is important to ensure the full
implementation of the peace plan in order to achieve
a sustainable solution to the crisis. In that regard, we
welcome the fact that Russian President Putin has
expressed support for the peace plan.

At the same time, we reiterate that an inclusive
political process is the essential foundation for a stable
and democratic future for all Ukrainian people. We
encourage the Ukrainian Government, building on the
legitimacy of the democratically elected president, to
lead comprehensive reform measures that reflect the
wishes of all Ukrainians. The protection of all ethnic
and linguistic minorities should be a priority in that
process.

Finally, we appreciate the ongoing diplomatic efforts
towards the stabilization of Ukraine, in particular those
of the United Nations, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, the European Union and
bilateral partners. We encourage all parties to continue
such efforts to seek a peaceful political solution.

