Mrs. Haley (United States of America): This
discussion could not have come at a better time. There
were reports this morning that the Houthi militants in
Yemen had fired yet another missile into Saudi Arabia.
According to the Houthis themselves, it was targeted at
a meeting of Saudi leaders in Riyadh, in an area crowded
with Government offices. Thankfully the missile was
intercepted before it could hit its intended target, but
the very fact of this attack is a flashing red siren for
the Council. This is not the first time that the Houthis
have fired missiles at civilians in a country belonging
to the Group of 20 (G-20) and, unless we act, it will not
be the last. While we do not yet have sufficient insight
into this particular attack, it bears all the hallmarks of
previous attacks using weapons provided by Iran. It is
only a matter of time before one of these missiles hits
its target. If we do not do something, we will miss the
opportunity to prevent further violence from Iran.

Before us is the Secretary-General's fourth report

(S/2017/1030) on the Iranian regime's lack of full

compliance with resolution 2231 (2015), and it is the
most damning report yet. The report makes the case
that Iran is illegally transferring weapons. I know that
many Member States put a lot of effort into the nuclear
agreement with Iran, but that should not allow us to look
the other way as concerns the very serious non-nuclear
items, like the sales of arms, ballistic missile testing
and support for terrorism. The report was compiled
before the latest attacks, but it points to evidence of the
Iranian origin of missiles fired from Yemen into Saudi
Arabia this year. It notes that arms seized by the United
States from a ship in the Gulf of Oman were identical
to those previously seized by France, which the United
Nations had concluded were of Iranian origin.

The report describes a dual English-Farsi keyboard
that was part of the guidance system of an unmanned
surface vehicle used against the Saudi coalition in
Yemen. That was just one of several pieces of evidence
that point to the Iranian manufacture of the detonation
and guidance systems of the weapon. There is plenty
more. The United States and our partners went to great
lengths to support the Secretary-General's investigation.
We shared our intelligence, and we insisted on the use
of the highest standards of evidence and methodology.
We therefore welcome this report and the evidence
it presents.

To build on its conclusions, the United States took
the extraordinary step of revealing, in a public setting,
military equipment recovered directly from military
attacks on our partners in the region. Last week, we
put this information on display in Washington, DC.
Nearly a dozen countries have sent delegations to
see it. Members of Congress are now viewing it.
We invite the entire Security Council to visit this
massive and compelling display of information about
Iran's violations.

The material speaks for itself. The evidence is
undeniable. The Secretary-General's report refers to
debris from missiles fired by Houthi militants from
Yemen into Saudi Arabia in July and November. The
inventory at the warehouse in Washington, DC,
removes any shred of doubt that the missiles are from
Iran. The missile debris recovered in Saudi Arabia
came from Iranian Qiam-I missiles. We have multiple
indicators: everything from the lack of tail fins at the
base of the missile - which only Iranian missiles
lack - to the logo of an Iranian defence manufacturer
stamped on the side. The fact that these missiles were
transferred from Iran and fired by a group of militants
should gravely concern us. The intended target of the
4 November missiles should concern us even more. The
target was the civilian airport in Riyadh. Hundreds of
innocent civilians could have been killed. Just imagine
if this had been the John F. Kennedy airport in New
York City, or Paris or Brussels.

The warehouse also contains material from
Iranian-manufactured anti-tank guided missiles,
which the Houthis have used to destroy buildings, an
unmanned aerial vehicle known as a kamikaze drone,
and material from a Shark-33 explosive boat. Those
boats have a warhead inside them that has blown
six-foot-wide holes in the sides of ships, killing and
injuring numerous personnel. All of these weapons
recovered from attacks and planned attacks on a G-20
country were made by Iranian weapons industries
tied to the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps. We
have made this information public because Iran's
destabilizing behaviour is only growing. It will
continue to grow unless we raise the cost of defying the
international community.

International peace and security depend on our
working together to expose and hold accountable the
Iranian regime's hostile actions. The United States
will continue to share what we know with the United
Nations and other parties to combat this threat, but
the effort of one nation is not enough. We must all
act cooperatively to expose the crimes of the Tehran
regime and do whatever is needed to make sure they get
the message. If we do, then Iran will bring the world
deeper into a broadening regional conflict.

Based on the violations mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report, there are a few options that we can
use to put pressure on Iran to adjust its behaviour. The
Security Council could strengthen the provisions of
resolution 2231 (2015). We could adopt a new resolution
that makes clear that Iran is prohibited from all
activities related to ballistic missiles. We could explore
imposing sanctions on Iran in response to its clear
violations of the Yemen arms embargo. We could hold
the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps accountable for
its violations of numerous Security Council resolutions.
In the coming days, we will continue to explore those
options and others with our colleagues. We must speak
with one voice in dealing with Iranian threats to peace.
While we do so, we must also make it clear - as I do
now - that the Iranian people are not the problem. The
Iranian people are victims of their own Government.

I want to add a final point about the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. The Secretary-
General's report devotes considerable space to Iranian
compliance with the nuclear deal. While the Plan itself
was not intended to directly address Iran's non-nuclear
behaviour, we must all recognize that resolution 2231
(2015) does address such behaviour, and that is made
clear in the Secretary-General's report. While the
United States continues to uphold its commitments
under the Plan, the international community must also
demand full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
by responding to Iran's dangerous violations. We must
not allow ourselves to be held hostage to the nuclear
agreement or treat Iran any differently than we would
any other country violating a resolution.

Today, based on the United Nations report, we
have an opportunity to confront the Iranian regime for
its actions, which are clearly in violation of Security
Council resolutions. The international community
must demonstrate that we are committed to ensuring
accountability for the full spectrum of Iran's malign
behaviour. The Security Council must follow through on
the violations listed in the Secretary-General's report.

