Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would first like to welcome Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, to today's
meeting and to commend her on her excellent briefing.

As Secretary-General Guterres has rightly pointed
out, the many threats to global stability that we are
dealing with call for us to pool our efforts and means
in order to meet today's challenges. We believe that the
quest for international peace and security is a long-term
endeavour that requires all of our support. We therefore
have to work to build a world order based on full-
scale cooperation in a multilateral framework. From
that perspective, the cooperation between the United
Nations and the European Union (EU), based on Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, is a concrete
reflection of a partnership based on a community built
on shared values and principles. The European Union
is an essential partner of the United Nations within a
framework of increased cooperation that encompasses
economic growth and sustainable development as well
as peace and security. We see the European Union's
unflagging commitment in the fact that it contributes
40 per cent of the United Nations peacekeeping budget
and that EU voluntary contributions represent half of
the combined budgets of United Nations programmes.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the European Union's
significant contributions and its pragmatic vision for
its multidimensional efforts, based on the European
Union Global Strategy on Foreign and Security Policy,
the sustaining peace agenda and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. We also welcome the
joint commitment that the United Nations and the
European Union made in September 2018 to promoting
multilateralism and a rules-based world order by
seeking innovative solutions to global challenges. The
European Union formulated its annual priorities for
the period from 2018 to 2019 on that basis, focusing
primarily on strengthening multilateralism, promoting
mediation as a tool for fostering peace, advancing
sustainable development, defending human rights and
addressing issues related to climate change.

In its implementation of the goals it has set for
itself, the United Nations is central to the European
Union's work, as is strengthening its cooperation
and partnerships with other regional organizations,
including the African Union, thereby also supporting
their role in prevention and peacebuilding. In
that regard, my country welcomed the holding on
23 September 2018, on the margins of the General
Assembly at its seventy-third session, of the third
trilateral meeting of the African Union, European
Union and the United Nations, at which the leaders of
those organizations reaffirmed,

"Their joint commitment to promote an effective
multilateral system and to take further
action towards reinforcing synergies and
coordination in tackling global challenges through
international cooperation".
Cote d'Ivoire also welcomed the holding in Abidjan
on 29 and 30 November 2017 of the fifth African
Union-European Union Summit, under the theme,
"Investing in youth for a sustainable future", which was
an opportunity for the two organizations to identify in
a joint declaration their shared priorities for the future
of the Africa-European Union partnership, including
the strengthening of resilience, peace and security and
governance, and the issue of migration and mobility.

Aware of the effect of new threats to regional and
international peace and security on the stability of both
continents, the two regional institutions understand
the importance of strengthening their relations and
agreeing in principle on the preparation of a framework
document that would contribute to the strengthening
of their partnership. Regardless, the European Union
remains a partner of choice for Africa, particularly in
the areas ofpeace and security. The EU's involvement in
the fight against terrorism and the settlement of crises,
particularly in Mali, Somalia and Guinea-Bissau,
is eloquent proof of that. In addition to the already
excellent cooperation we have in the area of peace and
security, we continue to believe that joint investment in
youth for accelerated inclusive growth and sustainable
development, as advocated at the Abidjan Summit,
would open up prospects for building a more stable
future in Africa.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its faith in
the advantages of multilateralism aimed at establishing
a cooperative order governing international relations.
In that regard, my country supports and encourages
close cooperation between the United Nations and other
regional organizations similar to that between it and the
European Union, which will be crucial ifwe are to meet
the new challenges we are seeing to international peace
and security.

