Mr. Mbeki (African Union): First of all, we
would like to join the Chairperson of the Commission
of the African Union (AU), Mr. Jean Ping, in thanking
you, Mr. President, and the Security Council, for
giving us the opportunity to be here today to reflect on
various matters relating to Sudan, starting with the
report of the African Union High-Level Panel on
Darfur (S/2009/599, annex I). Similarly, we join the
Chairperson of the AU Commission in stressing the
significance of the partnership between the AU and the
United Nations, which was pioneered in Darfur in the
form of both the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)and the Joint Chief
Mediator.

As Mr. Ping has indicated, the essence of the
mandate of the AU High-level Panel on Darfur was to
advise the African Union on what could be done to
accelerate the advance towards peace, justice and
reconciliation in Darfur. The Security Council is of
course aware that at its meeting of 29 October, the AU
Peace and Security Council reconstituted the AU High-
Level Panel on Darfur as the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel for Sudan. I mention this

because much of what we will say will relate to the
work of the Implementation Panel, whose mandate,
again as mentioned by the Chairperson of the AU
Commission, is

"to assist in the implementation of all aspects of
the AU Panel on Darfur recommendations, as
well as to assist the Sudanese parties in the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) and other related processes, as
part of the democratic transformation of Sudan".

We are certain that the members of the Security
Council are familiar both with the AU High-level Panel
report and its recommendations and with the decisions
of the AU Peace and Security Council in that regard.
We will therefore not discuss the report in detail, but
will rather offer what we consider to be a few salient
observations. Of course, if the Council should require
us to comment on any detail in the report, we will do
so.

Drawing on its collective experience, the AU
Panel understood that a peaceful settlement of the
conflict in Darfur could only be achieved through a
negotiated agreement amongst the Sudanese
themselves. In other words, we proceeded from the
position that it was neither possible nor desirable to
impose a Darfur solution on the Sudanese people. We
mention this important point at this stage because it
helped to inform both the modus operandi of the AU
Panel and the report it ultimately submitted to the AU
Peace and Security Council. With regard to that modus
operandi, the AU Panel decided to engage the Sudanese
stakeholders, and especially the Darfurians, in an
extensive process of consultations, essentially to
understand what they themselves thought might be
done to accelerate the process towards peace, justice
and reconciliation in Darfur. Further, to conclude this
process of consultations, we also presented our draft
recommendations to the same Darfur and Sudan
constituencies to solicit their opinions on the
recommendations.

Arising out of all this, we are happy to inform the
Security Council that, in our View, the AU Panel report
and recommendations broadly reflect the Views of the
major stakeholders in Sudan and Darfur about what
needs to be done speedily to achieve the objectives that
I have stated. We believe that this is of major practical
importance, because it underlines the objective reality
that a broad consensus exists in Darfur and in Sudan as
a whole which should facilitate the critically important
negotiations to end the conflict in Darfur.

Just over a week ago, we Visited Sudan, and the
AU High-Level Implementation Panel had occasion to
meet with, among others, a broad spectrum of the
leadership of Darfur civil society. Those leaders
emphasized exactly this point: that, to use their words,
the situation in Darfur was ripe effectively to
accelerate the peace process. We must also mention the
fact that after interactions with other Sudanese
stakeholders since the report of the AU Panel was
published and endorsed by the Peace and Security
Council, we can say firmly that the major Sudanese
constituencies broadly support the report and its
recommendations.

Members of the Security Council will also be
aware that, in our report, we insisted on everything
being done to enable the people of Darfur to participate
in both the 2010 general elections and any national
dialogue that might take place around the critical issue
of the 2011 South Sudan referendum. For this reason,
we thought it was important that the Darfur
negotiations be concluded before the impending
general elections.

We attached a great deal of importance to this
because we were concerned that, should the people of
Darfur feel excluded in any way from both the
elections and the consideration of matters relating to
the referendum, this would serve to underline their
marginalization and disempowerment, which were a
central cause of the armed uprising that started in 2003.

In this context, we would like to reiterate our
view that, first, a broad consensus exists in Darfur and
Sudan on the various elements that would constitute
what we described as a global political agreement on
Darfur; secondly, the people of Darfur insist that a
negotiated peace should be concluded as quickly as
possible; and thirdly, it is both possible and necessary
that this objective be achieved without much delay.

Here, I should also confirm that, like the AU
Panel during its short lifespan, the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel is ready to assist the Joint
Chief Mediator to achieve this outcome. This means
that, among other things, the Panel will engage the
various parties in Darfur and the Sudan to encourage
them to respond positively and expeditiously to such
initiatives as would be taken by the Joint Chief
Mediator.

Yet another matter I would like to underline is the
important reality, mentioned by the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, that the three objectives of
peace, justice and reconciliation are interconnected and
interdependent. We are thus convinced that the positive
outcome we all seek with regard to Darfur will have to
take the form of an integrated package that achieves
the necessary balance among the various objectives of
peace, justice and reconciliation.

We are convinced that any attempt to emphasize
the importance of any of these three objectives at the
expense of the others would not bring about the just
and stable peace we all desire for the people of Darfur
and which the Darfurians themselves seek. This is one
of the considerations that informed the manner in
which we composed our recommendations, and we
believe that these will help the Sudanese negotiators to
arrive at the necessarily integrated package to which
we have referred.

In this context, we must mention the fact that
Sudan is not the first African country to be faced with
the challenge of finding the necessary balance in
addressing the interrelated issues of peace, justice and
reconciliation. Therefore, if necessary, beyond
considering the decisions taken by the AU Peace and
Security Council in this regard, the negotiators of the
Darfur agreement could draw on this wider African
experience. Indeed, I must say, the Darfurians kept
referring to that.

Members of the Security Council will also have
taken note of the fact that the AU Panel underlined that
the conflict in Darfur, as was the case with the conflicts
in South and Eastern Sudan, is a manifestation of a
general Sudan crisis. We explained that this Sudan
crisis was of long standing, encompassing both the
colonial and post-colonial periods. It arose, again as
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission has
said, essentially from the concentration of power and
wealth in an elite centred in Khartoum, resulting in the
marginalization, impoverishment and underdevelopment of
the so-called periphery, including Darfur.

Furthermore, this unequal distribution of power
and wealth made it imperative that the centre should, to
the extent possible, deny the rest of the country the
democratic right to elect a Government of their choice,
among other rights. The Darfurians themselves insisted
that this historical legacy was the root cause of the
violent conflict in Darfur. From this, it follows that the

solution of the conflict in Darfur should be located
within the context of addressing that legacy.

It is therefore self-evident that the resolution of
the conflict in Darfur, like those in South and Eastern
Sudan, cannot but necessitate the restructuring of
Sudan as a whole in order to address the historical
legacy, the consequence of which has been the various
conflicts that have afflicted Sudan for many decades.

Accordingly, the Implementation Panel will work
closely with the people of Sudan as they strive to give
effect to a stated common resolve to build what has
been described as the new Sudan. As with any process
that seeks to achieve the fundamental restructuring of
any society, the creation of that new Sudan, explained
in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement as making
unity attractive, is and has been difficult and
challenging. Because of this, the Sudanese people need
all the support they can get to help them achieve this
objective. We therefore hope that the United Nations
will also do what it can in this regard.

As the Security Council is aware, the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement gives the opportunity
for the people of South Sudan to opt for independence,
which might suggest that once the South has seceded,
if this is the outcome of the 2011 referendum, the
historical power relations in North Sudan could remain
unchanged. In our interactions with the population in
Darfur, there was no serious suggestion that this region
of Sudan sought to follow South Sudan with regard to
the issue of self-determination. We make this point to
emphasize that the implementation of a just Darfur
peace agreement necessarily implies the transformation
of Sudan in the manner we have indicated, including
the democratization of the country.

Because of the central importance of this process
of democratization to the resolution of the Sudan crisis,
as indicated in the mandate of our High-level
Implementation Panel, we will act to encourage the
Sudanese parties to create a climate conducive to free
and fair elections and to conduct the 2010 general
elections in such a manner that all the people of Sudan
can freely elect legislatures and Governments of their
choice.

It is commonly agreed that this is vitally
important in the context of both the fundamental
restructuring of Sudan, to which we have referred, and
the need to ensure that the 2011 referendum is handled
by a democratically elected Government. Again, it is a

matter of common agreement that the will of the
people of South Sudan should be respected, whatever
the outcome of the referendum. In this context, the
Sudanese parties have recognized the fact that they
must engage one another on the vital matter of the
consequences of the referendum, regardless of its
outcome.

Accordingly, and, again, as the Security Council
knows, the South Sudan referendum law requires that
the parties engage in discussions to consider all the
relevant post-referendum issues. Once again, our
Implementation Panel will work with these parties to
contribute what it can to the consideration of these
post-referendum issues, in part to help ensure that
Sudan sustains the peace that was brought about by the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement - once more,
regardless of the outcome of the referendum.

We share the belief that the people of Sudan, in
both the North and the South, are very keen to live in
conditions of peace, even if South Sudan elects to be
an independent State. The Implementation Panel will
therefore do everything it can to focus on the issue of
peace, among other ways by considering the situation
along the North-South border and making the
necessary and relevant recommendations to the
Sudanese parties.

We should perhaps have mentioned earlier the
continuing challenge to the implementation of all the
outstanding agreements contained in the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. By agreement with
the National Congress Party and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement, the Panel will interact with
these two parties to the CPA to help accelerate the
process towards the completion of the agenda detailed
in the Agreement.

As indicated in the AU Panel's report, we
consider the normalization of relations between Sudan
and its neighbours to be of vital importance with regard
to the achievement of the goal of a peaceful and stable
Sudan. Accordingly, we have been greatly encouraged
by the steps taken by the Governments of Chad and
Sudan to reduce and end the tensions between the two
countries. The African Union Panel has engaged both
Governments on this matter, and the Implementation
Panel will follow up on this and will resume its
interaction with the other neighbouring countries.

As we carry out this work, we will be very
mindful of the critical importance of Sudan to its
neighbours and the rest of our continent - again, as
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission has
said. It is self-evident that Sudan, which shares borders
with nine other countries in a volatile part of Africa,
should serve as a force for peace, stability and
development both in the region and in Africa as a
whole.

Earlier, we mentioned the groundbreaking
partnership between the AU and the United Nations,
which resulted in the establishment of UNAMID. As
UNAMID approaches the second anniversary of its
establishment, at the end of this month, we would like
to pay tribute to the extraordinary dedication and
courage of the men and women who are serving in
Darfur under challenging conditions, as well as to
commend the Mission. It is obvious that in addition to
the work it has done already, UNAMID will be
required to take on additional tasks once the Darfur
global political agreement is concluded. We therefore
hope that the necessary steps will be taken to ensure
that it has the necessary capacity to carry out all its
tasks.

In this context, we would like to congratulate
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari on his assumption of the high
position of Joint Special Representative in Darfur; we
look forward to working with him as closely as
possible.

The AU Panel was privileged to have regular
interactions with both UNAMID and the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan, as well as with the
special envoys of countries members of the Security
Council and the European Union. The Implementation
Panel will strive to sustain this interaction, as we
believe that concerted international action is required
effectively to respond to the urgent challenges that
Sudan faces.
09-66048
The Panel is conscious of the reality of the
extensive nature of its mandate and therefore the work
it must carry out. It is similarly alert to the fact that it
has to act within a very short time frame, given the fact
of the impending general elections and the South
Sudan referendum.

However, objective reality dictates that the
matters we have mentioned - the resolution of the
conflict in Darfur, the CPA and North-South relations,
the democratization of Sudan and the normalization of
relations in the neighbourhood - should be addressed
simultaneously and as a matter of urgency. The
Implementation Panel will do its best to respond to this
challenge.

Once more, we thank the Security Council for
giving us the opportunity to make a brief presentation
on the issues we have mentioned and hope that the
Council will favour us and our continent with its
support, resulting in the further strengthening of the
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations.

