Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): Since I did not

participate in the discussion during the morning meeting,
I would also like to join my colleagues who extended
their warm welcome to Ambassador Levitte of France.
We wish him every success in all his endeavours at the
United Nations in the years to come.

I would like to thank Mr. Annabi for the briefing on
the latest developments in Tajikistan, and to express my
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his interim
report. We also welcome the participation in our meeting
of Ambassador Alimov of Tajikistan.

The recent parliamentary elections in Tajikistan have
become a crucial event in the life of that country and
therefore deserve the full attention of the Security
Council. Those elections mark the last major step in the
transitional period outlined in the June 1997 General
Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National
Accord in Tajikistan, which was signed between the
Government of Tajikistan and the United Tajik
Opposition (UTO). Those elections draw a line under one
of the most difficult conflicts in the territories of the
newly independent States that re-emerged on the world
political map. After long years of fighting, the Tajik
parties managed to come to a peaceful solution and to
eventual reconciliation.

Peaceful reconciliation became possible thanks to the
political will and tireless and persistent efforts of the
Tajik parties themselves, the President of Tajikistan,
friendly neighbouring countries and the entire
international community, in particular the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE).

The parliamentary elections - the first multi-party
ones in the history of the country - were held on the
basis of the new law adopted following the national
referendum in September 1999.

As outlined in the joint statement issued by the
OSCE and the Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights (ODIR) on the parliamentary elections in
Tajikistan, the most significant accomplishment of this
peace-building step was the inclusion of the former
warring parties and others in the electoral process. It is
noteworthy that for the first time the military opposition,
which had relied on its military force, chose to say
farewell to arms and to seek by political means its place
in civil society and in the power structures.

 

In our view, this remarkable decision attests to the fact
that Tajik society has taken the road to democracy and
should be regarded as a solid basis for the further
development of the society. It would be no exaggeration to
say that this is an significant event that will have a positive
impact on the security environment of the entire region of
Central Asia.

It should be noted that the international community
has taken a significant interest in this event. The United
Nations and OSCE Joint Electoral Observation Mission to
Tajikistan provided more than 80 observers, who visited
some 300 polling stations across Tajikistan. We are fully
aware of the critical assessments regarding certain
shortcomings observed by the international monitors during
the elections. However, we should bear in mind the fact
that these took place in a country which went through years
of armed conflict and is now taking its first steps on the
road towards democracy. We have no doubt that those
findings will be taken seriously by the leadership of the
Republic of Tajikistan.

As the Secretary-General rightly noted in paragraph 17
of his report (8/2000/214), "the move towards a stable
democracy has only just begun". It is of crucial importance
that the international community continue to support
Tajikistan. Ukraine, as a country with longstanding
traditions of friendship with Tajikistan, will actively
participate in this process.

We also deem it essential that a United Nations post-
conflict peace-building office be established in Tajikistan.
We would like to commend the men and women of the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan
(UNMOT) staff for their dedicated work during the course
of this year, sometimes under extremely difficult conditions,
which ensured the successful implementation of the task
entrusted to them by the international community. We are
proud of the fact that Ukrainian nationals have made a
concrete contribution to the work of the Mission.

Finally, we support the draft presidential statement
proposed by the delegation of the Russian Federation and
negotiated today.

