Ms. Power (United States of America): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Kang and High
Commissioner Guterres for theirpowerfulpresentations.

One year ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2139 (2014), aimed at addressing the
humanitarian and human rights catastrophe in Syria.
As today's briefings made clear, the humanitarian
crises have only deepened. There are multiple crises. It
is estimated that 12.2 million people need humanitarian
assistance in Syria. At this time last year, 9.3 million
people were said to need humanitarian assistance.
That is nearly 3 million more people who need aid to
survive, in just a year. Let us think about that. That
is why it is absolutely crucial that all donors make
generous commitments at the humanitarian pledging
conference in Kuwait in March; commitments that are
commensurate with the magnitude of Syria's crisis.
That is what the United States plans to do.

While the international community absolutely
must meet the immediate and dire needs of the Syrian
people, we must also face the fact that humanitarian
assistance is a band-aid: it must be accompanied by
more intense political pressure to stop the violence and
widespread abuses that are fuelling the crisis.

Although more people in Syria need humanitarian

aid than ever before, the Al-Assad regime also seems
more intent on denying aid and causing civilian harm
than ever before. Resolution 2139 (2014) called on the
Syrian parties to immediately cease the indiscriminate
use of weapons in populated areas, including through
aerial bombardment using barrel bombs. Yet in the
year since the resolution was adopted, according to the
Syrian Network for Human Rights, the Assad regime
has dropped at least 1,950 barrel bombs, which have
killed at least 6,480 people, 95 per cent of whom were
civilians. According to the Human Rights Watch
report released earlier this week, satellite imagery
identified at least 450 distinct major damage sites in
10 opposition-held towns and villages in the Dara'a
governorate, and more than 1,000 major damage sites
in the Aleppo governorate, between February 2014
and January of this year. The Human Rights Watch
report shows that many impact sites have damage
signatures consistent with the detonation of large, air-
dropped munitions, including improvised barrel and
conventional bombs dropped by helicopters. Yet in
spite of this clear evidence, Assad cheerfully denied
that his forces used barrel bombs and called any such
claims, "a childish story" - a particularly grotesque
choice of words, given that well over 10,000 children
have been killed in the conflict so far.

The recently released report of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic (A/HRC/28/69) documents many attacks on
civilians. One of them occurred on Aleppo's al-Shaar
neighbourhood on 6 November. The first barrel bomb
reportedly killed civilians in its area of impact and
buried more in rubble. When others rushed to the area
to dig out the people buried and assist the wounded,
the Government dropped a second barrel bomb. At
least 15 people were killed in all, most of them women
and children. Some of the wounded later died in field
hospitals, according to the report, due to the lack of
necessary medical supplies.

The lack of medical supplies is no accident; it is
the result of the Al-Assad regime's routine confiscation
of medical and surgical supplies transported by
United Nations convoys. The United Nations and its
implementing partners have tried to be maximally
transparent with the Syrian regime by allowing the
Government to inspect cross-line shipments, going
beyond the provisions in resolutions 2165 (2014) and
2191 (2014). Yet, even when these regime approvals
for cross-line operations are granted, the regime seizes
medical supplies, such as surgical items, midwifery
kits and rehydration kits, which could save the lives of
mothers, small children and babies. The Council was
clear in its demand that all parties allow delivery of
medical assistance and cease depriving civilians of
food and medicine indispensable for their survival in
resolution 2139 (2014).

The Physicians for Human Rights report that
Assistant Secretary-General Kang mentioned documents
228 attacks on 179 separate medical facilities. Ofthese,
Physicians for Human Rights found, 90 per cent were
carried out by regime forces. To date, according to
Physicians for Human Rights, 145 medical personnel
have been executed or tortured to death in Syria; 139
of those individual killings were carried out by Syrian
Government forces or by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL).

In Yarmouk, 18,000 civilians - most of them
Palestinians refugees - are virtually cut off from
assistance and surrounded by fighting. In 2014,
the United Nations was only able to provide the
equivalent of 400 calories per day for each inhabitant
of Yarmouk - the equivalent of two cups of rice - due
to the extremely limited access provided by the Syrian
regime. If members have not seen the photos of the
kids inside Yarmouk, they should force themselves to

stare at their sunken, hollow faces and glossed eyes.
This is what Al-Assad's regime has done to children,
and he is under insufficient pressure from his backers
to do something as simple as let food through. And
Yarmouk is not an outlier: of the 212,000 Syrians living
in besieged areas, 185,000 of them, or 87 per cent, live
in areas being besieged by Syrian Government forces.

Now, terrorist groups like ISIL have committed
horrific abuses against Syrians, and we must be
absolutely adamant and united in our condemnation of
those horrors, which are on the rise. We condemn in the
strongest possible terms ISIL's attacks of 23 February
on Assyrian Christian villages in the northeast Syrian
province of Al Hasakah, where they kidnapped
hundreds of civilians, including women, children and
older persons, and we join others in demanding the
immediate and unconditional release of these civilians,
together with all ofISIL's hostages.

In December, four mass graves were discovered
in Deir ez-Zor, containing the bodies of some of the
hundreds of people abducted by ISIL months before.
ISIL has also established what they call "cub camps",
where they indoctrinate kids, teaching them how to use
weapons and to carry out suicide attacks.

At the same time we condemn ISIL and unite to
confront them, we must remember that the rise of
these violent extremist groups in Syria would not have
happened without the atrocities perpetrated by the
Al-Assad regime. And the regime's ongoing atrocities
continue to be the extremists' best recruiting tool. So
any plan that would ally the international community
with Al-Assad to confront these violent extremist
groups would be completely counterproductive, as it
would further fuel ISIL's rise.

There is only one way out of this horrific crisis,
and that is through a comprehensive political solution.
To that end, the United States again joins others in
commending the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, to
halt - even for a limited time - the use of all aerial
bombs and heavy artillery in Aleppo, whose civilians
have suffered immensely amid fierce fighting. While it
would be a welcome step if the Al-Assad regime were
to fulfil the commitments it made to Mr. De Mistura
to stop unilaterally its aerial bombardment in Aleppo
and allow the unimpeded delivery of humanitarian
assistance to civilians for six weeks, the regime has an
abysmal track record on honouring its commitments.
Indeed, these very commitments are supposed to have
been implemented under resolutions adopted by this
very Council. So what matters and what we must look
to are the regime's actions.

In addition to marking a year since the adoption
of resolution 2139 (2014), we also mark other terrible
benchmarks today. On 15 March, we will enter the
fifth year of the Syrian conflict. It has also been three
years since plainclothes security officers raided the
office of the Syrian Centre for Media and Freedom
of Expression, a Damascus-based group dedicated to
promoting freedom of expression, detaining 14 staff
members. Many of those detained were tortured,
according to staff members who were later released.
Among those detained was the group's director, Mazen
Darwish, who was charged with so-called crimes such
as publishing human rights reports and documenting
the names of people tortured, disappeared or killed
during the conflict.

Mazen is still behind bars today, despite a General
Assembly resolution adopted in May 2014 (resolution 67/262) that included a demand for his immediate
release. Writing fromjail last year, Mazen said,

"There is not a single prison in Syria today
without one of my friends inside it, nor is there a
cemetery in Syria today that doesn't contain the
remains of one of them."

There is a risk, in our regular meetings on Syria,
to get used to the fact that the numbers of individuals
detained and killed and disappeared and displaced
and denied food - among so many other measures of
human suffering - continue to rise. Indeed, there is a
perverse dynamic whereby, as those numbers continue
to rise, our sensitivity falls. Our nerve endings harden,
and a sense of inevitability takes hold.

We must not let that happen. We must remember
that each of those rising numbers and each one of those
millions stands for another person. We must return to
the commitments the Council has made, such as those
in past resolutions to "take further measures" "in the
case of non-compliance" (resolution 2165 (2014)) and
to hold accountable those responsible for violations and
abuses.

The Council's impact will increase only if member
States' positions change, and that will happen only if
we recognize that there are children just like our own,
starving in Yarmouk, and mothers just like our own who
die in childbirth in Aleppo, because medical supplies
have been stolen off United Nations trucks, or mothers
who feel helpless in the face of their children's pleas for
food. Ifthat does not motivate us, literally nothing will.

