Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I welcome Ambassador Bolton as Permanent
Representative of the United States to the United
Nations. We are prepared to cooperate actively with
him in the Security Council and other bodies of the
Organization.

Russia voted in favour of resolution 1618 (2005)
on terrorist activities in Iraq. We proceed from the
premise that any Violence against the civilian
population is a crime that can have no justification
whatsoever. We express our condolences once again to
the Iraqis who have lost their loved ones as a result of
terrorist attacks and to our Algerian and Egyptian
colleagues whose comrades fell victim to criminals
hiding behind religious and political slogans. We are
pleased that today's resolution includes provisions
condemning the murder of diplomats and calling for
protection for all foreign civilian personnel. Those who
organize, sponsor and carry out such inhuman
misdeeds must be subject to the most severe
punishment.

In the circumstances of a brutal war against
terrorists, we note in particular the inadmissibility of
giving them a podium in the mass media for the spread
of their views. We may refer abstractly about freedom
of speech and the right to disseminate information, but
that right is not without its limits. In most countries
throughout the world, it is prohibited to propagandize
war, inequality among people and various forms of
discrimination. There are other limitations as well. We
must be equally responsible in approaching the
possibility of propagandizing ideologies and terrorist
practices, which are no less dangerous phenomena. It is
indeed ignoble to yield to the commercial temptation to
popularize sanguinary bandits who defile the memory
of the dead and inflict additional pain and suffering on
their loved ones.

The situation in Iraq cannot be boiled down
simply to the need to fight international terrorism.
Uncompromising opposition to terrorism, regardless of
its origins, is one of the priority responsibilities of the
Security Council. We can resolve the issue of Iraq only
if we undertake comprehensive efforts in the overall
Iraqi context. The crimes committed today by terrorists
are only part of the problem to be overcome by the
Iraqi people on their path towards a political
settlement. The achievement of national reconciliation
is the most important key to the elimination of the
terrorist threats facing that State. It is vitally necessary
to find a just political solution for adequate
participation in the management of State affairs by all
political forces in the country and all ethnic and
religious groups living on its territory.

We should agree on the basic principles to
underlie the future constitution and the country's
governmental structures. In that connection, a new
basic law must be acceptable to all Iraqis and exclude
all forms of discrimination. We must reach an
understanding on the timeframe and conditions for the
withdrawal of all foreign forces from Iraqi territory. In
that connection, we must revive the country's
functioning national security structures. If we fail to
resolve those issues, the causes of the ongoing terrorist
activity in Iraq will not be allayed. Russia has
repeatedly undertaken initiatives to assist in the Iraqi
political settlement, and those initiatives remain active.

