Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Acting Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his
briefing. I welcome the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Jeremie, at today's
meeting. I listened very attentively to the statement by
Mr. Hoxhaj.

Recently, the situation in Kosovo has generally
remained stable, yet it is still sensitive and fragile. The
situation in northern Kosovo where ethnic minorities
live is particularly complex.

China is gravely concerned at the recent tension
in northern Kosovo. We are of the view that the parties
concerned should exercise caution and resolve their
differences through dialogue and negotiations and
should refrain from taking any unilateral action that
could change the current status of the region and
escalate the present situation.

The question of Kosovo has a direct bearing on
peace and stability in the Balkans and Europe at large.
China believes that the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia should be respected. Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) serves as the important
legal basis for resolving the question of Kosovo. The
question of Kosovo should be settled in the framework
of relevant resolutions and through peaceful means
such as dialogue, consultations and negotiations among
the parties concerned.

China is encouraged by the recent progress made
during the dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo. We
urge both parties to keep up the momentum and
endeavour to find a mutually acceptable solution at an
early date.

China commends the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo for its efforts to
carry out its mandate under difficult circumstances,
and we support the Mission's continuing contribution
to maintaining regional peace and stability. We hope
that the relevant regional organizations will continue to
play a positive and constructive role in properly
addressing the question of Kosovo.

China is deeply concerned at the illicit trafficking
in human organs in Kosovo. No action in violation of
international law and international humanitarian
standards can be tolerated. Serbia's concern at such
cases is fully justified. We support calls for the United
Nations to conduct investigation into these cases.

