Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to express our deep concern over the
escalation of violence in the Middle East. The situation
has spun out of control, as recent events demonstrate.
We emphatically condemn the terrible act of terror in
Netanya and other recent acts that have caused the
death of an excessive number of civilians. In making
this condemnation, we call into question and reject the
disproportionate use of force by Israel. The actions
taken in Ramallah by the armed forces of Israel do not
contribute in any way either to establishing a process
that generates the conditions for security or to finding a
political solution to this spiral of violence.

We are thoroughly convinced, as the Secretary-
General has said, that this escalation fuels the
arguments of the extremists; it empowers their cause in
an unacceptable manner. The political context
necessary to put an end to this cycle of violence
between Palestinians and Israelis has evolved
favourably in recent days. There are some political
events deserving of our support, since they provide the
most visible reason to hope that the situation will
evolve in the direction we all wish. We are referring,
first, to the outcome of the Arab Summit in Beirut,
which has set out a vision for a definitive solution to
the conflict. We are also referring to the role played by
the "Quartet" and, in particular, to the political
importance that we all attach to the activities of
General Anthony Zinni, the Special Envoy of the
United States. Thirdly, we would like to refer to the
validity of the Mitchell and Tenet plans and the
Council's recognition of them as possible solutions to
the spiral of violence. Finally, we refer to resolution
1397 (2002), adopted on 12 March, which
demonstrated that unity on the Security Council does
indeed have a desirable impact.

Unfortunately, the positive developments in the
political context have not been enough to halt the cycle
of violence or to create conditions for security. That is
why it is clear to us now that if we, as the Security
Council and as responsible members of the
international community, are not capable of protecting
this political environment, we will be faced with an
escalation ofa magnitude we do not want to imagine.

We would like to join the other members of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General in calling
on the parties to completely cease and desist from all
acts of violence and in calling in particular on Israel to
respect the physical integrity of President Yasser Arafat
and to withdraw from occupied territories, especially
from Ramallah, thereby recognizing the political
importance of the Palestinian Authority and of its
leader as the valid interlocutor in finding a definitive
solution to this conflict.

Our actions, individually and collectively, must
contribute to strengthening the political environment to
which I referred earlier and be part of a well-concerted
international effort leading to a sustainable ceasefire
and to the return ofthe parties to the negotiating table.

