Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani for his remarks
and welcome him as the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). I assure him of my delegation's full support in
steering the work of that important Committee. Poland
very much appreciates the objective and creative
approach that Indonesia has adopted since the very
beginning of its tenure in the Council.

This year, under Indonesia's leadership, the
Committee has started preparatory work for the
upcoming comprehensive review of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), which will be completed
in 2021. The comprehensive review will have two
major objectives: first, to analyse the implementation
of the resolution, and, secondly, to evaluate the process
with a view to improving its effectiveness, analyse the
work of the Committee and recommend any necessary
changes. We should remember that, based on resolution
2325 (2016), recommendations should take into account
the evolving nature of risks of proliferation and rapid
advances in science, technology and commerce
in the context of non-proliferation. We encourage
non-reporting States to collaborate with the Committee
and its Group of Experts with the aim of drafting their
initial reports.

One hundred and eighty-two countries have
submitted at least their initial reports on the
implementation of the resolution 1540 (2004) to the
Committee. This is a good record, and it proves that
the issue of non-proliferation remains among the main
priorities of the international community. However,
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004) are not a
one-time task. We call on all States to fully implement
that document by taking national and international
measures aimed at strengthening their capacities,
including by the establishment of national action plans,
improving border management and law enforcement,
international judicial cooperation, countering terrorist
narratives and engaging communities.

As an example of Poland's serious engagement in
building capacities and awareness in that regard, let
me briefly inform Council members that, in May this
year, we will organize, together with the United States,
a three-day workshop on the Proliferation Security
Initiative (PSI). The programming of that event will
include discussion of elements of proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors. We
have invited countries from the broader region, the
European Union Eastern Partnership, members and all
PSI Operational Experts Group countries.

As a country that, together with Croatia, organized
the first peer review under resolution 1540 (2004), we
commend those States that have conducted similar
exercises. We welcome the most recent initiative of the
Dominican Republic and Panama to organize a peer
review this year.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to express Poland's appreciation for the professional and
active work of the Group of Experts, whose expertise
and knowledge provide valuable feedback for use in the
decisions to be made by the Committee.

