Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The representative of Ukraine would be well
advised to choose his words more wisely. Ukraine is a
neighbour of Russia, and we are trying to find a solution
to the crisis. Therefore Ms. Power should be asked who
is the arsonist there - she is laughing now - and
what she, together with Mr. Parubiy, set fire to on the
Maidan. She could shed some light on that question if
she knows the details about the arsonists.

I have one last point, which is connected to the
comments made earlier by Ms. Power. People keep
talking about Russia as though there were no one
in eastern Ukraine trying to fight for their rights.
Even if the figures mentioned pertaining to Russian
interference were all correct, the fact is that tens of
thousands of people have taken up arms to defend their
rights in eastern Ukraine. Russia could not force anyone
to do that. It would be impossible. Unfortunately, many
simply do not wish to see the real situation in eastern
Ukraine. That is why the crisis has dragged on.

My Ukrainian colleague said something about
artists. In Washington, DC, they painted for them a
very simple picture of who should be toppled and how.
There was no need to use paint; a simple pencil sketch
was enough. Using that rough pencil sketch, they tried
to resolve the political problems of Ukraine. And now
we are seeing the results. Now military advisers are
being called for. At present Saakashvili is an adviser
to the President, and there are 300 advisers. We saw
a similar scenario in Georgia in 2008. If that path is
chosen, while using colourful words about the role of
Russia, this will end very sadly for Ukraine - even
more sadly then the events we have seen over the past
year.

We would like to avoid that because there are
finally signs that the situation can be resolved. There
is a package of measures, both military and political,
that should be strictly implemented. We should not say,
as some have today, that we must first deal with all the
military aspects, then deal with the political ones. No,
we need to deal with those aspects in parallel, because
the range of issues that need to be resolved before the
end of the year in accordance with the package is very
broad. So we should not lose track of the essence of the
issue. We should focus on all the different measures in
the package.

