Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Mr. Lowcock, the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, and Ms. Gamba, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for their briefings.

China takes note of the Secretary-General's recent
report on cross-border humanitarian relief operations
(S/2018/724) and would like to express its grave concerns
about the humanitarian situation in the country and the
obstacles to humanitarian activities there. We applaud
the efforts of United Nations humanitarian agencies
and related parties to ease the humanitarian situation
in certain parts of Syria. We hope that all Syrian
parties will continue to coordinate with United Nations
humanitarian relief operations. Given the ongoing
conflict in some parts of Syria, we hope that the parties
concerned will refrain from harming innocent civilians
and work to improve the protection of children affected
by the conflict. All Syrian actors must bear in mind their
country's future and their people's well-being, abide by
the relevant Security Council resolutions and resolve
their differences through dialogue and consultations,
with a view to easing the humanitarian situation as
quickly as possible. In all humanitarian endeavours, it
is imperative to adhere to the principles of neutrality,
impartiality and non-politicization and respect Syria's
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity. The United Nations and the international
community must enhance their communication and
coordination with the Syrian Government and provide
assistance to all areas in need.

Greater support is needed from the international
community to help Syria's neighbours accommodate
the large numbers of Syrian refugees. We have noted
the progress made in returning Syrians to their homes.
The international community must prioritize and
actively support Syria's reconstruction, stepping up
efforts to clear mines, improvised explosive devices
and explosive remnants of war, minimize accidental
casualties among civilians and help refugees and
displaced persons return home.

Terrorist groups continue to launch attacks
within Syria. We condemn the recent terrorist attack
in Suwayda governorate in southern Syria. The
international community must enhance cooperation
and uphold uniform standards in combating all groups
that the Council designates as terrorists.

Any serious improvement of the humanitarian
situation in Syria requires greater efforts to promote
the political process. The international community
should make every effort to endorse the United Nations
as the main mediation channel and support Special
Envoy de Mistura in facilitating the political process,
in accordance with the principle of Syrian ownership
and leadership and based on resolution 2254 (2015). It
is important to ensure that the Council remains united
on the issue and can help to create the conditions
conducive to a political settlement. China attaches
great importance to the humanitarian situation in Syria.
China's President, Xi Jinping recently announced
another $600 million in aid to Syria, Jordan, Lebanon
and other countries in support of humanitarian and
reconstruction efforts on the ground. We will continue
to help Syria and its neighbours affected by the flow of
Syrian refugees to the best of our abilities.

