Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): It is an honour to speak
before the Council today on the question of Palestine. It
is an issue of profound importance to the Government
and people of the Maldives. I would like to extend my
thanks to Mr. Jose' Manuel Garcia Margallo, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Spain and President of the Security
Council for the month of October, for convening this
timely debate on the question of Palestine. My delegation
wishes to further express our sincere appreciation to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon for his recent visit to
the region, which is yet another in a series of visits, in
continuation of his tireless efforts in search of peace.

In two days' time, we will be marking the seventieth
anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations.
The United Nations has been a force for good for all
humankind. It has helped in ending conflicts and in
making peace. It has saved millions of people from
oppression, colonialism and military occupation. Yet
the United Nations has been helpless in ending Israel's
subjugation of Palestinians. Israel's continued illegal
occupation of Palestine epitomizes a deep malaise in
the international system that we have to address.

For decades, the international community has sought
the realization of a two-State solution, reaffirmed by
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid Principles, the
Oslo accords, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
Road Map. Those efforts attempt to succeed against a
system of institutionalized occupation and apartheid
that tries to alter the mindsets of generations who have
grown up under occupation and whose reality is one of
fear, hatred and violence. Those efforts have failed a
people, a nation, a region and the entire international
community.

The recent violence that has broken out in
Jerusalem and across the occupied territories paints a
bleak picture. In the past weeks, we have seen violence
and counter-reprisals escalate sharply. That the Old
City of Jerusalem has been shut to Palestinians is a
clear illustration of the gravity of the current situation.
The sanctity of the Haram Al-Sharif must be restored.
Granting Palestinians their rightful access is a first step
to further the peace process. Israel must stop altering
the Islamic and Arabic character of the city.
Every year, thousands of Israeli settlers move into
the occupied territories illegally. The combination
of increasingly belligerent political rhetoric and the
enforced physical and demographic changes to the
occupied Palestinian territories continually reduces the
chances for peace. That window is steadily closing. The
Secretary-General, on his latest trip to the occupied
Palestine, highlighted that, when he said: "What is
missing is the resolve to restore a political horizon for
talks and a political process that delivers real results
and hope".

It is a sad reality that today there is an absence of
hope and that despair has grabbed hold of a people who
have nothing left to lose, and that conditions for further
violence are being fermented. It is no coincidence that
the second Intifada broke out six weeks after the collapse
of the Camp David summit, nor is it an accident that
violence broke out last summer following the collapse
of the United States-led peace effort. In the absence
of hope and in the face of oppression, there is only
violence and hatred. Such hatred has bred extremism,
fostered radicalism and consumed the entire region.

The Maldives has repeatedly called for the
community of nations to be more vigilant in addressing
the issues of borders, refugees, settlements and
Jerusalem in the quest for a comprehensive and
sustained peace. The Maldives reiterates its support for
full recognition of an independent State of Palestine
within its pre-l967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. We have underscored the importance of
greater involvement on the part of the international
community, particularly the Council, in the settlement
of a negotiated peace.

The Maldives urges the Security Council to fulfil
its primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. We urge it to take the firm measures
that are needed to end Israel's illegal occupation of
Palestine and its apartheid practices there. It is time that
the Council demanded an end to the illegal occupation
and to the oppression of the Palestinian people. The
United Nations must take the lead in steering the peace
process from passive rhetoric to pragmatic action. The
right to live life in peace is as much one for each and
every Palestinian as it is for each of us here today.

