Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela thanks Nigeria for convening
this important thematic debate and expresses its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Furthermore, we endorse the statement to be made by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The concept note circulated by the Nigerian
presidency (S/2015/599, annex) rightly points out that
the end of the Cold War led to the strengthening of
regional and subregional organizations with greater
political space and international relevance. Venezuela
believes strongly that the emerging multipolar and
multicentre world bodes very positively for the
strenghening of international peace and security.
In this process, sustained cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations is critical to
achieving the definitive abandonment of unilaterlism
in international affairs. In this respect, we stress the
need to work towards a more balanced world in which
regional organizations have an important role to play
in ensuring peace and security. Venezuela therefore
calls for the expansion and strengthening of regional
organizations, as well as for increasing interaction and
relationships among them, since they are the natural
agencies for preventing and resolving the conflicts that
threaten world peace.

Regional organizations are prior and complementary
entities in the United Nations efforts to maintain
peace and security, with particular emphasis on their
preventive capacities. In fulfilling these tasks, regional
organizations should fully respect all the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations,
including full respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of States and the
self-determination of peoples. Regional organizations
cannot promote war.

Over the past 15 years, Latin America and the
Caribbean have seen a profound change in their
structures and political and social institutions with the
emergence of a clear, progressive orientation towards a
multipolar and multicentre world, inspired by President
Hugo Chavez and other great regional leaders, including
Commandante Fidel Castro Ruz and Presidents Nestor
Kirschner, Evo Morales Ayma, Rafael Correa, Daniel
Ortega Saavedra, Lula da Silva, Dilma Rousseff and
Michelle Bachelet Jeria, among others. It has created a
new regional political architecture that answers more
to the interests of the countries of Latin America and
the Caribbean than to the interests of any other Power,
leaving far behind regional organizations that, rather
than represent the interests of Latin America and the
Caribbean, subordinate them to alien interests and
needs.

Thus, these past 15 years have seen the emergence of
the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America
(ALBA), PetroCaribe, the Union of South American
Nations (UNASUR), the Community of Latin American

and Caribbean States (CELAC), and the Southern
Common Market, now expanded and re-energized. This
break with the past represents a reaffirmation of the
principles of sovereignty, non-intervention in internal
affairs and political independence, and the definition
of the interests and priorities of the countries of the
region. These political integration processes are based
on the need for mutual respect and benefit in preserving
peace with social justice.

The Union of South American Nations is built
on the common resolve of all the countries of the
subregion. UNASUR has demonstrated its ability to
act quickly and decisively to prevent any corruption of
the constitutional order, as happened in Bolivia against
President Evo Morales Ayma in 2008 and against
President Rafael Correa in Ecuador in 2010, when the
member countries of that forum spoke up in favour of
the validity of the constitutional and democratic order in
those sister nations, in rejection of the insurrectionary
and separatist claims of the insurgents. UNASUR now
has a democratic protocol, signed in 2010, that provides
for the imposition of diplomatic, political and economic
sanctions in case of a breakdown of the democratic
order in the South American region.

Furthermore, ALBA was born of an initiative of
the President ofVenezuela, Hugo Chavez, to strengthen
the self-determination of peoples and the sovereignty
of States against the neocolonial policies of foreign
Powers and consistently in favour of the poorest and
most excluded. ALBA is not a subregional defence
mechanism. It is an organization that is sensitive to
the social, economic and environmental challenges
facing the peoples of the region. It is committed to
the fight against poverty and inequality. It is aware
of the inequities among rich, middle-income and
least developed countries. And it is focused on the
complementarity of economies, and not on voracious
and predatory competition. Cooperation and respect
are pillars of peace.

The greatest illustration of the commitment of
ALBA with regard to the development of the peoples
of the region is the establishment of PetroCaribe, in
2005. Conceived as an initiative to promote energy
security in Central America and the Caribbean,
PetroCaribe benefits more than 17 countries. It is a
model of cooperation based on energy integration and
founded on the principles of solidarity and special but
differential treatment in the region. That cooperation
is taking place in absolute respect for the agreements
of the Caribbean Community and the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States, as outstanding
examples of South-South cooperation among our
countries.

The Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States is an example of pluralistic multilateralism
and of unity in diversity among its members. Those
aspects have allowed CELAC to make progress
firmly in the development of common policies in such
sensitive areas as sustainable development, climate
change, nuclear disarmament, illicit drug trafficking,
rejecting the embargo against Cuba, rejecting sanctions
against Venezuela, and support for the process of
the decolonization of the Malvinas and Puerto Rico,
among others. In doing that, CELAC has highlighted
its strong commitment to international peace and
security, development with solidarity, partnership
and the promotion of human rights. Through CELAC,
not only do we consolidate the dream of the liberator
Simon Bolivar for a united America, but we reiterate
the historic principles of Latin America on international
law with regard to self-determination, territorial
inviolability and non-intervention, which are enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations.

Latin America and the Caribbean still faces
significant challenges, but the strength ofits institutions
and the commitment of its leaders and its peoples to move
forward towards fair, solidarity-based and autonomous
integration is the best tool at its disposal. In that context,
Latin America and the Caribbean stands out as a region
with a clear commitment to peace, which in the past
two decades have witnessed irrefutable progress in the
area of peace and security. In that regard, our countries
together have the lowest rate of military spending
worldwide. We strongly support the objectives with
regard to disarmament and the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. We are part of the first
nuclear-weapon-free zone in a heavily inhabited region,
set up in 1967 through the Treaty of Tlatelolco. We add
our support to the principles set out in the declaration
on South America as a zone of peace, as promoted by
the Union of South American Nations, as well as the
declaration on a zone of peace adopted by CELAC in
January 2014.

That experience, founded on respect for sovereignty,
rejection of interventionism, and an unlimited
commitment to peace, security and international law,
contribute to strengthening our cooperation with other
regional organizations in Africa and the Middle East,

among others.

Lastly, we want to stress the importance of
cooperation among the various regional and subregional
organizations, above all in support of regions beset by
terrorism, violence and war. Perhaps our experience in
the South as a zone ofpeace could be useful to our other
brotherly countries throughout the world.

