Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are very pleased
to have His Excellency President Touadera here at
the Security Council this afternoon. We thank him
for his presence here and for his important remarks.
They were extremely useful and put matters in their
proper perspective. We also thank Under-Secretary-
General Ladsous and Ambassador Hilale, Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) Central African
Republic configuration, for their respective briefings.

Although the Central African Republic continues
to face enormous difficulties, we appreciate the
positive developments under the leadership of President
Touadera. We fully support his Government's National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. The Central African
Republic certainly needs the sustained support of
the international community to ensure that its post-
conflict reconstruction and peacebuilding endeavours
are implemented successfully. We appreciate the role
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) is playing in that regard. We look forward
to its even greater effectiveness, for which it will need
much greater support.

The active engagement of the PBC through its
Central African Republic Configuration remains very
important in supporting the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan. Ambassador Hilale's statement
is very useful, and we have taken note of what he had
to say. The pledges made at the Brussels Conference
on the Central African Republic and the African
Union solidarity conference for the Central African
Republic are also very welcome, and we hope they will
be fulfilled.

We also commend the President's efforts in
undertaking security sector reform, and welcome
the progress made in disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation. Furthermore, we
recognize his efforts to expand State authority in the
entire country and reach out to the armed groups for
dialogue. We have taken note of what he said a while
ago with respect to the challenge the country is facing
in this area. The resumption of renewed violence in
various parts of the country is therefore a source of
great concern. It is an indication that sustaining peace
in the Central African Republic remains a serious
and complex challenge. There is therefore a need for
sustained efforts towards an all-inclusive national
dialogue and reconciliation for the restoration of
sustainable peace, social cohesion and stability.

In that context, we welcome the African Union
initiative for peace and reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, whose aim is to facilitate an
agreement between the Government and armed
opposition groups. That should be achieved without
in any way allowing impunity or compromising on
accountability, in order to create the necessary political
conditions for peace, reconciliation, democracy and
stability in the country. Three days ago, we had an
opportunity to informally interact with the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission to the Central African Republic on
that important African initiative. We are indeed very
pleased to hear today from President Touadera about his
views on the initiative. We understand that the goal is
to support President Touadera in his efforts to promote
reconciliation and inclusive governance, while building
on the conclusions of the Bangui Forum.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
of support to the President in his efforts to bring on
board all those who are willing to contribute to building
the country and to lay the basis for a durable peace in
the Central African Republic. The President could not
have been clearer with respect to how complex and
challenging the tasks involved are in ensuring that the
country is stabilized and begins the reconstruction
process. We have no doubt that the African initiative
will make a great contribution in that regard. We are
hopeful that the Council will send a strong political
message in support of the African initiative, and that
the President will continue to be committed, as he said,
to constructive dialogue.

