Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jan
Kubis for his briefing. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2013/535) on
the situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security, as well as our colleague
Ambassador Tanin for his statement, which amplifies
clearly the position and views of his Government on the
ongoing processes in Afghanistan.

We underline the importance of the continued
engagement of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in promoting peace and
stability in the country through increased support for
the realization of the Government's objectives. We
agree that UNAMA's role in the country should evolve
to strengthen national capacities, and that its activities
should be closely aligned with national priorities.
Therefore, UNAMA must be equipped with adequate
resources in order to effectively carry out its core tasks.

The reported period was marked by a number of
significant developments, which further solidified
Afghanistan's continued progress towards meeting the
objectives of the transition period. The 18 June launch
of the fifth and final phase ofthe security transition was
a milestone achievement that has put Afghan security
forces in the lead and demonstrated their determination
to fully assume security responsibilities across the
country.

The year 2014 will signify another milestone event
in further consolidating Afghanistan's sovereignty and
national unity - namely, the presidential and provincial
council elections. We note that important steps have
been taken in the run-up to the elections, including
the adoption of legislative acts and key appointments,
as well as other measures to ensure greater public
activeness and involvement in the pre-election process.

We welcome the outcomes of the first senior
officials meeting on the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, held in Kabul on 3 July, which provided
an important opportunity to assess the status of the
implementation of commitments under the Framework
one year after its adoption and to discuss further ways
for moving forward. It is noteworthy that the meeting
recognized the progress achieved by the Government
of Afghanistan and the international community in
meeting their respective commitments, and called for
resolute actions by both sides to address areas of the
Framework where further progress is required.

Ensuring national peace and reconciliation
constitutes a fundamental element of durable stability
and unity in Afghanistan. We welcome the continuous
efforts of the Afghan Government to advance this
process, including by the High Peace Council and the
implementation of the Afghan peace and reconciliation
programme. We underline the imperative of respecting
the Constitution of Afghanistan and preserving the
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned character of the
reconciliation process. Any attempt to undermine
Afghanistan's independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity and reverse its years-long democratic
achievements is unacceptable and must be averted.

Stronger relations and cooperation between
Afghanistan and its immediate neighbours and
other regional counterparts on a wide range of
issues - including peace and reconciliation, regional
security challenges, development and humanitarian
assistance - are essential for the peaceful and stable
future of the country and the region. We welcome
Afghanistan's increased interaction with its various
partners within bilateral and multilateral frameworks.

The Istanbul Heart of Asia process is a unique
regional platform for dialogue and partnership aimed
at promoting security, confidence and cooperation,
with Afghanistan at its core. After the adoption of
the implementation plans for all confidence-building
measures (CBMs) at the Almaty ministerial conference
in April, the main focus has now shifted to the realization
of concrete practical activities within each CBM. We
look forward to the next senior officials meeting of
the process to be held in New York next week. We also
thank the Government of China for having offered to
host the ministerial meeting next summer.

My country has been a part of international efforts
in Afghanistan and will remain so in the post-2014
period. We shall continue our active engagement
within the Istanbul Heart of Asia process, and are
ready to participate in other regional initiatives. As
international security forces prepare to withdraw
next year, my country is determined to strengthen its
cooperation with Afghanistan by providing capacity-
building assistance and training programmes in the
areas of civil service, law enforcement, mine action,
border and customs control, health and rehabilitation.
Most recently, our bilateral relations have become
remarkably dynamic, in particular due to a number
of ministerial visits from Afghanistan to Baku. We
are very pleased with the increased interest of the
Government of Afghanistan in benefitting from
Azerbaijan's experience in other spheres, such as
energy, the exploitation of mineral resources, emergency
management and e-Government. We are determined to
actively contribute to that end.

Azerbaijan strongly supports Afghanistan's
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity, and will
stand by the brotherly Afghan people in their legitimate
aspirations to become a secure, self-reliant and self-
sustaining State.

