Ms. Sellassie: On the question raised by the
representative of Lithuania, on whether progress has
been made by States in the region in terms ofcountering
terrorism, the answer is that progress has been made.
Some countries have even developed comprehensive
strategies to counter terrorism. Many bilateral partners,
including the African Union and the European Union,
are working to strengthen the capacity of State actors.
The United Nations, through the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, are also working to build
those countries' capacities so as to counter terrorism.
However, the level and the multiplicity of the threats
linked to terrorism in the region are such that they
probably require further efforts. In that respect, I
would like to say that there was a recommendation, at
one point, for my Office to be provided with an expert
on terrorism to support countries in the region, which
never materialized. I would say that that would have
benefited my Office and given us additional capacity to
support the region.

There was a comment made by the representative
of China about the projects that the United Nations is
implementing in the region. I have a feeling that there
is a perception among some members of the Council
that the United Nations is not doing enough in terms of
expectations. I would like to say that what we have been
doing - at least at the regional level - is described at
length in Secretary-General's report (S/2015/866). But
I would like to add that what we are trying to address
in the Sahel are long-standing structural issues. That
takes time. The added value of the Strategy is that it
requires United Nations entities to work together in an
integrated manner and develop regional projects, which
is not an easy endeavour. What my Office has tried to
do over the past year, first of all, is gain the support and
the ownership of the countries of the region in those
processes. We have been able to develop nine flagship
projects, five of which have been launched. Those
projects are beubg implemented in multiple countries
by multiple agencies in a holistic approach.

Secondly, we consider those nine projects as our
flagship projects because of their essential nature. We
believe that they will have a quick and visible impact.
Meanwhile, 10 other regional projects have been
launchedby UnitedNations entities. Ihave not mentioned
here all the work that has been done by United Nations
entities at the national level within countries. We are
therefore doing our best with the available capacities
to deliver on expectations. But I want to reiterate that
what we are trying to do is structural prevention. We
are not trying to resolve ongoing conflict or address
short-term issues. Rather, we are addressing long-term
issues, which take time. I would like to insist on that
and have the Council's understanding that what we are
doing is a long-term endeavour.

