Mr. Keating: It is now almost one year since
Somalia underwent a peaceful transition of power
and the election of President Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed Farmajo. Like many new Governments,
his has been through a steep learning curve. In the
process, it has crafted a commendable national agenda
embracing financial reform, job creation, inclusive
politics, conflict resolution and reform of the security
sector. The focus is now on the essential task of
developing a plan for security transition.

In implementing that multipronged agenda, the
Federal Government is facing a number of major
challenges. One is the mobilization of adequate
technical and financial capacity. Another is ensuring
coherent and coordinated approaches by both national
and international actors. A third is successfully
managing the powerful constituencies that need to
be on side. Those include federal member states,
parliamentarians, clan power brokers, the private sector
and international partners.

It is encouraging that following a period of
tension between federal member states and the Federal
Government late last year, the relationship has stabilized.
The form and structure of Somalia's federal system
remains a matter of vigorous debate, but the renewed
commitment of the Federal Government and federal
member states to cooperate to address Somalia's needs
is essential in order to make progress on all fronts. The
improving relationship between the Government and the
private sector is also encouraging, as evidenced by the
adoption of the telecommunications act - a milestone
in public regulation of the economy - and by an
increase in business confidence and domestic revenues.

In December, the International Monetary Fund
commended the Somali authorities' progress on policy
reforms and its successful completion of the country's
first staff-monitored programme since the end of the
civil war. That is setting the country on a pathway that
leads both to debt relief, increased public and private
sector loans and investment, and to more money for
basic services and infrastructure. That Somalia's
relationship with international partners remains strong
was apparent at the Somalia Security Conference and
the Partnership Forum, held in Mogadishu in early
December 2017. The Government believes that it needs
and deserves greater financial support to implement its
reform agenda, even if that involves some calculated
risks by donors.

Somali politics, however, remain turbulent. In
December, tensions were sharplyincreasedin Mogadishu
by the violent arrest by the National Intelligence and
Security Agency of a prominent opposition politician
and by a raid on the house of a leading parliamentarian.
The recent replacement of the Mayor has also created
waves. Those incidents have highlighted basic problems
that need to be addressed, such as inadequate rules and
safeguards governing the conduct of politics, including
impeachment procedures; blurred roles and lines of
accountability of the many security actors; and the
perpetuation of corrupt practices and of untraceable
money in the political marketplace.

Corruption is a blight, undermining reform efforts
and limiting the confidence and trust of Somalis in their
leaders and institutions. The effects can be seen in all
areas of public life from business to politics, justice to
security, while playing into the hands of extremists. The
Government has declared its determination to develop
plans to address corruption in the coming year. In the
meantime, all Somali actors need to respect the rule of
law and resist the use of violence against their political
opponents. Otherwise, the risk is that the many positive
developments under way will be overshadowed, and
the Government's ability to implement its broader
agenda and improve the lives of the population will
be undermined.

The scale of the challenges facing the country are
daunting. Chronic poverty and persistent humanitarian
needs are casting an ominous shadow over Somalia. The
risk of famine continues to loom after four consecutive
failed rainy seasons. The 2018 humanitarian response
plan calls for $1.6 billion. Although famine was averted
in 2017 thanks to national leadership, collective
humanitarian action and historic levels of donor support,
food security needs are nearly double the five-year
average, and an estimated 6.2 million people are in
need of humanitarian assistance. Malnutrition reached
emergency levels in many locations and is expected to
increase. Drought and conflict have displaced more
than 2 million people within the country - up to a
million of them in the last 12 months - including many
children and more than 80,000 pregnant women.

Given the recurrent nature of droughts in
Somalia, an imperative is to address the root causes
of Somalia's fragility and build resilience to shocks.
That is needed to prevent further refugee flows and
displacement. Humanitarian interventions must be
complemented by investment in job-creating public
works and infrastructure. The basis for that will be
the drought impact needs assessment and recovery
resilience framework, which is being developed by
the Federal Government with support from the United
Nations, the World Bank and the European Union.
Continued support will be needed to help Somalia
break the cycle of recurrent crises that cause so
much suffering and undermine the peacebuilding and
State-building process.

Central to that process is gaining political agreement
as to how power will be exercised, shared and accounted
for. That requires progress in three key areas: review
of the provisional federal constitution, preparation for
the 2020-2021 elections, and conflict resolution and
reconciliation. The national constitutional convention
scheduled for March and/or April is expected to launch
the next phase of the constitutional review process,
focusing on resource- and power-sharing between the
Federal Government and the federal member states, the
status of Mogadishu and harmonization of the Federal
and member state constitutions.
In December 2017, the National Independent
Electoral Commission launched its strategic plan to
achieve universal elections. That will require sustained
political support and donor funding. Registration of
political parties will help stabilize politics. Thus far,
seven have been registered, including one led by a
woman. Registration is also an essential step towards
holding universal elections. Immediate priorities
include the development and adoption of the electoral
law by the Parliament, reaching agreement on the
system of representation, decisions on voter registration
and ongoing capacity-building and the institutional
development of the national Independent Electoral
Commission, including in the Federal member states.

Regarding conflict resolution and reconciliation,
the Federal Government plans to launch a national
strategy in the coming months, while recognizing
the multifaceted nature of the many disputes and
grievances in the country. On the ground, there has
been some significant progress. Since 2015, Galmudug
has been split between the state authorities and Ahlu
Sunna Wal Jama'a, with the state administration
displaced to Cadaado. On 18 January in Dhusamareb,
President Farmajo oversaw a ceremony to mark an
agreement between the two to merge Assemblies,
constitutions and security arrangements, and return the
state administration to Dhusamareb - an agreement
reached through political dialogue. That bodes well for
efforts to resolve other disputes including in Galkayo.
Several continue to simmer, while creating space for
and distracting attention from the bigger threat posed
by Al-Shabaab.

There is a serious danger that long-standing disputes
between Puntland and Somaliland, and in particular an
armed stand-off in $001, could erupt into violence in
the coming days, with potentially grave consequences.
That closely follows delayed presidential elections and
the orderly and peaceful transfer of power that took
place in Somaliland late last year. With the support of
international partners, including many on the Council,
I have urged the leaders of Puntland and Somaliland
to declare a cessation of hostilities, withdraw their
forces, restore the status quo ante and open channels
of communication.

Al-Shabaab remains a potent threat, despite, or
perhaps because, it is on the back foot as a result of
financial pressures, counter-terrorism operations and
air strikes. On 14 October, Mogadishu suffered the most
deadly attack caused by an improvised explosive devise
ever perpetrated, with an estimated 512 people killed,
nearly all of whom were civilians. On 10 December
2017, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
released its first public report, entitled "Protection of
civilians: building the foundations for peace, security
and human rights in Somalia", which covers the period
from 1 January 2016 to 14 October 2017. It documented
a total of 2,078 civilians killed and 2,507 injured.
The large majority of those casualties are attributable
to Al-Shabaab. Al-Shabaab abducted civilians and
conducted targeted assassinations and summary
executions. In addition, 729 civilians were abducted
by Al-Shabaab, of whom 403 were released. Five days
ago, the Somali National Army's Danab special forces
rescued 36 children from an Al-Shabaab training
camp, many of whom had been forcibly recruited into
the movement.

Defeating Al-Shabaab will require both a military
and political strategy - the use of both sticks and
carrots - as well as sustained efforts to address
deficits that lend extremists a degree of credibility.
Those include corruption, the lack of educational and
job opportunities for young people, weak national
justice and corrections capacity, and grievances
arising from unresolved disputes. The African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) remains fundamental
to security in the country and can take credit for having
created the space to allow Somalia's political progress
over the last decade. I pay tribute to the bravery and
sacrifice of its troops, and am grateful to the troop- and
police-contributing countries for their commitment
to Somalia.

AMISOM. cannot stay indefinitely. This year will
require a dedicated effort by the Somali leadership,
the African Union and international partners to build
political acceptability and operational capability of the
Somali security sector. That should enable AMISOM
to gradually hand over responsibility to Somali
security forces and to enable the Federal and state
Governments as per the agreements in the national
security architecture to exercise a monopoly over the
use of force. The current situation, whereby security
responsibilities are fragmented, often privately
controlled and unaccountable, is both dangerous
and untenable.

To that end, on 4 December 2017, the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states
agreed to develop a transition plan in the first quarter of
this year, working closely with international partners,
most importantly the African Union, the troop- and
police-contributing countries and major international
investors in Somalia's security, including the European
Union. They agreed to create a conditions-based plan
with clear milestones and target dates. It will be rooted
in the comprehensive approach to security to ensure
that planning focuses not only on military handover but
also on policing, the rule of law and the strengthening
of basic local governance, all of which are essential to
sustaining security gains and to the credibility of the
State. The transition plan will be the basis for securing
future support for Somalia's security sector, and
for AMISOM.

The starting point for the plan is not ideal. The
Federal Government of Somalia has undertaken
an operational readiness assessment of the Somali
National Army and the Somali Police Force, providing
a much clearer understanding of their capability. They
have revealed multiple deficits and the enormous
challenge ahead in translating the national security
architecture into reality on the ground. AMISOM's
continued presence will therefore be essential. The
premature drawdown of AMISOM. forces would be a
gift to Al-Shabaab and risks undermining the gains that
have been made, at great human and financial cost, over
the past decade. The United Nations will continue to
work closely with the African Union and key security
investors to explore sustainable, predictable funding
mechanisms for AMISOM, and support to AMISOM. to
effectively fulfil its mandate.

Progress is being made. The 2,400 Puntland defence
forces have been integrated into the Somali National
Army - a possible model for integration in other parts
of the country. There is agreement on the allocation of
police numbers for each state, for Mogadishu and the
Federal Government. Each federal member state has
developed a state police plan. A harmonizedjustice and
corrections model has been endorsed by the National
Security Council, which provides the basis for the
establishment of an independent and impartial justice
system. Action plans have been developed to implement
the national strategy on preventing and countering
violent extremism.

The human rights situation continues to be of
great concern. The rule of law is weak and capacities
and mechanisms to protect and promote basic rights
are lacking. Forced evictions, sexual violence and the
repression of freedom of expression are among the many
indicators, with marginalized and minority groups
being particularly vulnerable. The United Nations
is supporting the Federal Government to strengthen
frameworks, institutions and measures for upholding
human rights, address impunity and improve the
protection of women and children, and to take action to
end the involvement of children in armed conflict. The
formation of the national human rights commission is a
positive step forward.

Somalia is making definite progress, though the
risks remain real. It is fortunate to have a Government
that is committed to implementing reform, resolving
conflicts and meeting the formidable social, economic
and security needs of the population. Continued
progress is dependent not only on the strong political
will and skill of the Federal Government, but also on
cooperation and partnership with federal member states,
Parliament, clan elders, business and international
partners. When all of those constituencies cooperate,
huge strides can be made.

I strongly encourage Somali stakeholders to unite
to tackle those priorities and make 2018 a year of
implementation. Allow me to take this opportunity
to encourage international partners to continue their
financial generosity, their support for strengthening
technical capacities, and to be transparent and
coordinated in their assistance.

