Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Mr. President, we are
delighted and honoured to speak before the Security
Council for the second time under your leadership.

My delegation would like to join in expressing
our condolences to the people and the Government of
Chad for the untimely death of their troops. I would
also like to acknowledge the Assistant Secretary-
General for Rule of Law and Security Institutions,
Mr. Alexander Zouev, and Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan
and South Sudan, both of whom are here with us today.

My delegation welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Abyei (S/2017/870) and
the progress in the implementation of the mandate of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). My delegation accepts the report, not only
for its comprehensiveness but, more importantly, for the
glimmer of hope for what could happen to the people of
Abyei if the international community could build on the
current relative tranquility that the report talks about.

My delegation would be remiss if we did not pay
a well-deserved tribute to the Ethiopian men and
women of UNISFA in general, and in particular to the
Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of
Ethiopia, for their unwavering commitment to keeping
peace and harmony among the people of Abyei. As
the report conveys, it is the creativity of the Ethiopian
troops in Abyei that has brought relative peace to
the Area. As we appreciate their commitment to and
sacrifices for the people of Abyei, we would like to
appeal to the international community to maintain the
much-needed support for those troops.

We would also like to thank the Council for the
positive role and attention that it continues to pay to
the issue of Abyei. Needless to say, its continued
engagement will be crucial until the case of Abyei is
positively resolved to the satisfaction of both countries.

In that regard, I would like to reiterate South Sudan's
commitment to engaging the Republic of the Sudan in
renewed efforts towards finding an agreed solution
to the issue of Abyei. Such renewed engagement was
conveyed to the Council in the joint letter that was sent
by the Foreign Ministers of South Sudan and the Sudan
on 23 September. I would like to remind the Council
that, in that letter, both Ministers stated:
"We would like to reconfirm to you our resolve
to remove the obstacles and address challenges
facing the operationalization of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. We
would like to affirm to you our readiness to uphold
the commitments we made in the Agreement on
the Border Monitoring Support Mission of 2011
and the Agreement on Security Arrangements of
2012, and to hold the meetings of the joint political
and security mechanism, and the joint security
mechanism, and begin a political process to unlock
the deadlock on Abyei and the borders, as urged by
Security Council resolution 2352 (2017)."

In the spirit of the aforementioned letter and as the
report of the Secretary-General notes, South Sudan has
granted the operations of the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism full freedom of movement.
The helipad at Gok Machar is now fully functional
and expedited approval procedures to clear flights
for the Mechanism's aerial patrols have been granted.
The report further notes that the cancellation rate for
aerial patrols is at its lowest since its establishment in
2013, having decreased from 56 per cent to 22 per cent,
and that many of those cancellations mentioned were
due to bad weather. The report also notes the positive
progress made towards full operational capacity of the
Mechanism. Both parties have accepted the proposal
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) to establish four temporary observation sites
within the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone and sent
their respective monitors to start a joint reconnaissance
mission with UNISFA to identify the four temporary
observation sites.

All of that demonstrates significant progress
and the commitment of South Sudan to making the
mandate of UNISFA, and in particular the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, functional.
The Republic of South Sudan appreciates the role of the
Mechanism in maintaining the effective operations of
UNISFA, which in turn sustain harmonious coexistence
in the area. Moreover, we are happy to report that there
is serious and credible information that the expected
visit of President Salva Kiir Mayardit to Khartoum will
finally take place in the next few days.

Realistically, we must admit that there are
serious differences between the two countries, and
the aforementioned activities cannot replace the final
resolution ofthe Abyei issue. In that regard, while we see
the call to establish interim administrative structures
in Abyei, we feel that it has been superseded by many
events. Rather, we stand for a final settlement of the
Abyei matter on the basis of African Union High-level
Implementation Panel's proposal of 21 September 2013,
which the African Union Peace and Security Council
has accepted a number of times and for which it sought
the support of the Security Council in its communique
of 26 October 2013.

Finally, as the Council knows, serious differences
on such a historic dispute usually take a long time to
settle. We would like to appeal to the international
community through the Security Council that in order
to build on the limited peace and tranquility achieved
so far by the Ethiopian peacekeepers, as the report
indicates, certain fundamental humanitarian and social
services ought to be provided for the people of Abyei.
We appreciate the various early recovery and transition
activities mentioned in the report, which include the
rehabilitation of the Abyei Referral Hospital, the Abyei
Women's Centre and the various livelihood ventures
targeting young people and women. We encourage
more such ventures, as providing livelihood for the
young people of Abyei will help reduce the criminality
that is caused by the economic situation.

