Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this important meeting. Permit me to address
the Council today as a main party in the context of this
item.

On 24 October, the United Nations will celebrate
its seventieth anniversary. However, the question
should be: do we have the right to celebrate, and what
are we celebrating? Perhaps we do not, in fact, have
that right, given that we are seeing that the aspirations
of the founding fathers of the United Nations in the
area of peace, security and development have come to
naught because of the policies of certain influential
States that disregard the principles of the Charter and
of international law.

How can we celebrate when we are witnessing
mass violations of the provisions of the Charter, leading
to acts of aggression, instability and threats to the
peace that hinder the development of relations between
nations based on respect, the rights of peoples and the
principles of non-intervention and of the inadmissibility
of the threat or use of force against the sovereignty and
independence of States? Perhaps some would say that
we do not have the right to celebrate after 70 years of
suffering on the part of the Palestinian people.

How can we celebrate the vision of our peoples,
particularly the Palestinian people, who have a
completely just case that is being undermined because
the power of the law is giving way to the law of power?
How can we celebrate when we see States using the
United Nations as a pretext for invading other countries,
toppling their legitimate Governments, killing their
leaders and turning them into failed States that have
become breeding grounds for international terrorism?
How can we celebrate when they are changing the very
definitions of concepts - for example, a certain degree
of terrorism is termed "moderate terrorism"?

Perhaps we should not celebrate that some have
caused the United Nations to fail to uphold its mandate
with regard to the Israeli occupation of Arab territories
in Palestine, Syria and Lebanon. How can we celebrate
half a century of occupation, of turning Palestine into a
mass prison, and of apartheid against the Palestinians,
the legitimate owners of the land, in Jerusalem and
other occupied territories? How can we celebrate the
escalating violence and barbarism of settlers, under
the protection of the Israeli Government? How can we
celebrate the cancerous settlement policy that allows
building on any part of the Palestinian territories?

How can we accept that some members of the
Security Council have irresponsibly provided support
and protection to Israel so that it can continue its
provocative policies, in violation of all international
instruments? How can we not deal with the question of
Palestine in its factual context? Can we really be trying
to project the image that this is reciprocal violence and
that our differences are only over the degree of that
violence? How can we ignore the main reason for this:
the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories?

Yes, in two days we will celebrate the seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations. But on that
occasion, what will the United Nations do to help
displaced Syrians and those who have been living under
Israeli occupation for over half a century? Indeed, the
Organization has failed to take any real action aimed at
making Israel implement United Nations resolutions on
this issue, primarily resolution 497 (1981).

The displaced Syrian citizens in the occupied
Golan have legitimate questions about the effectiveness
and credibility of the United Nations vis-a-vis theirjust
cause. How could they not ask those questions, given
Israel's incessant settlement activities and policies of
oppression, suppression and racial discrimination? How
could they not when they see Israel supporting terrorist
groups, including Al-Qaida's Al-Nusra Front in the
Golan region, even as the United Nations does nothing?
How could they not, when they see Israel arresting the
Syrian Mandela, who spent 27 years in their prison for
one reason only: exposing Israeli support for terrorists?

We want to celebrate the seventieth anniversary of
the United Nations, but we want the celebration to be
meaningful, a celebration of real accomplishments, not
one of words, statements or interventions. We want to
realize the aspirations of the founding fathers and their
dream of a world of peace, stability and prosperity,
based on respect for the sovereignty of States and
non-interference in their affairs - a world that is free
of occupation and colonization and in which there is no
manipulation of the fate of peoples or changing their
governing regimes through foreign intervention. That
is what we want; that is the one thing towards which
we should work collectively, so that we can hold a
celebration that is truly meaningful and satisfies our
consciences and the conscience of our peoples.

In conclusion, I would like to denounce in the
strongest terms the desperate attempts made by certain
delegations, whose names I will not mention, to defend
Israel and try to cover up its crimes, particularly
through desperate, Don Quixote-like attempts to
bring causes before the Security Council that have no
relation to the situation in the Middle East. Every time
Israel escalates its aggression against the Palestinian
people, we find those delegations making misleading
statements that escalate the situation, with the aim of
diverting attention from the crimes committed by Israel
and alleviating international pressure.

For that reason, I am not going to respond to the
empty claims made against Syria by those delegations,
in spite of the fact that we could say much to refute
their claims, as they support and arm terrorists i the
artifically created moderate terrorists who are waging
destruction in Syria and oppose any peaceful settlement.
Those countries are intervening in the internal affairs
of Syria and using the Syrian diaspora as a weapon to
bring pressure to bear on the Syrian Government to
force it change its positions and independent political
choices.

