Mr. Baja (Philippines): We are honoured that
you, Sir, the Foreign Minister of Argentina, are
presiding over this important meeting on Haiti. We also
welcome and thank the Foreign Minister of Haiti for
his statement. We are grateful to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), Ambassador Juan Gabriel Valdes, and
the Acting Secretary General of the Organization of
American States for their informative presentations.

Next month will mark the first year of the re-
engagement of the United Nations in Haiti. The
international community's response - initially through
the multinational interim force and now through
MINUSTAH - has prevented Haiti from sliding
further into instability, which would have adversely
affected the region.

MINUSTAH is now close to its authorized
military and civilian levels, tasked with law
enforcement and other related responsibilities. Filipino
military and civilian police forces are now part of
MINUSTAH. The Philippines is encouraged to note
that MINUSTAH now has a credible military and
police presence to allow it to respond more effectively
to threats to the country's stability.

The improved law and order situation is expected
to pave the way for reconstruction and rehabilitation
efforts, with the help of the international community. It
is gratifying to note that the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund have approved loan
packages for economic governance and emergency
recovery and disaster management.

The task ahead for MINUSTAH is not going to be
easy. The immediate challenge for the Mission is how
to address the reported climate of fear prevailing in
Haiti and create a safe and secure environment that will
allow the Haitian people to resume their normal way of
life. That will involve countering the continuing threat
posed by the armed gangs and dissident former soldiers
who have recently threatened to wage guerrilla warfare
against the Transitional Government.

The second challenge is for the Transitional
Government to take concrete steps towards the
establishment of a national commission on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. MINUSTAH and the
Haitian authorities should explore more creative ways
to entice those former soldiers and gang members to
turn in their weapons in exchange for, among other
things, compensation or livelihood opportunities.

We are pleased to note that initial steps have
already been taken in that direction. We welcome the
steps taken by the Transitional Government to look
into the valid demands of demobilized soldiers. The
greatest weapons to meet the challenges are hope and
commitment.

We hope to see Haiti's transitional leaders
exercise a greater degree of flexibility and tolerance
and exert greater efforts to persuade those who remain
outside the political process to renounce violence and
take part in rebuilding their nation. We welcome the
release of Fanmi Lavalas leaders as a positive step
towards national reconciliation.

We hope to see the Haitian authorities place
greater emphasis on human rights and put an end to
impunity. We hope that the Transitional Government
will end the reported illegal and arbitrary arrests and
detentions, summary executions of human rights
activists and acts of sexual violence against women
and that those responsible for those acts will be held
accountable.

We hope to see the transformation of the Haiti
National Police into a professional police organization
that respects human rights and adheres to international
norms and standards.

We hope to see the redemption of the pledges
made during the international donors conference six
months ago to support the Transitional Government in
preparing and implementing development projects that
are vital to the stabilization process. We also look
forward to the establishment of a long-term
development strategy for Haiti in accordance with the
priorities underlined in the interim cooperation
framework.

We hope to see the people of Haiti go to the polls
in November to freely elect their new leaders. In that
regard, we welcome the preparations being undertaken
by the Transitional Government and the Provisional
Electoral Council to ensure the holding of free,
inclusive and peaceful elections in November. We also
welcome the global agreement, recently initialled in
the office of Prime Minister Gerard Latortue, which
will bring $41 million from Canada, the European
Union and the United States to Haiti for its elections
later this year.

We hope that the Core Group on Haiti, the
Organization of American States and the Caribbean
Community will continue to play a constructive role in
Haiti.

We support a mission to Haiti in conjunction with
a mission of the Economic and Social Council's Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti.

Our common vision for a democratic and stable
Haiti requires the long-term commitment of the
international community. MINUSTAH should learn
lessons from previous United Nations missions in the
country. Its success hinges on how far we are willing to
support MINUSTAH in its objective of institution-
building, national reconstruction and economic
rehabilitation.

