Mrs. Haley (United States ofAmerica): I would like
to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Mr. Mark Lowcock
for their briefings and to take a moment to welcome
Mr. Lowcock to the Security Council. His dedication to
addressing the humanitarian crisis in Syria is inspiring.
I would be grateful if at some point he could tell us if
the Syrian regime has given him a visa yet.

Last week's high-level meeting to address
humanitarian needs in Syria was very productive. We
thank the European Union for convening it to focus
attention on the ongoing crisis that has resulted from the
Syrian conflict. The United States was able to announce
$697 million in new humanitarian assistance for victims
and the host communities that support Syrian refugees.
Other nations also made much-needed commitments.

Although there has been some lessening ofviolence
in Syria, this is no time to become complacent. If the
Syrian people do not see a political process working
in parallel with our de-escalation efforts, the Violence
will resume. Any gains against the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) will only be temporary. Any
agreements on paper in Astana will not succeed. The
Syrian people will remain vulnerable and at odds with
each other without a political process in which they and
the regime can participate in good faith.

Yet, the Syrian regime refuses to come to the table
in good faith. Instead, the regime continues to deny
humanitarian access to those in need. Monthly United
Nations operation plans, including this month's, have
been met with "constraints". No cross-line convoys
have been able to move in recent weeks, despite having
received approval from the Syrian Government at the
outset. As the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic has reported,
the Syrian Arab Armed Forces continue to use chemical
weapons against civilians and target hospitals and
medical personnel.

Just last week, there were reports of airstrikes in
Idlib and northern Hama provinces. The strikes killed
at least three medical personnel and damaged a number
of medical facilities and civil defence centres. Just
yesterday, there were reports of an alleged regime attack
on a centre for the disabled in Modira. That attack, if
true, is reprehensible. The attacks fit an all-too-familiar
pattern in which medical facilities and personnel, as
well as the civilians they serve, are victims of strikes by
the Syrian regime and its Russian allies. The Russians
claim to have leverage over the Syrian regime. They
claim to want to expand humanitarian assistance
to certain areas, but it is their ally Al-Assad who is
denying humanitarian assistance to many people in
need in an ugly new low, even for Al-Assad. His regime
is authorizing humanitarian convoys to his supporters
while preventing life-saving aid from reaching other
Syrians. We take our Russian friends at their word
when they say that they will resolve those humanitarian
problems if they are going to continue to partner with
Iran and Al-Assad.

The United States is committed to finding a solution
in Syria. We must increase humanitarian access to
besieged and suffering communities. We must hold
the regime accountable for denying assistance. But the
only lasting solution in Syria and the only way to end
the violence and defeat terrorism is through a political
transition that does not allow Iranian influence to
replace ISIS or Al-Assad in power. If the civil war
continues, more people will suffer and our gains against
ISIS will only open a door to other extremists seeking
to exploit the conflict. All of those who have answered
the call of human tragedy in Syria have our thanks and
our respect, but we must not and we will not forget
what is needed in order to truly solve the crisis: a real
political process through which the Syrian people gain
the ability to ensure their own safety and determine
their own future.

