Mr. Stefanile (Italy): Let mejoin previous speakers
in commending Equatorial Guinea and you personally,
Mr. Minister, for having convened this open debate. I
also wish to thank the three briefers for their much-
appreciated contributions.

Italy aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union.

A new wind of hope is blowing in Africa. After
the historic rapprochement between Ethiopia and
Eritrea, the continent is moving towards a new phase of
regional stabilization and integration, as also shown by
the revitalized peace agreement in South Sudan and the
recent Bangui peace agreement for the Central African
Republic. That should encourage us to step up our
efforts in support of Africa, and should help African
States to reach the objective of silencing the guns in
Africa by 2020.

Notwithstanding those recent and inspiring
developments, there are still major threats and
challenges to peace and security in Africa - terrorism,
transnational organized crime, violence against
women and children in armed conflicts, poverty and
vulnerability to climate change, to mention only a
few. Addressing those challenges requires that the
United Nations and the African Union (AU) keep
working together closely, while involving regional and
subregional organizations.

The AU-United Nations partnership has already
proven to be of paramount importance. The successful
conclusion of the peace talks between the Government of
the Central African Republic and armed groups, which
took place in Khartoum, is just the most recent example
of how successful and effective that relationship can be.
We have consistently supported the new impetus given
by the Secretary-General to the further strengthening
of cooperation between the United Nations and the AU,
and we call on the two organizations to continue in that
direction. We also attach importance to advancing the
trilateral cooperation between the United Nations, the
African Union and the European Union.

Italy commends the progress already achieved
in operationalizing the African Peace and Security
Architecture, especially the Peace Fund of the African
Union, which is set to finance mediation and preventive
diplomacy activities. Let me recall, in that regard, that

we remain in favour of using United Nations-assessed
contributions for African-led peace operations,
provided that appropriate standards are met in terms
of troop preparedness, training, equipment, financial
transparency, human rights compliance, conduct and
discipline. At the subregional level, we deem it crucial to
deepen the cooperation mechanisms between the United
Nations and the relevant subregional organizations on
the basis of complementarity and subsidiarity.

I now wish to focus on two major areas that we
consider essential to reaching the objective of silencing
the guns in Africa by 2020: the fight against the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and
improving governance throughout the continent.

On the first point, Italy is strongly committed to
multilateral efforts in fighting the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons, which contribute to instability,
violence and insecurity and undermine action towards
sustainable development. Italy attaches the utmost
importance to the universalization of the relevant
multilateral instruments, such as the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, the Arms Trade Treaty and the United
Nations Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing ofand
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition - the so-called Palermo Protocol.

Let me recall that Italy is currently financing the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Global
Firearms Programme with a view to assisting States
in the Sahel region in the full implementation of
the Palermo Protocol. Moreover, Italy supports any
initiative taken and owned by the States of the region,
such as the Kinshasa Convention and the Economic
Community of West African States Convention on
Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition
and Other Related Materials, and fully supports the
efforts of the African Union to define a continent-wide
action plan to implement the Road Map of Practical
Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020.

On the second point - governance - we must be
aware that the weakness of States' institutions and the
lack of good governance, combined with socioeconomic
inequalities, are recurrently indicated as major factors
in fuelling the cycle of instability. Italy is actively
engaged in capacity-building and training programmes
in many African countries with the aim of promoting

political and economic partnerships, fostering peace
and sustainable development.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Italy's full
engagement alongside Africa in reaching the objective
of the African Union's flagship initiative of Silencing
the Guns by 2020. In that spirit, we welcome the
unanimous adoption of this morning's resolution 2457
(2019), which we were pleased to co-sponsor.

