The Secretary-General: We are honoured to have
the Foreign Secretary of Pakistan here to preside over
this important debate, and we thank you, Sir, for this
initiative. Pakistan is the single largest troop contributor
to United Nations peacekeeping. Its personnel are
working courageously every day under the United
Nations blue flag to bring peace to troubled areas.

This year marks the sixty-fifth anniversary of
United Nations peacekeeping. Peacekeeping has
come to be a flagship activity of the United Nations.
Thanks to debates like this one, careful analysis and
adjustments in our work, peacekeeping has kept pace
with the times. Our operations today are more varied
and more complex than ever, and whatever form it
takes, multidimensional peacekeeping remains a highly
cost-effective investment in progress towards lasting
stability. No other international tool is as effective in
combining political, security, rule of law and human
rights efforts. And our missions are integrating their
work with the development efforts of United Nations
country teams.

The draft resolution before the Council today
(S/2013/27) identifies the many contributions that
United Nations missions make towards enhancing
security and building sustainable peace. We continue
to press for progress in the face of challenges. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
the Department of Field Support are working to further
improve how we plan, manage and support our missions.

We count on the members of the Council and all
Member States to support this effort. I call on them
to contribute military and police personnel with the
professional skills, training and integrity required to
fully implement their mandates. I also call on Member
States to provide the key military assets and enabling
capabilities we need to operate in ever more challenging
environments. When Member States show the will to
make the right contributions at the right time, we can
deploy more quickly and operate more effectively. And
I repeat my standing appeal for more women to serve in
our operations. I am a proud advocate of gender equality,
and I want to usher in the day when our peacekeeping
operations benefit from the full participation of women,
especially in leadership positions.

We will conduct periodic reviews of our missions
to ensure that we have the right mix of skills and
capabilities to respond to evolving mandates and
changing conditions on the ground. We are improving
how we integrate our efforts across the United Nations
system to maximize the collective impact of our
missions and our country teams. DPKO and the United
Nations Development Programme are coming together
as the joint global focal point for police, justice and
corrections. We are also improving the way we carry
out transitions as missions draw down and ultimately
close, as we did recently in Timor-Leste. We aim to
deploy, work hard, fulfil the mandates that the Security
Council entrusts to us, and leave behind strong
structures to maintain lasting peace.

But we have to do more than integrate the work of
the United Nations system; we have to coordinate with
other international partners. In most cases, regional
organizations, the World Bank, bilateral donors and
countries of the region concerned play a major role. It is
often far more difficult to ensure the coherence of this
broader international support than to integrate our own
United Nations work, but such coherence is critical.
That is why we will continue supporting transition
compacts and other efforts that align international
support behind clear national priorities. I encourage the
Council to work harder for greater coherence across the
international community, including with advice from
the Peacebuilding Commission.

Today's draft resolution rightly emphasizes that
national Governments have the primary responsibility
for identifying peacebuilding priorities, in consultation
with a broad cross-section of society. Inclusivity and
institution-building are critical to preventing a relapse
into conflict. Peacekeeping missions play a vital
role on both of these fronts. They promote national
reconciliation. And peacekeeping missions help support
national institution-building, as we are seeing in South
Sudan, Liberia and Haiti.

We learned especially valuable lessons from
Timor-Leste, where the political commitment of the
Government and close collaboration between United
Nations and the National Police were critical to success.
In too many other cases, however, a lack of political
will and sustained commitment to reform on the part of
national leaders have undermined progress. Too often,
international donors focus on training individuals while
neglecting to build institutions.

Institutions responsible for ensuring security and
rule of law must be strengthened. Otherwise, when
the United Nations reduces its military and police
presence, we riskjeopardizing the gains we have made.
Host States are ultimately responsible for ensuring the
protection ofcivilians, and effective national institutions
are essential to this effort. Our national counterparts
must take this obligation seriously, as peacekeeping
operations can never act as their surrogate in protecting
the civilians within their borders.

It is important to be honest and clear on this
point. When national leaders and the international
community allow these problems, the local population
suffers. Council members bear a heavy responsibility
to prevent this, including by engaging directly with
host Governments.

I am confident that, together, we can build on
more than two decades of success in multidimensional
peacekeeping. I look forward to hearing Council
members' views on how to continue adapting this
indispensable tool to better meet the needs of peoples
suffering from the throes and aftermath of conflicts.

