Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): Ghanajoins previous speakers
in thanking the Cote d'Ivoire presidency of the Security
Council for convening this high-level meeting on the
role of States, regional arrangements and the United
Nations in the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
a theme that is at the very heart of the Charter of the
United Nations.

We all have a primary responsibility as Member
States to individually and collectively pursue
the overriding moral, political and humanitarian
imperative of preventing the outbreak, continuation
and escalation of or relapse into conflict. The complex,
multidimensional and transboundary nature of conflicts
today, as well as new and emerging threats to peace and
security, call for enhancing strategic and operational
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations. As implied under Chapter VIII of the
Charter, the responsibility for peace and security must
be shared, and the success of our joint efforts will
depend to a large extent on our political commitment
to more effectively utilize the tools provided in the
Charter under regional and subregional arrangements.
Joint collaborative efforts between the United
Nations and regional and subregional arrangements
have proved successful in conflict prevention and
resolution. Your own country, Mr. President, is a
glowing example of such successful outcomes. Such
efforts have been particularly instrumental in dealing
with difficult political transitions, defusing tensions
and encouraging political dialogues ahead of highly
contentious elections, resolving electoral crises and
ending political deadlocks.

The conclusion in April 2017 of the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security is therefore a welcome
development. The Joint Framework provides a platform
for regular consultations, joint horizon scanning,
joint assessment and good offices missions, joint or
similar messaging and mutual capacity enhancement
towards conflict prevention and resolution in Africa.
The memorandum of understanding between the
African Union Commission and the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office, together with the African
Union's post-conflict reconstruction and development
policy, will foster collaborative actions that are critical
for sustaining peace. It is my delegation's hope that
those initiatives will benefit from greater support from
Member States in order to ensure maximum benefits
for peacebuilding.

In a similar vein, the Organization's multifaceted
engagement and partnership with the Economic
Community of West African States has effectively
made the subregional body a vital partner in the areas
of conflict prevention, mediation and resolution,
as well as in peacebuilding and the strengthening of
regional capacities. We call for the strengthening
of that partnership through regular thematic
intergovernmental dialogues on critical areas for the
West Africa subregion.

Cooperation between the United Nations, regional
arrangements and Member States in the maintenance
of peace and security has been more pronounced in
the area of peacekeeping. All Member States, and
particularly troop- and police-contributing countries,
are important stakeholders in peacekeeping. In that
regard, we welcome the Secretary-General's Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, which is aimed at enhancing
partnerships and efficiencies in that important pillar.
Burden-sharing is paramount for success, and we wish
to add our voice to calls for enhancing the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing for African
Union-led peace support operations authorized by the
Security Council.
My delegation also wishes to take this opportunity
to call for greater harmonization of standards between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations as a way of improving transitions from
regional operations to United Nations-supervised
missions. Increased systematic coordination and
consultation on policies, guidance and training
standards would ensure coherence in all phases, from
the planning to the drawdown of operations.

In conclusion, we wish to stress the importance
of fostering political dialogue, national reconciliation,
democratic governance, justice and accountability,
respect for human rights and the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security. A
comprehensive approach to sustaining peace must
include sustainable development, with inclusiveness at
the heart of our efforts.

