Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would first
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the way
you have guided the Council this month. During your
Security Council membership, which ends in a little
more than two months, you have demonstrated your
ability to contribute to the maintenance of international
peace and security, thanks to your objective approach.

The abductions and massacres committed by
the rebel movements in Darfur against the civilian
population and peacekeeping troops are a major
concern for the Government of the Sudan, and far more
so than for the other parties involved. We hope that all
the efforts being made in this area can be coordinated
to support those of the Sudan to end the conflict in

Darfur, so as to re-establish peace and stability and, as
a result, prosperity for the people of Darfur.

As I begin my statement, Iwould also like to reiterate
the Government of the Sudan's condemnation of the
incident in which one Zambian and three Senegalese
peacekeepers died, and to once again express the
condolences of the Government of the Sudan to the
Governments of Zambia and Senegal.

I would also like to underscore the fact that
the Sudanese Armed Forces have clashed with the
perpetrators of those incidents in which peacekeepers
and two members of the militias were killed, and a
vehicle was recovered after it had been intercepted
by the assailants. In addition, a soldier from the
Sudanese Armed Forces died and another was injured
in that incident. The latter is currently in the hospital.
The incident demonstrates with all certainty the
commitment of the Sudanese Government to dealing
with the acts perpetrated by the armed movements.

We also expect the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to fully
shoulder its role, in particular because UNAMID is
made up of peacekeepers and military personnel. The
military personnel should carry out their duties and
deal with the assailants, first and foremost to defend
themselves, and then to carry out their mission to
maintain peace in Darfur. In other words, the inability
of the UNAMID military personnel to defend and
protect themselves against attack, as well as the
Mission's inability to shoulder other tasks, raises many
questions. How can UNAMID personnel remain sitting
on their hands when they are the targets of attack, with
the Sudanese Armed Forces having to intervene to
protect them?

We have just heard the briefing by Mr. Chambas,
which focused on his efforts to persuade those
movements that refuse to join the peace process to do
so. We highly appreciate his efforts. I would urge the
Security Council to ensure that Mr. Chambas' efforts
are successful by seeing to it that influential countries
encourage the parties to come to the negotiating table
and re-establish peace in Darfur.

Mr. Chambas talked of the obstacles that hamper
the work of UNAMID. In that regard, I would like to
say that cooperation between the Sudanese Government
and UNAMID has made considerable progress in terms
of granting visas. Mr. Ladsous acknowledged that
fact when he met with the Sudanese Minister of the
Interior during his visit to New York last month; he also
mentioned it in his meeting with the Sudanese Minister
for Justice, who is from Darfur, specifically from
the Zaghawa tribe. Those two Sudanese leaders met
with senior officials of the United Nations, including
the Secretary-General, and confirmed the Sudan's
cooperation and its determination to help UNAMID
carry out its role in the most effective manner. I can
confirm today that the Sudanese Government is
absolutely determined to continue its work along the
lines set forth heretofore, both here in New York, within
the Secretariat, and in the Sudan as well, in order to
facilitate UNAMID's mission.

We have also heard the positive news regarding
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and its
implementation. Priority is currently being given to the
implementation of the development strategy in Darfur
that was approved at the donor conference that took place
in Doha in April 2013. The report presented to us today
(S/2013/607) discusses in great detail the measures
taken in that regard in coordination with UNAMID and
the United Nations Development Programme. Thus,
and given the progress that has been made in terms of
implementing the Doha Document, we strongly urge
the international community, in particular, the Security
Council, to support that progress. It is extremely
important, as I have already said, to exert the necessary
pressure on the rebel movements that refuse to join
the peace process to do so swiftly and without any
preconditions.

The report befoe the Council today (S/2013/607)
confirms in paragraph 7 that the Special Prosecutor
for Darfur informed UNAMID that he had, since being
appointed in June 2012, brought to trial nine cases of
serious crimes resulting in 42 convictions, and that he
was investigating another 57 cases. In that regard, we
reaffirm his assertion that the Sudanese justice system
is qualified and capable of meting out justice and make
rulings in cases.

I would like to underscore that during his visit
to New York last month, the Sudanese Minister of
Justice - who, as I said earlier, is from the Zaghawa
tribe of Darfur - met with the Secretary-General.
In that meeting, the Secretary-General praised the
Minister's efforts to combat impunity and to lift
the immunity enjoyed by certain indictees. I wish to
confirm that we are going to continue along that path
in order to convict all perpetrators of those crimes. The
Government of the Sudan is also pursuing its efforts
and investigations to bring to justice all those people
involved in attacks against UNAMID.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that
the report before us today states in paragraph 13 that
intercommunal fighting over land and other natural
resources poses a serious threat of physical violence to
civilians.

Furthermore, paragraph 41 of the report
underscores that intercommunal fighting in East
Darfur was responsible for the humanitarian situation.
I can confirm to the Council that such attacks and
intercommunal fighting have now been contained and
that, in that regard, we are cooperating with all parties
of influence at the regional level in order to promote
reconciliation between the tribes. The events of the
past month have been contained, and fighting has now
ceased between the tribes.

Paragraphs 47, 48 and 49 of the report reflect a
decrease in cases of violations of the right to life, of

violations of the right to physical integrity, and of
sexual and gender-based violence - all as a result of
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur.

In conclusion, I would urge all Council members to
exert firm pressure to achieve the aims we all seek and
to convince those movements that have not yet joined
the peace process to do so as soon as possible in order
to restore peace and security.

