Mrs. Albright (United States of America): It has been
five years since my Government has felt compelled to vote
against a resolution under consideration by this Council. I
have cast this veto today - reluctantly, but without
hesitation - on an issue of principle for the United States.
The principle is this: the only path to achieve a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East is direct talks
between the parties. My Government was compelled to
oppose this resolution because the Council sought to declare
itself on a permanent-status issue - Jerusalem - and thus
violated this principle. These issues must be resolved by the
parties, with the support of the international community, but
without its interference.

The United States has consulted at length with other
Council members on the issues raised by this resolution.
But a consensus was, unfortunately, not possible because
others were not prepared to adhere to the negotiating
process which we believe is central to continued progress
towards peace in the Middle East. This council is not
able - and should not seek - to try to resolve sensitive
issues in the Middle East peace process: that is for the
parties, who must live with the outcome of these
negotiations.

Let us be clear. At this point, progress towards peace
in the Middle East depends not on what the United
Nations does, but on what the parties agree to. The
heartening progress that has been made during the past
two years is the result of decisions made by the parties,
in recognition of the urgent desire of their own peoples to
begin a new chapter in the history of their troubled
region. That progress has occurred despite the resistance
of terrorists and rejectionists, and notwithstanding still
deep sensitivities about issues upon which final agreement
has not yet been reached.

The Declaration of Principles, signed on
13 September 1993 by the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Government of Israel, lists several
issues, including Jerusalem, as permanent-status issues to
be covered by the parties at a later time specified in the
Declaration. That agreement reflects the pragmatic View
of the parties that there is a logical sequence for dealing
with the issues which would involve covering the most
sensitive ones at a later stage of the negotiations.

This Council, the General Assembly and Member
States separately have expressed strong support for the
Middle East peace process and for the Declaration of
Principles. It is necessary and appropriate that we
continue to do so. However, passage of this resolution
would have had the Council intrude upon the agreed
political process set out in the Declaration of Principles.
That could yield no positive result.

The commitment of Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization to achieve peace and
reconciliation has changed, dramatically, the face of the
Middle East. Palestinians and Israelis now meet on a
regular basis. Practical problems are being addressed.
Fears and suspicions are being confronted. The parties are
actively engaged in negotiations to implement the second
stage of the Declaration of Principles. Progress towards a
wider regional peace agreement has been made. There is
much at stake for all of us in the successful outcome of

 

this process. But for the parties, the stakes include issues
that no one but the parties can resolve.

Undoubtedly, events will occur that appear to
represent setbacks in the path towards full agreement and
reconciliation. Given the history and complexity of the
issues, that is inevitable. But we must have the discipline to
maintain our support for this process, despite the setbacks
and despite differences of perspective on particular actions
or events.

The United States has expressed the view that the
Israeli notice to expropriate land in Jerusalem is unhelpful.
Clearly, this Israeli decision does not move the peace
process in the right direction. But by injecting the Council
into this issue, this resolution would merely compound the
problem. Instead, this Council should be encouraging the
parties and not acting in a way that is detrimental to the
process.

The international community has an important role to
play in supporting the efforts of the parties to the Middle
East process in their quest for reconciliation and what
President Clinton has referred to as the quiet miracle of a
normal life. The events of recent years indicate that the
parties derive confidence from the willingness of
governments around the world to encourage them in their
efforts and to stand by them when incidents of destructive
and violent resistance to those efforts have occurred. But to
be effective, the support of the international community
must also be discreet, maintaining a certain distance from
the details of the negotiations. We may pull out the chairs
for those at the bargaining table, but we do not belong at
the table ourselves.

My Government's decision to vote against this
resolution may have disappointed some, but it should not
have surprised anyone. We have not voted against this
resolution because we support Israel's decision on land
expropriation: we do not. This vote is a result of our long-
held and long-stated position regarding what we can and
cannot support in this Council.

As I made clear in my statement on 18 March 1994
with respect to Security Council resolution 904 (1994), my
Government will not agree to a resolution that prejudges or
prejudices the outcome of negotiations over such a sensitive
issue as Jerusalem. Nor will we agree to any Council action
that oversteps the Council's appropriate role as supporter of
the negotiations aimed at achieving a lasting settlement to
the conflicts that have for so long plagued the Middle East.

My Government is aware of the importance of
Jerusalem to many Governments, as was evident during
this week's debate. Jerusalem is a special city. I urge
other Governments that care deeply about Jerusalem to
encourage the parties to move forward in the peace
process so that they can begin discussion of permanent-
status issues, including Jerusalem, next year.

In closing, let me appeal to each Government
represented here, to States in the Middle East and to other
interested Governments not to let this issue distract us
from our shared commitment to assist the parties in their
perilous, but still promising, journey towards peace.

