Mr. Hamidon (Malaysia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

At the outset, let me congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April 2006. We are fully
confident that you will successfully guide the
important work of the Council, as you have done on
several occasions in the past. Allow me this
opportunity also to express appreciation to your
predecessor, Mr. Cesar Mayoral of Argentina, for the
manner in which he conducted the important work of
the Council last month.

The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its
commitment to a peaceful solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and continues to support the
Palestinian people in the exercise of their inalienable
right to self-determination; their right to an
independent and sovereign State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital; and their right to freedom and dignity.

The Movement further reaffirms its support for
the Middle East peace process on the basis of the
relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, the principle of land for peace, the Arab
peace initiative, the principle of the illegality of any
territorial acquisition resulting from the threat or use of
force, and the road map. Fulfilling the provisions
contained in those instruments could lead to the
achievement of the two-State solution, with Israel and
Palestine living side by side in peace and security
within recognized borders, based on the pre-1967
borders.

Israel should withdraw from all the territories it
has occupied since the 1967 war. Israel must realize
that, after almost four decades, a military solution is
certainly not the answer. In the words of Sun Zi, one of
the greatest military strategists of ancient China, "Of
all the stratagems, to know when to quit is the best".
The time for Israel to quit its occupation of Palestinian
territories is now.

The Movement is gravely concerned at the
escalating military campaigns launched by Israeli
forces in the occupied Palestinian territories last week.
The Movement strongly condemns such campaigns, in
particular the wilful killing of Palestinian civilians,
including extrajudicial killings; the excessive and
indiscriminate use of force by Israel; and the siege and
collective punishment imposed against the
Palestinians, including severe restrictions on the
movement of persons, goods and humanitarian aid
workers, further exacerbating the already grave socio-
economic debilitation of the Palestinian people. Those
acts have led, and could lead in future, to further
Violent retaliatory measures by the Palestinians. In
addition, the Movement is seriously concerned at the
reported targeting by Israeli forces of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and of other
humanitarian aid agencies and their workers, including
ambulances and paramedics, operating in the
Palestinian territories.

In the light of the current situation in the region,
the Non-Aligned Movement urges Israel in particular
to exercise maximum restraint and both sides to take
all necessary measures to stop the vicious circle of
violence, which has caused so many casualties among
innocent civilians and so much destruction to public
infrastructure and property. The Movement condemns
the killing or injuring of innocent civilians, which is
unjustifiable, and condemns all acts of Violence and
destruction, including terrorism and suicide bombings.

In that regard, the Movement urges the Security
Council, bearing in mind its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
immediately to intervene by pressuring Israel to stop
all attacks against the Palestinian people, as well as by
assisting and supporting the Palestinian Authority in its
ongoing efforts to prevail upon groups in its territories
to halt all rocket attacks against Israel. The Movement
urges both sides to act in conformity with international
law and to refrain from taking any steps that could
further escalate the violence and exacerbate the already
tense situation in the region.

The decision by the Palestinian people to choose,
through a free, fair and secure democratic process,
their representatives to the Palestinian Legislative
Council should be respected. The outcome of the
elections in Palestine last January should not be used
as a pretext by the international community to cease
extending economic and financial assistance and other
forms of aid to the Palestinian people. We welcome all
financial and humanitarian assistance provided by the
international community to meet the needs of the
Palestinian people and urge strongly that this be
sustained. Any suspension of assistance could lead to a
humanitarian catastrophe in the Palestinian territories.
The Palestinians should not be punished; they do not
deserve to be punished. They deserve much better
treatment, and we, the Member States, have the duty to
ensure that they receive it.
In that connection, the Non-Aligned Movement
renews its call upon Israel to disburse without delay to
the Palestinian Authority the full amount of the
monthly tax and customs revenues which rightfully
belong to the Palestinians, in accordance with the
Israeli-Palestinian Protocol signed in Paris in 1994.
Those much-needed revenues could greatly alleviate
the dire humanitarian conditions and suffering of the
Palestinian people, who are in need of food and water,
medicine and medical treatment, and education for
their children, among other things.

The Non-Aligned Movement remains concerned
about the failure of repeated efforts to revive the peace
process, and deeply regrets in particular that the road
map has yet to be implemented. The Movement
continues to note with concern that the Israeli
Government has failed to take the necessary first step
in accordance with its obligations therein. It has
evaded the provisions of the road map and substituted
different steps which are inconsistent with international
law and relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions. It is incumbent upon both Israel
and Palestine, as well as in their own interests, to
create, with the assistance of the international
community, the necessary conditions that could lead to
the resumption of negotiations with a view to seeking a
just, durable and comprehensive final settlement.
Those entail, in particular, the denouncing of violent
measures or acts of terrorism and the revoking by
Israel of unilateral actions that could further undermine
peace and stability in the region.

The Movement renews its call for the
intensification of efforts by the Quartet to salvage the
road map and to work earnestly towards the full and
honest implementation of its provisions.

The Non-Aligned Movement stresses the
necessity of upholding international law, international
humanitarian law and the Charter of the United Nations
with regard to the question of Palestine. The
Movement further stresses the permanent responsibility
of the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, with regard to the question of Palestine until
it is resolved in all its aspects.

The Council is in a position to prevail upon Israel
and Palestine to achieve their long-held desire for a
just, lasting and comprehensive final settlement. The
Council shoulders the primary responsibility for
ensuring that they do so. There is a Chinese proverb
which says, "Make a decision when a decision is called
for. Hesitation only brings disaster". The Council must
not be reluctant to invoke its functions and powers,
especially on this question - for the sake of the
Palestinians and the Israelis, for the sake of the people
in the region and in order to serve and meet the
collective interests and desire of our global family of
nations, which has clearly pronounced itself repeatedly
on this question. The Movement remains hopeful that
our collective interests and desire will be translated
into reality sooner rather than later.

