Ms. Bensouda: In my last briefing to the Council
in June (see S/PV.6974), I expressed my Office's
frustration and despair at the Council's inaction and
paralysis regarding the situation in Darfur. This is
my Office's eighteenth report to the Council since
the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005), by which the
Council, acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, referred the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court.

Resolution 1593 (2005) represented hope for
Darfur's victims - hope that there would be an end to
their suffering; hope that there would be accountability
for crimes, and that justice would not only be done but
would be seen to be done; and hope, above all, that
lasting peace and security would return to Darfur. That
hope was strengthened even further when the Council
mandated my Office to report on progress every six
months in order to enable the Council to remain actively
seized of their plight.

Sadly, with each report provided by my Office to
the Council, the hopes of the victims of Darfur have
faded. With this eighteenth report, it would be an
understatement to say that all hope is lost. Over the years
and despite the blatant disregard of the Government of
the Sudan for the Council's resolutions and presidential
statements, the situation in Darfur has continued to
deteriorate and the plight ofDarfur victims has continued
to go from bad to worse. Not only does the situation in
Darfur continue to pose a threat to international peace
and security, but other situations - such as that in
Abyei, as well as the situation along the border between
the Sudan and South Sudan - have also deteriorated.
In 10 years, the situation in Darfur alone has cost the
United Nations and humanitarian aid organizations
more than $10.5 billion, and has taken the lives of
47 aid workers, with many more injured and abducted.

Attacks on peacekeepers appear to have become
the norm, with a record number of 57 killings. In this
reporting period alone, peacekeepers from Tanzania,
Rwanda, Zambia and Senegal have been killed. My
Office salutes their sacrifices and recalls that intentional
attacks on personnel involved in peacekeeping missions
are crimes under the Rome Statute. Sadly, not enough
seems to have been done to identify those responsible,
despite the repeated insistence of the United Nations
and the African Union that the Government of the
Sudan must duly investigate. It is in the common
interests of the United Nations, the African Union and
the ICC to ensure that those responsible for attacking
peacekeepers are swiftly brought tojustice. I encourage
the United Nations and the African Union to share
information from their own internal investigations with
my Office, in the interests ofjustice.

This year alone, 460,000 people have been newly
displaced in Darfur. The number of people killed,
abducted and displaced continues to grow each year.
All these are crimes that will not stop unless the
Council and the States parties to the Rome Statute show
a determination to apprehend their authors.

Since 2004, the Council has adopted 52 resolutions
and 17 presidential statements and issued 17 press
statements on the Sudan situation as a whole. The
Government of the Sudan's failure to cooperate
with the ICC is but one of the many incidents of the
Government of the Sudan's continuous failure and/
or refusal to implement the Council's decisions.
Inaction and paralysis within the Council have not only
prolonged the suffering of Darfur's victims, but have
bolstered Mr. Al-Bashir's resolve to ignore the Council,
prompting him to even publicly boast in a 13 October
2011 speech that the Sudan does not implement Security
Council resolutions.

The same, sadly, holds true today. Without stronger
action by the Council and States parties, the situation in
the Sudan is unlikely to improve. Alleged perpetrators
of serious crimes against the civilian population will
continue to commit crimes unless they are brought to
justice. My Office has done its part, and it is now up to

the Council and to the States parties to heed the cries
of the millions of victims of the crimes that continue
unabated in Darfur. The time has come for the Council
and States parties to seriously devise strategies for
arresting those alleged to be responsible for these
crimes. That is the only way to stop the seemingly
endless suffering of the Darfur victims.

It is a serious indictment on the Council and on
States parties that Mr. Al-Bashir and Mr. Hussein have
been able to travel to various countries without fear of
arrest. The Council's silence, even when notified of
clear failures and/or violations by States Members of
the United Nations of their obligations to comply with
the Council's resolutions only serves to add insult to the
plight of Darfur's victims. The question that Darfur's
victims are undoubtedly asking themselves is: Has
resolution 1593 (2005) become meaningless? What is
the point of the Office of the Prosecutor's briefings
if there is no concrete follow-up action taken by the
Council? Why has none of the eight ICC Chamber
communications transmitted to the Council by the
Registrar not been acted upon?

At this point, we can do no more than recall the
astute words of the Pre-Trial Chamber of the Court
when it opined:

"When the Security Council, acting under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, refers
a situation to the Court as constituting a threat
to international peace and security, it is expected
that the Council would respond by way of taking
such measures which are considered appropriate,
if there is an apparent failure on the part of the
relevant State party to the Statute to cooperate in
fulfilling the Court's mandate entrusted to it by the
Council. Otherwise, if there is no follow-up action
on the part of the Security Council, any referral by
the Council to the ICC under Chapter VII would
never achieve its ultimate goal, namely, to put an
end to impunity. Accordingly, any such referral
would become futile."

In spite of the frustrations, challenges and obstacles,
my Office's determination to carry out the mandate
given to it by resolution 1593 (2005) has not and will
not waver. We owe it to Darfur's victims to show them
that we have not abandoned them and that we may be
their only hope for justice. To this end, our judicial
activities are ongoing; in particular, preparations for
the trial of Mr. Abdallah Banda Abakaer Nourain are on
track. My Office has focused on that case in particular,
taking into account that the trial is scheduled to start
on 5 May 2014. The willingness oer. Banda to appear
voluntarily is a clear sign of the confidence that he
has in the system of justice provided at the ICC and
his strong belief that he will receive fair, impartial
treatment in accordance with the highest standards of
procedural fairness and due process, including the right
to be presumed innocent until proven guilty. A message
to all other Darfur fugitives is that they have nothing to
fear in coming to ICC if they are innocent. To be sure,
any person brought before the Court will be afforded
all the requisite facilities and enjoy the right to legal
assistance and other necessary safeguards to ensure
that he or she undergoes a fair trial that respects the
due process guarantees stipulated in the Rome Statute.

The failure of the international community and the
Council in particular to put pressure on the Government
of the Sudan to arrest and surrender persons against
whom arrest warrants have been issued continues to
present an ongoing challenge for my Office in moving
forward with the other trials. Within my Office's limited
resources, security challenges and lack of cooperation
on the part of the Government of the Sudan, my Office's
activities in these other cases are limited to preserving
evidence and maintaining contacts with witnesses.
That is the only way we can ensure a smooth kick-start
of judicial proceedings in the event that the fugitives
are arrested.

The report submitted to the Council for this
briefing provides an overview of allegations of crimes
that continue to be committed in Darfur and that cry
out for full investigation. It is particularly noteworthy
and indeed disturbing that persons against whom
arrest warrants have already been issued are allegedly
implicated in the commission of these crimes. If it has
not been clear to the Council before, it should now be
clear that lasting peace in Darfur will remain elusive
for as long as those alleged to be responsible for the
commission ofthese crimes remain at large. The alleged
crimes include attacks by the Ministry of Defence,
either targeting or indiscriminately affecting civilians
and other persons, as well as alleged attacks by rebel
movements, alleged criminal acts affecting displaced
persons, and alleged abductions of and attacks on
humanitarian aid workers and peacekeepers, among
others.

The plight of displaced persons is particularly
worrying. Much as the precise numbers of displaced
persons may be in doubt, there is reason to believe
that the crisis may even be worse than imagined and
is exacerbated by lack of access to humanitarian aid,
such as food, water and the most rudimentary shelter in
the form of plastic sheets. Allegations of the hijacking
or stealing of humanitarian aid food deliveries by
the Government of the Sudan's Humanitarian Aid
Commission are also of concern to my Office, as they
have reportedly left hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons suffering.

Alleged aerial bombardments affecting civilians
also feature in our overview. There is no doubt that
civilians continue to bear the brunt of all these armed
attacks. My Office has taken note of a recent survey
that identifies violence in Darfur as the major cause of
death among refugees, and the apparent ongoing pattern
of incidents previously highlighted by my Office
wherein thousands of militia members enter targeted
towns in Land Cruiser vehicles, on horseback and on
camels and confront local tribe members. Those attacks
have allegedly resulted in civilians killed and injured,
with tens of thousands displaced at a time. My Office
has also noted increasing clashes between Arab tribes
that have in the past supported the Government of the
Sudan's Janjaweed militia, including related concerns
that the Government of the Sudan is increasingly
willing to fan the flames of violence, even among its
traditional allies, to deflect their demands for greater
compensation for their involvement in the military
campaign of the past 10 years.

My Office notes the pervasive and corrosive effect
of organized sexual and gender-based violence on
women and girls, which is a key concern for my Office,
and the fact that it remains seriously underreported.
Sexual and gender-based violence is undoubtedly a
threat to peace and security in Darfur. My Office
notes attacks on human rights defenders, civil society
members and community leaders, which likewise have
a corrosive effect on the ability of communities to
speak up in search ofjustice, peace and security. Those
communities are also increasingly exposed to unliveable
conditions by attacks on humanitarian aid workers and
peacekeepers, which diminish the assistance they can
receive and which prevent the United Nations Mission
in Darfur from being able to execute its mandate. The
interference of the Sudan's National Intelligence and
Security Services in the work of humanitarian aid
workers has caused substantial deterioration in the
level of health coverage that they have provided as a
stop-gap to the total lack of local services.

On the matter of non-cooperation, the Council
has yet to respond to eight formal communications
from the Pre-Trial Chamber, including concerning
the non-cooperation of the Government of the Sudan
in the Harun and Kushayb case. The Council's silence
and inaction contribute to the Sudan's continued
determination to ignore the Council. The Office recalls
the statement of the Chamber in these cases that the
ICC has no enforcement mechanism and thus relies on
the States' cooperation, without which it cannot fulfil
its mandate and contribute to ending impunity.

Let me conclude by noting the Assembly of States
Parties' omnibus resolution from its recent 2013
session - resolution ICC-ASP/12/Res.8 - in particular
its reference, in paragraph 13, to the Security Council's
presidential statement S/PRST/2013/2, of 12 February
2013. The resolution encourages further strengthening
of the Security Council's relationship with the Court,
such as through support for international justice in
peacekeeping mandates, the holding of annual open
debates on the Court and identifying other means to
institutionalize cooperation. Rome Statute States parties
have an essential role to play in making that stronger
relationship a reality. That is certainly essential if we
dare hope to make progress towards ending impunity
in Darfur. I still believe that is possible. I hope the
Council does as well.

