Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank the briefers for the information they provided today. We welcome the progress made in the preparations for the 2020 and 2021 elections as well as the adoption of legislation outlined in the Mutual Accountability Framework. We note with concern the ongoing political impasse between the Federal Government and the leaders of the federal member states. We understand that overcoming that impasse must be a priority so as to support the reconciliation process and ensure a fair electoral process in Somalia. We call on the leaders to redouble their efforts to reach an agreement that addresses issues such as security, the constitutional review and the elections, among other national priorities. We welcome the positive developments in the subregion, resulting in the agreement signed by President Farmajo and President Kenyatta on restoring bilateral relations and the joint plan of action for 2020 and beyond between Eritrea, Ethiopia and Somalia. We welcome the adoption of the amended electoral law. We call for ensuring the 30 per cent quota of women and a broad participation of the public, particularly young people, in the electoral process. In that context, we believe the adoption of the amended federal constitution to be essential and we urge the parties to continue working towards holding a constructive, inclusive and transparent dialogue. The effects of climate change continue to pose a challenge to Somalia. The seasonal rains and rapid shifts to severe droughts, combined with the vulnerabilities and lack of resilience of communities, have resulted in a worrying increase in humanitarian needs in the country, where humanitarian assistance is needed to survive. In that regard, we particularly appreciate the briefing by Mr. Dan Smith, who informed us about the effects of climate change on the security situation in Somalia and the great effort being made by the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) to respond to the increasing impact of climate change on that country. Somalia's vulnerability to climate change is reflected by the repercussions it has on the population, who are forced to flee their homes in search of basic services. In addition, those who have already been displaced due to conflict and violence are disproportionately impacted. That has increased the humanitarian needs of the population, including food insecurity. It is therefore essential to continue to provide both the relevant authorities and those called on to support their efforts with the necessary tools for preparation, analysis and response regarding the negative impacts of climate change. As we are already seeing in Somalia, that would make it possible to comprehensively address the root causes of the current climate and humanitarian crises in the country and to provide sustainable solutions to them. As on previous occasions, we would like to express our concern about the security situation in Somalia and the attacks perpetrated by the terrorist group Al-Shabaab, which continues to be the main source of violence in Somalia. We particularly condemn the attack on 28 December 2019 in Mogadishu, which killed 90 people, and we express our condolences. In conclusion, we recognize the role that the United Nations Support Office in Somalia, the African Union Mission in Somalia and UNSOM have been playing in achieving lasting peace and stability in the country.We are confident that the process of preparing for and holding future elections will be a gateway to a new stage of dialogue in Somalia that will promote the development of a participatory democracy and lasting solutions to the many challenges facing the Somali people.
