Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the convening of today's
discussion at the initiative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, Madam President, as well as your
personal presiding over this Council meeting. A useful
discussion on the same theme took place a year ago on
the initiative of China (see S/PV.7389). It demonstrated
that almost no Member State remains indifferent to the
issue. And as of today, the discussion is far from being
exhausted.

The basic code of conduct for States in the world
is provided by the compilation of principles and rules
reflected in the Charter of the United Nations - such
as the independence and sovereign equality of States,
non-interference in their internal affairs, the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the right of peoples to
self-determination. Nobody, it would seem, calls into
question the immutable nature of the principles of the
Charter.

We are convinced that, today as well, many
parties reaffirm their commitment to them. However,
in practice those principles are not always upheld.
Seventy years after the end of the Second World War,
the basic principles that should serve as a backbone
for the system of international relations are becoming
for some an awkward obstacle and, consequently, are
subject to various types ofinterpretations, or are simply
circumvented. That inevitably leads to a situation in
which States are experiencing the explosive situations
that at the time created the conditions for world wars
and which the founders of the United Nations wanted to
exclude once and for all by creating a unified code of
conduct for all.

Today we cannot turn a blind eye to what is
happening as a result of undisguised interventions in
the internal affairs of States through support for illicit
changes of power or the forcible imposition of foreign
cultural or social norms. We all clearly saw how, from
the spark of popular unrest in Libya, through allegedly
disinterested outside assistance, a fire was fuelled
that destroyed the State, leaving in its place ashes and
chaos. The same sort of illicit intervention, involving
illegitimate air strikes or the provision of weapons to
non-Government armed forces, led to a rise in violent
extremism and radicalization in Syria, which eventually
resulted in the emergence and strengthening of such
terrible phenomena as the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Sham.

The Russian delegation is seriously concerned
about the most recent aggressive actions of the Turkish
Government, the massive shelling in neighbourhoods
of Syria on the border, as well as the possible movement
into Syria of fresh groups of mercenaries who seek
to join Jabhat Al-Nusra, Al-Qaida and other terrorist
organizations. The consequences of the interventions
in Libya and Syria are striking by virtue of their scale,
as they have caused atrocious suffering to civilians, the
desecration of the cultural heritage of humankind and
unprecedented migrant flows.

We support the declared goal of today's meeting,
namely, the commitment to the inviolability of the
purposes and principles of the Charter, a well as the
effort to find ways to involve States in their effective
implementation. We do indeed need to agree on how,
on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations,
joint risk management will be carried out in a context
of increasingly complex international relations. We
will not succeed in achieving that purpose without
upholding the system of fundamental principles that I
have mentioned.

Those endeavours should include decisive measures
to do away with double standards in international
politics and to strengthen the role of the Security
Council as the primary body charged with agreeing on
collective approaches, based on respect for the cultural
and civilizational diversity of the contemporary world.

The past year, since the Security Council meeting
in February 2015, has served to confirm that positive
results can be achieved when members of the Council
come together in the interests of finding consolidated
positions in line with the purposes and principles of
the Charter. That was the very foundation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action to ensure the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme, which
allowed us to get rid of one of the most explosive
sources of conflict in the Middle and Near East. The
destruction of the Syrian chemical weapons arsenal
was successfully carried out, important decisions were
made regarding countering terrorism and its financing,
and progress was achieved in the Syrian settlement. A
new comprehensive Paris Agreement has been drawn
up on the issue of climate change.

Today three delegations referred to the Ukrainian
crisis. We think that blatant interference in the internal
affairs of Ukraine took place through support from the
outside aimed at undertaking an anti-constitutional
coup d'etat in 2014. There is well-known evidence of
that: we might recall the brazenness of high-ranking
American officials, sponsors of Kyiv, which was
recently fully unmasked in the French documentary
film entitled Ukraine: Masks of the Revolution. The
coup led to a degradation in the statehood of the
country, radicalization, an increase in nationalism and
numerous casualties.

We would like to recall that, against the backdrop
of that crisis, what happened in Crimea is what is
envisaged by international law, including United
Nations principles, namely, the right to exercise self-
determination. According to the 1970 Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States, that right can
be realized, including through the establishment of a
sovereign and independent State, the free association or
integration with an independent State. It is noteworthy
that a number of States that have called into question the
legitimacy of the secession of Crimea said the opposite
with regard to Kosovo.

As to the current conflict in Ukraine, it is unlikely
to stop until the Government in Kyiv finds a common
ground with all the political forces and regions of
the country. We are ready assist in that effort in any
way possible. An important step there would be strict
compliance with the Minsk agreements, which, as we
well know, Kyiv seems to have a problem with. The
advantage ofthe Minsk agreements is their very specific
nature, which leaves no room for their manipulation or
arbitrary interpretation. That is the big headache for
Kyiv, which is attempting to not implement them fully.

In the current context, when accuracy in the
understanding of the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and their inviolability often seems to be
lost, we think that there is a need to clearly underscore
our shared commitment to those provisions, for which
there are no alternatives. We hope that that would help
in preventing attempts to bring massive pressure to bear
on sovereign States by imposing unilateral decisions
and standards in the political, economic and ideological
areas. The dictates of the present are that there is a need
to establish a true democracy and the rule of law in
international relations.

Some delegations today spoke about violations of
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
baselessly accusing Russia of such actions. To ensure
that such flights of fancy not give the wrong impression,
may I just give a quick review of the most egregious
cases of disregard for international law, including for
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, over the past decades, because clearly they
have been forgotten about.

In 1964, the United Kingdom bombed the Yemeni
city of Harib. The Security Council condemned that
action in resolution 188 (1964), underscoring that
reprisals were not compatible with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations. In 1983, the United
States invaded Grenada. In its resolution 38/7, the
General Assembly called the United States actions "a
flagrant violation of international law". Many of us are
probably aware that the President of the United States
at the time reacted to the adoption of the resolution by
saying that it would not spoil his appetite for breakfast.
In 1986, the United States carried out an armed attack
on Libya, which the General Assembly characterized
as a violation of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. In 1989, the General Assembly called
the United States incursion in Panama an out-and-out
violation of international law.

Such violations have been repeatedly noted by the
International Court of Justice, the primary judicial
organ of the United Nations. For example, in its first
historic decision in the 1947 case of Corfu Channel
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland v. Albania), the Court recognized evidence of
violations by the United Kingdom of the sovereignty of
Albania. In its 1986 judgment in the well-known case
of Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against
Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States ofAmerica), the
Court directly noted that the United States had violated
the sovereignty of Nicaragua and the norms governing
non-intervention in the internal affairs of States and the
non-use of force. It is to be noted that the United States
openly continued to carry out actions that the Court
had qualified as violations of international law.

The attitude of unaccountability of the United
States and its allies continues. I could cite other
instances, such as the bombing of Yugoslavia and Iraq
and the events of recent years in Libya and Syria, of
which I spoke earlier. It would seem that a sense of their
own exceptional status has long allowed certain States
to place themselves above the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.

