Mr. Mkapa: I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Council once again on the Southern Sudan
referendum. My statement will be short, since I do not
have much to add to the statement that the Secretary-
General's Panel issued two days ago.

During the week of polling, the Panel members
and I visited referendum centres in eight states, and the
Panel's staff monitored the process in all Southern
states and across the North. Based on our own
observations and those of our staff in the field, as well
as on accounts conveyed by various interlocutors in the
Sudan, I can report on behalf of the Panel that we are
satisfied that the process so far has been conducted in a
peaceful and transparent manner, allowing the people
of Southern Sudan to express their will freely.
Preliminary statements issued by international observer
groups have made similar assessments of the process.

Our reports indicate that polling procedures were
properly followed overall. Polling centres generally
opened on time and were well staffed and stocked.
Referendum staff carried out their work in accordance
with established procedures, and security was
maintained at all locations monitored. The referendum
staff appeared to be well-trained in counting and result-
aggregation procedures, including security and
transparency requirements. Ballots were counted in the
presence of observers and results posted at referendum
centres. The Panel has so far found no evidence to
suggest that there was any systematic or widespread
attempt to undermine the polling process.

We are now closely following the aggregation of
results. The process of transmitting the results from
nearly 3,000 referendum centres to county
subcommittees and state high committees, and then to
Juba and Khartoum, is under way. We understand that
any alleged errors or fraud will be thoroughly
investigated and that any results tainted by verified
cases of errors or fraud will be dealt with appropriately.
11-20932

A mere three months ago, when the Panel
undertook its first visit to the Sudan, the timely, orderly
and smooth conduct of polling was hard to imagine.
The dedication and work of the commissioners and
staff of the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission
and its Bureau, the registration and polling officers and
the security officers involved are to be commended.

As we stated on 16 January, we would like to
recognize the courage and leadership demonstrated by
President Omer Al-Bashir and First Vice-President
Salva Kiir Mayardit, as well their commitment to
implementing a major milestone of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. In order for the outcome of the
referendum to be sustainable, it is essential that a
number of outstanding post-referendum issues between
the parties be resolved. The Panel has urged
governmental authorities and the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission to make every effort to
ensure that all citizens are kept well informed of
progress towards the final results. The Panel also called
on the media and political forces to report on the
process in a responsible manner.

Both parties have given important and
unequivocal public assurances about respecting the
outcome of the referendum. Leaders of both parties
have also given assurances about the rights and safety
of Southerners in the North and Northerners in the
South. Early clarity on citizenship could ease some of
the anxiety felt by those communities. The positive
momentum achieved can be sustained only by further
demonstration of goodwill and political commitment
from both sides.

