Mr. O'Brien: For over five long years, the Syrian
people have endured one of the most savage and brutal
conflicts of the twenty-first century. The facts speak
for themselves: over 250,000 people killed; well over
a million injured; 6.5 million displaced within Syria;
almost 4.6 million refugees; and much of the remaining
population 4 some 13.5 million people e in dire need
of humanitarian assistance. We must never forget that
behind each of these figures are the individual and
personal stories of girls, boys, women and men whose
lives have been uprooted, whose dreams for the future
have been shattered, and who have witnessed and been
subjected to unspeakable fear and suffering.

This week, political talks are scheduled to begin,
led by Special Envoy De Mistura. I offer him once again
the full support of the humanitarian community in his
vital endeavour. We must all get behind his tireless
efforts to find a political solution to this shameful
tragedy. This political process offers a genuine window
of opportunity for the international community to come
together and find solutions that reduce suffering and

bring an end to the conflict. I cannot stress enough that
we must not let this opportunity pass.
Since the adoption of resolution 2139 (2014) two
years ago, the Secretary-General has reported month
after month on the parties' disregard for international
humanitarian and human rights law, their repeated
non-compliance with the Council's demands on
protection of civilians and humanitarian access, and the
humanitarian catastrophe that has ensued. This month's
report (S/2016/60) is equally as depressing as those
before it, highlighting how the human and social cost
of this conflict continues to spiral out of control. This
vicious cycle of death and destruction carries the grave
risk of being seen as having become, in many ways,
the new normal in Syria as the search for a political
solution continues. But the death, suffering and wanton
destruction and disregard for the law should never
be seen as normal. This tragedy is man-made. It is
hideous but it is avoidable. And we - the Security
Council - must come together to stop it.

Every time we think we have reached the nadir
of human suffering in this crisis, it continues to sink
deeper and deeper before our eyes. The recent pictures
of emaciated, starving children in the besieged town of
Madaya seemingly shocked the collective conscience
of the world. The humanitarian missions to Madaya
and the similarly besieged areas of Zabadani, Fu'ah
and Kafraya, undertaken by the United Nations, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent (SARC) over the past two
weeks have delivered desperately needed food, medical
and other aid sufficient for one month for over 60,000
people in total.

The original list of those requiring urgent medical
evacuation was 19. All of those people have been
evacuated. In fact, a total of 37 people out of 400
requiring medical attention have been evacuated. We
urgently need to get more medical supplies and teams
into Madaya. The last time SARC was able to enter
with supplies and teams was 15 January. Many of those
remaining need treatment where they are, rather than
evacuation. Simple treatments and supplies can provide
the care required. We do not know if there are others
who require evacuation. That is why it is vital we be
able to get independent medical teams in to assess the
most appropriate medical care for the sick and injured.

Humanitarian conditions in these areas remain
severe and critical, particularly the health of civilians
in Madaya. Negotiations continue to allow the free safe
passage - let me repeat, safe passage - of others in
both locations whose lives are at serious risk. These
negotiations with all parties must conclude urgently
to avoid more senseless death and suffering. In the
meantime, health supplies in Madaya are dwindling
fast, and recent United Nations and SARC requests
to the Syrian authorities for medical teams to enter
Madaya must be approved without delay or hindrance.
We also need similar, immediate safe access to Fu'ah
and Kafraya as conditions there also continue to
deteriorate sharply.

And why do we negotiate? Why do we request
safe access from all parties, but principally the Syrian
Government? We do so because although the Council
has adopted a resolution to allow for safe, unimpeded
access, that access does not always exist for the brave
women and men on the ground trying to deliver
assistance into these areas. Some simply say to me:
"The United Nations should break the sieges", but
that would be reckless. It would ential sending convoy
drivers and humanitarian workers into the line of fire.

To be frank, the situation in Madaya is only the tip
of the iceberg. More and more people are living in areas
that are under siege or are harder to reach than ever
before. We are continually monitoring the situation on
the ground throughout Syria, and based on the latest
information we estimate that some 4.6 million people
are in hard-to-reach areas, subject to various forms of
restrictions on the movement of people and goods that
severely limit their access to services and humanitarian
assistance. Of that number, we estimate that some
486,700 people are currently living in besieged
areas - 274,200 people besieged by the Government
of Syria; 200,000 by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL); and 12,500 by non-State armed groups
and the Al-Nusra Front.

The continued use of siege and starvation as
a weapon of war is reprehensible. The Secretary-
General has said that such tactics can constitute a
war crime. They must stop immediately. The primary
responsibility lies with the party that maintains the
siege and routinely and systematically denies people
the basic necessities oflife. However, other parties that
conduct military activities in or from populated areas,
using civilians as shields and endangering their safety,
also bear their share of responsibility for the immense
suffering in besieged areas. And those with influence
on the parties can demand it stops. I ask them to do so.
Now.

The indiscriminate use of weapons on civilians,
residential areas, aid supply routes and civilian
infrastructure protected under international law
continues, outrageously, with total impunity. Over the
past few weeks alone, hundreds of civilians have been
killed or injured in direct or indiscriminate attacks by all
parties, due to the continued use of explosive weapons
in populated areas, including through barrel bombs and
other aerial weapons, shelling and car bombs.

For example, on 12 January, reports indicate that
airstrikes on Ma'arat al-Numan city, in rural Idlib,
killed 33 people, while airstrikes on Sarmada town, in
northern Idlib, reportedly killed 29 persons on the same
day. In Madimayet, rural Damascus, at least 5 people
were killed and 25 more injured when two mortars
landed in the city centre on 23 January. Meanwhile,
a recent ISIL offensive on besieged Deir eZ-Zour city
has reportedly resulted in the death of large numbers
of civilians, and we also remain extremely concerned
about unverified reports of deaths related to severe
malnutrition in the city.

Attacks on hospitals and schools continue unabated,
with grave repercussions for all civilians, including the
2 million children out of school. In 2015, according to
UNICEF, some 35 schools were attacked, with one in
four schools closed, damaged or destroyed. Meanwhile,
Physicians for Human Rights documented at least 112
attacks on medical facilities - an average of one every
three days - as well as the deaths of 107 medical
personnel last year.

We have asked the Council repeatedly to demand
that the parties to the conflict facilitate unhindered,
unconditional and sustained access across Syria, but that
is simply not happening. Active conflict and insecurity
are limiting factors, but all parties to the conflict
continue to deliberately delay or obstruct the delivery of
aid. While we continue to do everything in our power to
press the parties and influential stakeholders to reach
people in need across Syria, restrictions on aid delivery
remain a routine and systematic occurrence.

Despite our persistent and unrelenting efforts, our
ability to access hard-to-reach and besieged locations
remains severely hampered by the pitiful approval rate
for inter-agency convoys by the Syrian authorities.
In 2015, just over 10 per cent of the 113 requests for
inter-agency convoys resulted in the delivery of much-

needed humanitarian and life-saving assistance. A
further 10 per cent were approved in principle but could
not proceed due to a lack of final approval, insecurity
or lack of agreement on safe passage. The United
Nations placed some 3 per cent of requests on hold due
to insecurity, and almost 75 per cent of requests went
unanswered by the Government of Syria. Such inaction
is simply unacceptable for a State Member of the United
Nations and a signatory to the United Nations Charter.

The impact on the ground is tangible: in 2013, we
reached some 2.9 millionpeople throughthe inter-agency
convoy mechanism, but this past year only 620,000.
On 11 January, the United Nations requested approval
from the Government of Syria to conduct inter-agency
convoys to 46 besieged and hard-to-reach areas during
the first quarter of 2016. As of 27 January, 16 days later,
we have not received all of the necessary approvals for
any ofthese requests. If all these convoys, which remain
one of the most effective and efficient ways to reach
people across conflict lines, could proceed, we could
reach an estimated 1.7 million people in need today
who are being subjected to unnecessary and avoidable
suffering owing to the parties' indifference to fulfilling
their basic international legal obligations.

We are in a race against time. More and more
people are slipping out of our reach every day as the
conflict intensifies and battle lines tighten. In 2015, the
United Nations delivered humanitarian assistance to
less than 10 per cent of people in hard-to-reach areas
and only around 1 per cent in besieged areas. From
our side, the United Nations remains committed to
the safe delivery of neutral, impartial and independent
humanitarian aid to all people directly affected by the
fighting, based on need and vulnerability - never on
political considerations. We stand ready to scale up
assistance as soon as security conditions and more
sustainable access allow. Resources are also vital, and
I encourage all Member States to pledge generously at
the upcoming London Conference on 4 February for
the desperate people inside Syria and for those who
have fled into the neighbouring countries. The United
Nations and its partners will be able to do our job the
best way possible only when we are fully resourced.

At the same time, the Council and Member States
with influence must take further steps to ensure
that the parties comply with their obligations under
international law and the demands of the Council
contained in resolution 2139 (2014). Specifically, this
will require urgent measures now to ensure that the
parties, first, stop targeting civilians, as well as civilian
infrastructure, including medical facilities, schools
and other infrastructure and services which people
depend upon for their survival, including targeted or
indiscriminate attacks, as well as the use of explosive
weapons or landmines in populated areas, at all times.

Secondly, the parties must also facilitate full,
unhindered, unconditional and sustained access to all
people in need, including in besieged and hard-to-reach
areas, for all types of assistance, including medical
and surgical supplies. This must include, for example,
immediate approval of the outstanding requests
for inter-agency cross-line convoys by the Syrian
authorities. Non-State armed groups and listed terrorist
groups must also facilitate the deliveries that they are
preventing.

Thirdly, the parties must allow freedom of
movement for civilians of all ages to enter and exit
besieged and hard-to-reach areas in safety and dignity,
and permit the immediate medical evacuation of sick
and wounded patients to a safe place for treatment.

Even with the worsening situation and continued
access challenges, humanitarian workers in Syria
continue to stay and deliver aid, often at great personal
risk. Humanitarian organizations - both United
Nations and non-United Nations - are dedicating
unprecedented resources and efforts to reach Syrians in
need. Together, we delivered aid to millions of people
in 2015, including food assistance to nearly 6 million
people per month and health assistance to almost
16 million, and we provided 6.7 million people with
water, sanitation and hygiene support, and 4.8 million
with basic household items.

I salute the efforts of the thousands of - mostly
Syrian - staff and volunteers of the United Nations;
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; the non-governmental
organizations (NGOs); the first responders; and the
staff of hospitals and clinics throughout the country,
who carry out their duties day after day in the face
of political pressure and, in some cases, violence and
intimidation from the parties to the conflict.

I remind the Council that each day the United
Nations and its partners are served by humanitarian
heroes: women and men who are willing to risk their
lives leading convoys into conflict zones to reach the
people who are so desperately in need. We should all
be inspired by their example, and we should all salute
them. The failure in Syria is a political failure, most
definitely not a failure on the part of these brave women
and men and the humanitarian organizations that they
represent.

I especially pay tribute to the 82 colleagues who
have lost their lives in the line of duty, including an
international NGO staff member from GOAL, killed by
an improvised explosive device in Idlib just two days
ago.

Let me be clear: the continued suffering of the
people in Syria cannot be blamed on the humanitarian
organizations and staff; it is the failure ofboth the parties
and the international community that has allowed this
conflict to continue for far too long. And try as we may,
humanitarian action cannot be a substitute for political
action. The only solution is through a political dialogue
that reduces and ultimately ends the violence. The key
stakeholders in the Syria crisis must do what has never
been done up to this point and put people before politics.

On the eve of further political talks, it is my
hope, and the hope of all humanitarians, that the key
stakeholders will finally take the bold, unselfish and
courageous decisions necessary to put an end to this
ruinous war and the unimaginable suffering it has
brought to the Syrian people.

Over the last five years, the Council has
demonstrated that when there is political will and a
unity of purpose, it is capable of reaching agreement
and taking decisive action to deal with the challenges
of the conflict in Syria. The Council has taken action
on chemical weapons in Syria; it has authorized cross-
border humanitarian assistance; and it has taken action
recently to launch a political process.

But for the millions of people trapped under siege,
malnourished and lacking basic supplies, the Council
has simply not done enough. We have left those people
with no hope. They believe that the world has forgotten
them.

As this conflict approaches its sixth year, now is
the time for those Council members with influence
on the parties to put their differences aside and come
together, at the most senior political levels, to find
ways to improve access to the millions of Syrians who
remain trapped in besieged and hard-to-reach areas.
The Syrian people cannot wait any longer.

