Mr. Abdinur: My name is Mustafa Haji Abdinur.
For the past seven years, I have been a reporter for AFP
in Somalia. Like so many others in my profession, on
the dusty streets of Mogadishu they call me a dead man
walking. Day after day, I tell stories to the world of
the people of Somalia, the troubles they face and their
hopes for the future. But today I sit here having carried
with me the stories of my comrades and colleagues,
my fellow journalists who paid the ultimate price for
reporting from those same streets.

I speak from experience as ajournalist in Somalia,
but I also want to speak for all the journalists in Syria,
Brazil, Egypt, Pakistan and many other countries, great
and small, who have been killed, are missing or have
been harrassed over the years.

My story is not unique. I am here today simply
because I am lucky and because the gunmen that have
killed so many of colleagues - my friends - have not
yet found me. As ajournalist, it is just a waiting game.
It is not a question of if, but of when. You report the
news, but in Somalia, all too often, it is the reporters
themselves who become the story. If we come back
home alive, we cherish that extra day with our wives
and children, and hope that luck remains for the next
day too.

Somalia's civil war began more than two decades
ago. Since then, nearly 60 journalists have been killed
covering one of the world's worst and longest-running
humanitarian crises. Last year, 18 were killed. So far
this year, four have died.

Journalists face threats from all sides: there is no
single enemy. How safe is it to speak when a security
official can throw ajournalist into prison simply because
he is not pleased with a story? How safe is it to speak
when a young boy armed with a pistol can walk along
your path and shoot you? There is no ordinary route to
work, you must change where you walk each day. You
wait for your turn to come, because the gunmen are out
there waiting for you.

My fellow journalists who have been killed all
knew the risks. They have paid the price because they
wanted to tell the story. They have paid the price for
telling the truth.

When I pick up my cell phone I feel sad, because
their contacts are saved there, as though I could still
dial their number and speak to them. I do not delete
their names just because their lives have been ended
by the killers. Instead, I wait for the day when justice
will be served and the guilty punished for shooting the
messenger. Sometimes, the authorities do make a few
arrests. However, rarely do they result in conviction
and punishment. The perpetrators of these grim crimes
remain free to kill again with impunity.

In such a terrible situation, it is fair to ask: "Why
become ajournalist?" Indeed, why do we risk our lives
to bring news to the world?

There is no doubt that without a free press there can
be no freedom for a country. I tell the Council that we
have a higher objective for good and that by doing our
jobs we feel that we are saving lives. We need the media
for our troubled country to grow and to help inform,
provide laughter with entertainment, provide education
with information, and play our role in building peace.
We talk to all sides in the conflict, providing the
platform for the debate and political discourse that will
shape the future.

When a journalist is killed, the news dies too. A
whole society can be forgotten simply because there is
no one left to tell its stories.

The concern here is, how long can the bravery of
Somali journalists and their determination continue?
We are few remaining. What participants discuss here
today will help save lives. Action can be taken.

Rebuilding the justice system is a long-term
challenge for Somalia, but the international community
can still help. In Somalia there is no effective justice
system to protect journalists. There are concerns about
possible restrictions in a draft media law. Immediate
steps can be taken towards ensuring effective and
impartial investigations into the murders of journalists,
and the prosecution of those responsible. We need
support and training. We are citizens who want to
report the truth.
I am just one man - a reporter - but the voices of
the people I speak to and the stories I write go out on
my news wire to be read all around the world.

Many colleagues have had to leave Somalia, fleeing
the country for safer lands. I remember my friend
and colleague Mohamed Ibrahim Rageh. He fled the
country in 2008 and sought asylum in Uganda, fearing
for his life. But he was a brave man, and he changed
his mind and came back home. He once told to me,
"Perhaps I want to die telling the news." Unfortunately,
earlier this year, they shot him dead while playing with
his daughter in front of his house.

All of my colleagues who have been killed had one
thing in common: they were committed to telling the
story of their country to the rest of the world. Sitting
here today, I want to say that we will not fail that
dream. We will never be discouraged. We will stay the
course and continue telling the world about the crises
in our country, to help save lives, and to develop peace.
But even sitting here, so far away from my home on the
other side of the world, in such a very different situation
as compared to life in Mogadishu, is not without risk.
In showing my face to the Council and the world, I
increase the threat of becoming a target when I go back
home. But I am a journalist. They may call me a dead
man walking, but I report the news.

