Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, as this is the last meeting in which
Ambassador Quinlan will act as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), I should
like to thank him and his team for their dedication and
effective work in steering the Committee over the past
two years.

Like the Chair of the Committee, I welcome the
renewed commitment of all parties to continuing
the negotiations towards achieving a comprehensive
agreement between the Iran and the P5+l. We believe
that extending the timeline for the agreement highlights
the value of diplomatic measures in achieving solutions
through negotiations. Likewise, we welcome the fact
that the P5+l and Iran have requested the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to pursue its nuclear
energy monitoring and verification activities as a
requirement in implementing the Joint Plan of Action,
and that the Board of Governors has approved those
functions.

With respect to the most recent report of the
Director General of the IAEA, we are encouraged by
the holding of technical meetings between Iran and the
Agency to consider the two pending practical measures
agreed in May for the third phase of the cooperation
framework to resolve pending, current and past issues.
Moreover, we wish to highlight the Agency's readiness
to accelerate the resolution of all pending issues. At
the same time, however, we consider it crucial that
Iran cooperate actively with the Agency and adopt the
measures necessary to fully implement its obligations,
including the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Concerning the work of the Committee, I wish to
thank the Panel of Experts for its mid-term report and
its work in the fulfillment of its mandate. Moreover,
as this is the last meeting on the item in which my
delegation will participate as a non-permanent member
of the Council, I should like to mention the holding of
regular open briefings as a useful practice leading to
strengthened ties between the Security Council and all
Member States. We therefore encourage the Committee
to pursue its efforts along those lines.

Similarly, we reiterate the importance of ensuring
that the lists ofpersons and entities subject to sanctions
on the part of all of the sanctions committees are
available in all six official United Nations languages.
That is crucial in guaranteeing the full implementation
of the sanctions measures by Member States. Therefore,
while we highlight the standardization of the listing
format, we encourage the Secretariat to ensure its
availability in all of the official languages as soon as
possible.

We also refer to the process for the selection of
the experts comprising the panels that support the
committees in carrying out their work. As we pointed
out in the Council on 25 November (see S/PV.7323),
we believe that persons with the necessary expertise
and specialized training should be selected to ensure
that each Committee fulfils its mandate. We must also
respect geographical distribution and gender parity.
Likewise, we understand that the process to identify
the most qualified candidates must be transparent
and that the committees must participate in selecting
the experts - after an initial intervention by the
Secretariat - and make decisions with respect to each
and every available vacancy.

To conclude, I again highlight my country's
commitment to the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. At the same time, I reaffirm the
inalienable right of all States parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to develop,
research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, without discrimination.

