The President: I thank Mr. Le Roy for his
clarifications.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its previous
relevant resolutions and statements of its
President which underscore the importance of
developing effective partnerships between the
United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, in accordance with
the United Nations Charter and the relevant
statutes of the regional organizations.

"The Security Council reiterates its primary
responsibility under the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security
and recalls that cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in matters relating to
the maintenance of international peace and
security, and consistent with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, can improve
collective security.

"The Security Council welcomes the
continuing important efforts and enhanced
peacekeeping role of the African Union and its
subregional organizations, consistent with
Security Council resolutions and decisions, to
prevent, mediate and settle conflicts in the
African continent.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
resolution 1809 (2008), which recognizes the
need to enhance the predictability, sustainability
and flexibility of financing regional organizations
when they undertake peacekeeping under a
United Nations mandate.

"The Security Council reiterates that
regional organizations have the responsibility to
secure human, financial, logistical and other
resources for their organizations, including
through contributions by their members and
support from donors. The Security Council
commends the support extended by donors to the
African Union Peace and Security Architecture
through specific mechanisms, including the
African Peace Facility.

"The Security Council recalls the statement
of its President (S/PRST/2009/3) in which it
requested the Secretary-General to submit a
report on practical ways to provide effective
support for the African Union when it undertakes
peacekeeping operations authorized by the United
Nations that includes a detailed assessment of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
African Union-United Nations panel (A/63/666- S/2008/813), in particular those on financing, as
34

well as on the establishment of a joint African
Union-United Nations team. The Security
Council notes that the aforementioned report is an
important contribution towards the overall efforts
to enhance the capacity of the African Union in
undertaking peacekeeping operations.

"The Security Council notes with
appreciation the report of the Secretary-General
on support to African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by the United Nations
(A/64/359-S/2009/470).

"The Security Council reiterates the
importance of establishing a more effective
strategic relationship between the United Nations
Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council and between the United
Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission. The Council encourages further
enhancement of regular interaction, coordination
and consultation between the United Nations and
the African Union on matters of mutual interest.
The Security Council notes the ongoing efforts by
the Secretariat and the Commission in this regard.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of expediting the implementation, in
close consultation with other international
partners, of the 2006 United Nations-African
Union Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme
for the African Union, mainly focusing on peace
and security, in particular the operationalization
of the African Union Standby Force and the
continental early warning system. The Security
Council supports the ongoing efforts to
strengthen the African Peace and Security
Architecture and reiterates its call for the
international community, particularly the donors,
to fulfil their commitments as endorsed by the
2005 World Summit Outcome document.

"The Security Council recognizes that, in
deploying peacekeeping operations authorized by
the Security Council, the African Union is
contributing towards maintenance of international
peace and security in a manner consistent with
the provisions of Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter.
the

"The Security Council notes the assessment
of the options for financing African Union
peacekeeping operations authorized by the
Security Council outlined in the report of the
Secretary-General and expresses its intention to
keep all options under consideration.

"The Security Council notes that the
African Union needs to enhance its institutional
capacity to enable it to effectively plan, manage
and deploy peacekeeping operations. The
Security Council, in this regard, calls upon the
African Union, in the context of developing its
Strategic Plan for 2009-2012, to develop a long-
term, comprehensive capacity-building road map,
in consultation with the United Nations and other
international partners.

"The Security Council underlines the need
for the United Nations and the African Union to
study the lessons learned from the Light and
Heavy Support Packages for AMIS, the logistics
package for AMISOM, as well as the
collaboration under UNAMID and the United
Nations Support Office for AMISOM. (UNSOA),
in close consultation with other international
partners.

"The Security Council welcomes the
intention of the United Nations Secretariat and
the African Union Commission to set up a joint
task force on peace and security to review
immediate and long-term strategic and
operational issues.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to update the Council by
26 April 2010 and submit a progress report no
later than 26 October 2010."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2009/26.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my

list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.
