Mr. Manis (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
honour to make this statement on behalf of the Group
of Arab States. First of all, on behalf of the Group, I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for responding
quickly to its request to convene this urgent meeting to
reconsider the grave situation still prevailing in the
occupied Palestinian territories. I should also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate you on assuming
the presidency of the Council for this month. We are
confident that you will conduct the Council's work
effectively by virtue of your well-known experience. In
addition, we should like to pay tribute to Ambassador
Lavrov and his team for their Herculean and
honourable efforts in presiding so ably over the
Council last month.

The Arab Group would like to express its
appreciation to Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his
great efforts to shed light on the events that took place
in the Jenin refugee camp by assembling a
distinguished team of eminent international figures
known for their honesty, credibility and high
professionalism. The Council welcomed the Secretary-
General's initiative and requested that he keep it
informed of the results of the work, in accordance with
resolution 1405 (2002).

In addition, the Arab Group would like to pay
tribute to the Secretary-General and officials of the
Secretariat for their patience and their efforts to present
the necessary clarifications to the occupying Power.
However, that Power, though it initially agreed to
receive the fact-finding team, saying that it had nothing
to hide, ultimately reversed its position, explicitly
rejecting the team. That led the Secretary-General to
say, in a letter addressed to the Council, that the team
would not be able to remain in place because of the
Israeli Government's position.

Israel's decision to reject the Secretary-General's
initiative and not to comply with Security Council
resolution 1405 (2002) came as no surprise to the Arab
Group. Israel, the occupying Power, has consistently
flouted Security Council resolutions. It has committed
grave violations of international law and international
humanitarian law. The Secretary-General has said
before the Council that the Israeli forces are engaged in
wide-scale violations of international humanitarian
principles and human rights standards.

The Arab Group strongly condemns and
denounces the decision of Israel, the occupying Power,
to refuse to receive the fact-finding team assembled by
the Secretary-General, which the Security Council had
welcomed. The Arab Group calls upon the international
community, represented by the Council, to condemn
the occupying Power's explicit rejection of Council
resolutions and its defiance and contempt of
international humanitarian law.

The question now arises: what does the Council
intend to do in the face of this grave challenge to its
credibility and to that of the United Nations? We
believe that the Council must require respect for its
authority. That could be accomplished, first, by
condemning the Israeli rejection, and secondly, by
uncovering the details of the occupying Power's
heinous crimes against humanity in the Jenin camp and
of all the massacres it carried out against the
Palestinian people, which were seen on television
screens by the entire world. We believe the Council
could do that in a report to be submitted by the
Secretary-General in accordance with the provisions of
resolution 1405 (2002).
Israel, the occupying Power, has consistently
acted as if it were above the law. It flouted the
Council's resolutions and was encouraged by the
Council's failure to implement those resolutions. It
proceeded to carry out further war crimes, State terror
and mass murder of innocent Palestinian civilians. Now
the Council must rise to its Charter responsibility to
maintain international peace and security. Its failure to
shoulder that responsibility will prompt the Arab
Group to resort to the General Assembly. This will
express the positions of the countries of the world
concerning Israel's crimes against humanity in the
Jenin refugee camp and other crimes of State terror
throughout the occupied Palestinian territories,
including holy Jerusalem.

In conclusion, the Arab Group clearly stresses
that its call for the Security Council to meet in plenary
is not intended to provide an opportunity for speakers
to repeat their statements over and over again. Its aim
is to call, in the light of the grave threat to international
peace and security in the occupied Palestinian
territories, for international justice and equity and to
prevent the Council from shirking its responsibilities.
The Council should seek to ensure respect for and
enforcement of its resolutions and meet the challenges
being made to the principles and purposes of the
Charter on the basis of justice and equality among
nations and States. The Council should not allow Israel
to impose its will upon it.

