Mr. Kouchner (spoke in French): Can a full
assessment be made after one year? I think not. At best
this can be only an interim report. Has it been one year
already? Or has it been merely one year? Is one year
too much, or is it not enough? One year ago, the United
Nations family was approaching what Andre Malraux
called the complicated Balkans with one very simple
idea in mind: peace. Members will recall that at that
time, after the bombings by the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), after 10 years of a policy of
segregation and after ethnic cleansing, when the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
arrived, there was nothing: Kosovo was a desert. One
hundred twenty thousand houses had been destroyed,
and I would not even venture to guess exactly how
many people had died - certainly thousands, in
common graves. The International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia has stated that there are more
than 550 such graves, of which I remind the Council
that we have excavated no more than 150.

We must not allow the truth to be hidden. The
international community needs much time, patience
and determination in the face of provocation if it is to
hope to be able to bring about the peaceful coexistence
in which we continue to believe. Indeed, we believe it
in ever more after a year of hard work by the
outstanding team I have the honour to lead. We are not
in Kosovo for 12 months or 24 months; we are
undoubtedly there for a significant number of years.

Quite a bit of progress has been made in the past
12 months, and I should like to summarize it this
morning. To be sure, a great deal remains to be done,
but we have accomplished something. But we have no
illusions: we will need years to build a society based
on tolerance and democracy. Neither tolerance nor
democracy can be built overnight, especially in that
part of Europe, and particularly in Kosovo.

I had anticipated that as we approached 15
June - a date by which some had felt that the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) troops and the United Nations Mission
would be withdrawing - there would be many
incidents, many crimes and many killings. That has in
fact happened, and I deplore it. We must do better on
the security front.

When we arrived, it was a desert. After many
years of a communist society, then a decade of an
unequal society and many years of patent
administrative and economic negligence, we had to
build a government authority from nothing. Our job
was a complex one. We had to implement resolution
1244 (1999), which the Council had adopted
unanimously. We had to provide an interim
administration and establish provisional institutions for
democratic and autonomous governance.

There have been four major phases. First, there
was the emergency phase during which we had to deal
with the refugees. Then came demilitarization, which
while imperfect met with some degree of success for
the first time in history. Next was the establishment of
a political administration. And now comes the fourth
phase, the elections, for which we are preparing at
present.

In the first phase, 900,000 refugees returned to
Kosovo with assistance from the United Nations family
and from non-governmental organizations, and with the
help of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Among other
tasks, about which a report will be issued this
afternoon, UNHCR had to deal with this surge of
refugees. With the help of all the forces on the ground,
and thanks to the donor community, most significantly
the European Union, the UNHCR along with others
made it possible for the 900,000 refugees to survive the
winter.

It was minus 30 degrees in Kosovo in winter and
there was no heat or electricity. But there was no major
humanitarian crisis in that respect. The winter was
survived. We rebuilt an administration involving the
local population as soon as we could. This was the
choice we shared in and which was supported by all
members of the Security Council. This proved possible,
thanks to resolution 1244 (1999), through the
establishment of a joint interim administrative
structure. We began reconstruction and established a
macroeconomic structure which never existed before: a
central fiscal authority, a banking system and a
payments authority. In the second phase we
demilitarized the Kosovo Liberation Army. As always,
there was a lot of criticism. When one does anything,
there is criticism. In Kosovo there are no illegal
uniforms or weapons. I am not so naive as to say that
there are no weapons in Kosovo or the Balkans.
Certainly not. I do not say that. However, that was true
long before the United Nations intervention. Lastly, we
have successfully begun civil registration for
forthcoming elections in October.

I would not like to create the impression that we
are boasting of our successes and that this is a triumph
for the United Nations. However, before moving on to
the negative aspects of the situation, I would like to
mention the personal, physical and psychological
involvement of all the volunteers and United Nations
personnel working in Kosovo. They work in an
environment that is not very attractive or welcoming
and where, because of personnel shortages, which I
stressed yesterday to the Friends of the Secretary-
General, we have often had to work twice as hard as
normal because we lack half the specialized personnel
we need. Once again, distinguished representatives, I
would urge you all to make efforts to ensure that we
can get more of the personnel we need.

There are many negative aspects in this matter
and there still are the many challenges relating to the
departure of the Serbs, the Roma, the non-Albanian
population, and particularly the precariousness of the
security situation for the non-Albanian population.
There are still too many murders, even if one considers
the great progress made in the area of security made
over the last year. We have reduced the crime rate by a
factor of ten, but there is still too much murder,
violence and arson, and too many exactions,
particularly against the Kosovar Serbs. There are also
shortcomings in the judicial system. But we are going
to overcome them by importing international judges
who we need.

Lastly, one crucial point I wish to stress is the
uncertainty about the interim status of Kosovo. The
ambiguities in resolution 1244 (1999) must be dealt
with. I recall with great interest and feeling the
discussion with Members here in the Security Council
during my last stay in New York, at the Council's
invitation. We clarified future plans and during the
election campaign I think we will be able to provide
explanations that everyone awaits as to what is meant
in resolution 1244 (1999) by the words "substantial
autonomy".

Regarding administration, it should be recalled
that the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) established administration over
all five regions in Kosovo and 29 of the 30
municipalities. We issue birth, marriage and death
certificates. We issue building licenses and small-
business permits. We carry out vehicle registration,
25,000 to date, starting from scratch and from the fact
that vehicle registration had been abandoned. However,
it must also be recalled that there was no personal
identification for the people in Kosovo. We must not
forget this, because when things are going a little
better, people tend to forget the past. We must not
forget what brought us here to Kosovo. Not only have
we been issuing license plates and drivers' licenses,
there are also now three insurance companies working.
This had not happened for years in Kosovo.

Health systems have been re-established.
Between 80 per cent and 95 per cent of the five
regional hospitals, 29 clinics and 300 dispensaries are
operating. Three-quarters of these medical buildings
were damaged. Reforms were introduced, such as
limited financial input to the hospitals. However, I
know that access by minority communities is not
sufficiently guaranteed in the hospitals and because of
that we have established structures for the minority
communities. We have tried to help in the rural areas
by opening small clinics. A judicial framework is being
developed within private medicine to open private
clinics.

A total of 500,000 students are also attending
school. This has not happened in 10 years. In Kosovo
the children are seen leaving for school in the morning
with their schoolbags. It is ajoy, whether they are Serb,
Albanian, Bosnian or Turk. Ten years ago no children
went to school because they had to hide. About 470
schools out of 1,000 have been rehabilitated. Colleges
and universities are also operating. There are textbooks
in Albanian, Serbian, Bosnian and Turkish that are
freely distributed.

Even if it is not working perfectly, the post office
is working at the international level. We have UNMIK
stamps, a mobile telephone company covers most of
the area and progress is being made with regard to
permanent lines.

We, or rather I should say you, the Member
States, employ 70,000 personnel who are paid a small
salary using a central data base that has been set up. In
the past they were offered only minimal compensation.
A joint interim administrative system marks the first
step towards a more direct system of administration.
We have 20 administrative departments, each run by
two leaders: one international and one Kosovar,
including the minorities. There is mixed participation
at all levels, both local and UNMIK. We are also
providing training for a more effective civil sector.

We have a joint interim administrative council
and a provisional national council. The three parties at
Rambouillet and Kosovo, the Kosovar Albanians and
the Kosovar Serbs are represented in the joint interim
administrative council. All the main political parties,
civil society, all religions and minorities are
represented in the Kosovo transitional council.
Administrative departments are administered by
members of the majority and minority populations. The
Kosovar Serbs have agreed to head the agriculture
department and the employment department.

Speaking of law and law and order, the judiciary
is still very weak. Local judges still show little ability
to be impartial, or at least they are not impartial
enough. The direct threats against them and their poor
salaries do not improve matters. That is why we have
called for international judges and prosecutors, of
which we currently have five. I hope we will
eventually have 15. I would like to thank the countries
that have made those international judges available to
us. We need them, but we also need funds for necessary
equipment and to provide judicial and penal services.

Security is our major problem. The police
mission given to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is
without precedent. The responsibility of the police is
not only to preserve order; it is also to establish local
police forces at the same time. Thanks to the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) there is a police academy, which is exemplary
both in the way it works and in its output. The
international police are not quite up to the authorized
number. The Mission needs more well-trained
international policemen, as well as international
experts trained in forensic medicine, investigation
procedures and evidence collection.

Fifty-eight police stations have been set up
around Kosovo. I hope that the local police service -
the Kosovo Police Service - will have trained 4,000
local recruits by early 2001. The police academy is a
multi-ethnic institution. I am very sorry that there are
not yet enough Serbs in it, but there are quite a few. I
trust the number of Serbian volunteers will increase. I
have noted complaints from our Serbian friends, and I
think that recruitment should be looked at more closely.

KFOR and the police are working together
satisfactorily, particularly in Mitrovica. As I said,
crime has dropped spectacularly. But there is still too
much of it, particularly in the area of inter-ethnic
violence. It is estimated - and these numbers can be
found in the report of the Secretary-General - that two
thirds of the serious crime can be attributed to inter-
ethnic incidents or to inter-ethnic hatred, as are 80 per
cent of the cases of arson.

For the time being, the situation in Mitrovica is
calm. This is due to the establishment of a Confidence
Area there and to the employment offers that have been
made by both sides, as well as to the deployment of a
new administrator. The situation on the Serbian border,
in the Presevo region, has also been stabilized, thanks
- and I would like to highlight this to the Council -
to the active involvement of Kosovo Albanian leaders.

Our basic objective is still the protection of the
non-Albanian population, particularly with regard to
the return of refugees. We must therefore step up our
efforts against organized crime and systematic violence
against minorities, as well as ethnically inspired
murders. A campaign of tolerance using posters,
television and radio will be launched in a few weeks.

I know it must be promised here that additional
steps will be taken to protect minority communities,
and I will do my utmost to ensure that they are taken. I,
you, we will need 200 to 300 special anti-terrorist
forces to protect Serb enclaves. We will have to
increase the number of Kosovar policemen, to perhaps
4,000 in 2001. We must improve police academy
recruitment of minorities. I must also commit myself to
having at least one international judge and one
international prosecutor in each of the five district
courts throughout Kosovo.

As we stated in 1999, we will need the expulsion
law to be applied, particularly in troubled areas. I am
happy to say that, following certain commitments we
made with our Serb friends, this morning Kosovo
Albanian leaders issued very strong statements against
violence, specifically against ethnic violence. Allow
me to mention a few sentences of what was written by
Mr. Ibrahim Rugova, Mr. Rexhep Qosja and Mr.
Hashim Thaci. What they said today was simply
inconceivable three or four months ago. I know they
are only words, but that is how peace begins. One
needs to talk about peace before peace takes hold. It is
indeed the case that there must first be a psychological
step before there can be a political one. If one does not
even talk, there is no hope of peace. So I am glad that
the political leaders of Kosovo made this statement.

On the return of Serbs and refugees in general,
there are two aspects to the situation. Albanian
refugees and those seeking asylum, who were taken in
primarily by European countries, are returning in large
numbers. I cannot reject them, nor do I have the
intention of doing so. The countries that so generously
opened their doors should be able to offer return to
those they hosted. There is no international law that
prevents them from doing so. But I must stress that it is
going to be a heavy burden. If the 180,000 or so
Albanians who took refuge in European countries and
the Serbs return - and I want Serbs to return - it will
mean 20 per cent of the Kosovo population returning
together. I hope it will not be too bad and that the
difficulties involved will be dealt with plainly. But it
will certainly be a very difficult situation in a country
where 50 per cent of the people are unemployed. I
would ask that this be taken not of. Perhaps at some
point one may have to ask - and right now I do not
wish for this - for a moratorium so that all the
refugees do not return at once. They must return in a
humane, coordinated and orderly way. And, of course,
they must have all the necessary services they will
need. I hope there will not be increased inter-ethnic
tension at the time of their return.

Then there is the question of the return of Serbs.
Not only are we in favour of their return, but, together
with Bishop Artemije, Commander Ortufio of KFOR,
Mr. Dennis McNamara of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and various members of the OSCE, we have
established a joint committee on return. All the plans
must go through that committee, and not only for
bureaucratic reasons, for I must confess that
bureaucracy is not my forte. But if all the plans are
legitimate, then the matter has to be regarded calmly so
that we can ensure a safe return for the Serbs. I am
quite proud to say that the first families have already
returned. Forty families will be back home either later
this week or next week into regions where, along with
our KFOR friends, we have provided minimum
security conditions. But we have to build; we must
provide work; we must ensure a proper environment.
We will provide these things. Our idea is that the return
of the Serbs should, by and large, begin before
vacations start in July.

I would like to say just a few more words about
security for minorities. Once again, the situation has
improved, but not enough. We are making special
efforts to ensure security in enclaves. We proposed
arrangements so that farmers could work in their fields.
We proposed foot patrols, and we carry out frequent
vehicle checks. We search dwellings for weapons.
Curfews have been declared in sensitive areas such as
Mitrovica, Bicina and other places. UNMIK police
have established small police posts in Serb enclaves in
Gracanica, Obilic, Orahovac and other enclaves.

KFOR provides around-the-clock protection to
churches. Unfortunately, some churches remain the
targets of bombings. I know that over 50 of these
religious establishments and churches have been
destroyed. I would recall - not as a tit-for-tat, but
things should always be placed in context - that 100
mosques were destroyed. We get no pleasure out of the
destruction of either. Naturally, we are trying to
improve the situation.

We are building roads with a British project,
since we want to improve traffic and to guarantee
freedom of movement for the Serbs. We have worked
in joint projects to repair several roads in Zubin Potok,
Zvecan and elsewhere. We provide bus service and
protection. New bus lines have been established to
transport Serbs within Kosovo and to and from Serbia.
Another and safer means of transport that we assist
with is trains. There are 12 train stations operational
now.

We provide safe transport to those from minority
groups and communities working in our administrative
structures. We guarantee their safe movement with
particular attention because, of course, we want
nothing bad to happen to them.

Telephone lines have been restored.

Once again, I hope that the return of Serbs will be
carried out successfully and that 50 families will soon
be back home.

The co-existence programme that I proposed to
minority groups on the Security Council's behalf has
allowed the establishment of local community offices
in all administrations. We have already opened 13 local
community offices out of the 20 envisaged. There are
Serb personnel at all of these offices.
I mentioned that access to health care, which was
inadequate to communities, has now been improved by
the creation of structures, which I hope will prove
temporary, at the very heart of communities. How
could we do otherwise? Medical and surgical care had
to be guaranteed.

We have also worked on schools within the
communities. Serb schools and a bussing service have
been established throughout Kosovo.

Micro-enterprises have been proposed for the
communities. Projects will be developed in Mitrovica,
Kosovo Polje, Dobrotin and Gracanica, For example,
there will be projects to rehabilitate windmills and to
assist small businesses, such as dairy and agricultural
enterprises. One industrial project at Leposavic is
closely tied to the dairy business.

We guarantee the free distribution of independent
Serb newspapers to the communities. Internet centres
have been created. Of course, everything I have said
about minorities, which happen to be the focus of our
attention, applies equally to the majority. Clearly, when
I refer to the distribution of newspapers, we must
welcome the free enterprise associated with the
publication of Albanian newspapers throughout
Kosovo. There are six or seven daily newspapers. The
press is flourishing. Naturally, it gets some help from
businesses dealing with United Nations or other
agencies. We should also praise the efficacy of the
television channel we set up, which broadcasts in
Albanian and minority languages alike.

We have also rebuilt housing. 20,000 units for all
communities are scheduled for this year. The
Department of Agriculture, which, as I mentioned, is
headed by the Serb community, provides food not only
within Kosovo, but perhaps for export as well. Some
10,000 families are targeted within the country. The
World Bank has a rural revival project, funded by 10
per cent of all the resources it distributes, to include
agronomists and other workers.

I am sorry to have gone on at such length, but I
did want to tell the Council about everything we have
done in the past year.

Let me talk now about contacts with the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. As I
said at my last briefing, we have regular contacts,
several times a week, with the Belgrade
representatives. I meet in particular with Ambassador
Vukicevic. We are willing to broaden these contacts
with specialists who cooperate with authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in many spheres. We
have exchanged letters, most recently on 30 May, with
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia with
a view to establishing a joint consultative committee to
address practical issues of mutual interest, such as
postal services and telecommunications, pensions,
social security, health care, property titles, circulation,
employment of Serbs and so on.

We have lost some time. It will be recalled that
there was a Belgrade proposal for a draft agreement on
a joint coordinating committee, but it went far beyond
the initial agreement that I had been discussing with
Ambassador Vukicevic. The agreement would involve
specialists from New York and would reopen for
discussion all aspects of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999). Of course, there was no question of
accepting it. Since the United Nations rejected it, we
resumed our exchange of letters so as to create a
genuine joint consultative committee.

With respect to the co-existence programme, I
have talked a good deal about the Serbs. I have been
happy to offer them a number of measures to improve
their daily lives, but there are other communities as
well. There must be an impact on the economic
development of each of these communities and a co-
existence programme involving them too.

I welcome the visit two days ago by all the
representatives of the Interim Administrative Council
- Mr. Rugova, Mr. Qosja and Mr. Thaci - to the
Roma community. They proposed not only the
establishment of a programme to resettle the Roma, but
that an economic development programme be accepted
by all. I must repeat that this would have been simply
inconceivable only a few months ago. I hope that the
inter-ethnic problems, which are currently at a peak
because of extremist attacks from both sides, will soon
be nothing more than a bad memory.

I would not wish to end without referring to the
issue of missing persons and detainees. As everyone
knows, this is a constant concern. The Kosovo
community will never reconcile with its past until the
matter of missing persons and detainees is addressed
and settled one way or another. Otherwise, that society
cannot achieve reconciliation or, if it can, years and
years will be required.

On 6 June, the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) issued a list of 3,300 persons of all
communities who went missing from January to 15
May 1998. The Albanian associations and the Council
for the Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms
number those missing at over 9,000, so there is a large
discrepancy between these figures. When I say 9,000
missing, that figure includes Serbs and Albanians.
There are 950 Kosovo Albanians still detained in
Serbia, according to the ICRC and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

At Nis, there was a case involving accused from
the town of Djakovica. I recall with deep emotion that
the Security Council mission was present in Djakovica
as the case was about to open. I am ashamed to say that
the judgement came down to a terrible concept that I
thought had disappeared - that of collective guilt,
which I find intolerable. Sixteen centuries of prison
sentences were handed down. People were being
detained in the street at that time. I have suggested
from the start that we ask the Secretary-General to
support me on this matter, and I have sent him a letter
to that effect, so that all the people detained in Serbia,
those arrested in and moved from Kosovo, could be
sent to us and justice could be done on their behalf
properly, in Kosovo. All of the detainees will be
brought to trial. I trust that pressure will be brought to
bear on the Belgrade authorities.

An investigation must be carried out into the
missing persons, whether Albanian, Serb, Roma or
other. We have set up a committee to identify the
victims. It has been a terrible experience to see it at
work. It was concerned with the remains of missing
persons. It had to reopen graves. According to the
International Tribunal, there are 559 mass graves, and
150 have been opened. We are in the process of
opening 400. Until this pain has been dealt with and
the wounds healed over, until the Albanian families
know whether those who disappeared are alive or dead,
whether they have lost brothers, cousins, sisters,
fathers, it will not be possible to create conditions for
greater tolerance.

On 6 March last, when I spoke to the Council, I
referred to the appointment of a special envoy for
missing persons, and I believe - the Secretary-General
has assured me - that someone will be taking up this
post soon.

Lastly, let me speak about elections. Elections are
the great promise this year. Registration has moved
along well. There were no electoral rolls. Municipal
elections, which were agreed to at our last meeting,
will be held in October. We have not actually set the
specific day. We will decide once registration is
completed.

The total number of people registered had risen to
over 454,852 on 3 June. That is not too bad.
Registration is set to be closed on 15 July and I hope
that we will have good conditions, including for the
appeals and those 10 per cent - in reality, they have
been reduced to 2 per cent - that have to be reviewed
because their papers are not in order. We must convince
the Kosovo Serbs and those Serb refugees in Serbia to
get involved and to register. It is in their interests to
register and to be represented in all the democratic
organs in Kosovo. It is in the interests of the Serbs and
the other minorities to work together with the
international authorities.

So far, we have received negative responses from
Belgrade and Mr. Milosevic's regime, and we regret
that. The municipal elections will be held this year,
whatever response we get. These will be the first
democratic elections ever organized in Kosovo. Of
course, establishing free and objective media has
helped us move ahead. Last week, we closed one of the
newspapers because it had published what we
described as a fatwa, condemning and naming one
individual who was working with the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, who has
recently been accused of crimes. The publication gave
the individual's name - Petar Topoljski- and what
his movements were. He was kidnapped and
assassinated.

This is the climate in Kosovo. I condemn it and,
of course, the Council condemns it, too. We will not
tolerate it. We have tried to help in the establishment of
a free press. The human rights organizations have
protested this. I say absolutely - I am intransigent on
this - that we want a free press, but that we do not
want a press that condemns individuals to death. We
will not tolerate it, or allow such death sentences to be
issued in what is supposed to be a free media.

On reconstruction, I do not want to drown the
Council in details. But, as I have said, 20,000 housing
units are scheduled to be built this year. Some 17,000
have already been reconstructed, and 25,000 have been
rehabilitated.

The macroeconomic system is in place.
Investment - insufficient though it is - has been
arriving. We have established a central fiscal authority
and have a consolidated budget now. Of course, by the
beginning of September, it will be insufficient. I hope
that the European Union will once again be generous
so that we can make it to the end of the year. We have
established a payment and banking system. Twelve
banks will be working by the end of the year. Some 70
per cent of the old private enterprises have started
functioning again, producing 40 per cent more than
they were producing five years ago. The first
commercial bank was opened in January. Five others
are working, and 16 commercial bank branches will be
working throughout the region. We are doing this, but
it is difficult.

The property situation is very difficult, despite
the example of the Sarr cement works. There is State
property, public property and cooperative property.
Under resolution 1244 (1999), the property situation is
not clear.

On taxes, we hope that the customs duty system
will improve and that international salaries will be
reflected in the internal revenue system.

Lastly, I welcome cooperation between the
United Nations, KFOR and UNMIK. I have inflicted
this account on the Council. I am sorry that I had to do
so, but I felt that it was necessary, because, in a way,
this is an anniversary. Sometimes we light a candle for
a first birthday, but I am not sure that we can do that
today, because so much remains to be done. In Kosovo,
I think that life is getting back to normal, even though
there is no full security yet. We will do our utmost to
provide security.

If the first free elections are held in October, then
I think that we will have moved beyond one essential
milestone. As for the future of Kosovo, I know no more
than the members of the Council, except that it will be
settled within the context of resolution 1244 (1999). In
that regard, in the election campaign, I am proposing a
pact with the Kosovars in relation to the protection of
minorities and the status of substantial autonomy. We
have to renew some ambiguities, not about the future
of Kosovo - that is not my job - but the about
present. We must stop Kosovo from being so isolated
and inward-looking. It has to be able to look outwards.
We have to do away with violence and inter-ethnic
hatred. Here, I would like to underline the importance
of the Stability Pact. I believe that the European Union
is now offering a more political dimension.

That is it. I would have liked to wish a happy
birthday to you all and to all the communities in
Kosovo. But a few days ago, they tried to assassinate
the future of Kosovo when a four-year-old child was
killed in Cernica. What was that little Serb boy guilty
of? He represented a future generation of Serbs capable
of living in harmony with the new generation in
Kosova today. Thinking of that small boy who was
killed, I think, too, of all the victims - the thousands
of victims of the past 10 years. There is no justification
for what has happened to them. There is no excuse. But
now it is up to us - it is up to the Council - we must
all remember why we are in Kosovo. We can be
optimistic. In a difficult town called Orahovac the local
Serb community was courageous enough to issue a
communique regretting past crimes and deploring
crimes committed by the Serb community against the
Albanian community. There was a response from the
Albanian community there, recognizing the Kosovars
as full members of the Serbian community.

There are, therefore, no grounds for despair. In
Kosovo today, more than before, one must cling to the
optimism that prevails in international organizations.
Each and every one must shoulder his or her own
responsibilities so that everybody knows what morals
and ideals they defend. I maintain that UNMIK and
KFOR defend peace and democracy - and all the
minorities. Soon we will have justice and peace for all
the children of Kosovo.

