Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, let me congratulate the United Kingdom on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. I thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate,
which is of the utmost importance for Uruguay.

I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Olof Skoog; and Ms. Bouchamaoui,
President of the Tunisian Confederation of Industry,
Trade and Handicrafts for their briefings.

The due consideration of the three pillars of the
United Nations - peace, security and development * is
essential to face the major challenges of maintaining
peace and international security. The multidimensional
nature of conflicts, as well as new and growing threats
to the stability ofnations, require coordinated responses
that take different national contexts into account and
are able to offer realistic and sustainable alternatives
to complex situations. We are convinced that the
structural causes of such conflicts are rooted in many
cases in rivalries and historical tensions, as well as in
the struggle for control of natural resources, ethnic
disputes and the creation of artificial boundaries that do
not reflect local realities. Similarly, poor governance,
corruption, growing dissatisfaction with the lack of
opportunities and inequality among and within States
are also decisive factors.

Analysing and identifying the underlying causes
of conflict and the actions that should be taken to
mitigate them are the best and most useful forms of
prevention. There can be no guarantees of international
security if we do not make greater efforts to prevent
entire populations from dying of preventable causes,
take urgent steps to eradicate hunger in the world and
respect the human rights of all without discrimination
based on race, sex or religion. Extreme poverty,
hunger, exclusion and limited access to basic services
such as health, housing and sanitation are just some
of the factors that aggravate internal tensions and
provoke confrontations. However, we believe that even
if such factors do not by themselves result in armed
confrontation, the international community has a vital
obligation and role to play in overcoming them and
promoting an international environment conducive to
ensuring that all developing countries can maximize
their potential and guarantee respect for their peoples'
basic human rights.

While the development of effective, accountable and
transparent institutions, the protection of fundamental
freedoms and strengthening of the security sector
represent some of the main elements of inclusive and
peaceful societies, gaps in those areas can certainly
contribute to the development of conflicts. If the root
causes of conflict are not addressed, reconstruction
efforts are doomed to be merely superficial and
perishable. Given that undeniable reality, we believe
it is essential to ramp up international efforts to
support the countries that need it most and encourage
the creation of national development strategies for
the medium and long term. In that context, the role of
international cooperation is particularly important for
meeting immediate needs and building capacity for
sustainable development.

For these reasons, Uruguay believes firmly that
there is a close link between security and development.
Security efforts must therefore necessarily be
accompanied by strengthening action in areas that,
while not directly related to security, have an undeniable
impact on it. Every area of the United Nations system
must play its part, and if we are to obtain the most
effective results it is important that the responsibilities
of each be respected and their needs taken into account
in a democratic and transparent way.

Such efforts must also be accompanied by measures
aimed at reinforcing and, where necessary, reforming
the security sector in countries dealing with conflict,
as well as strengthening their institutions and judicial
systems and the rule of law. The role of the United
Nations is key to the cooperation and support that the
international community can offer in that regard. We
also believe it is essential to stress the importance of
ensuring that the goals in these areas are attainable,
credible and clear. Similarly, peacebuilding requires
not only strengthened institutions, good governance
and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
but also a productive system and economic and social
development capable of supporting achievements in
other areas.

Uruguay, as a major troop-contributing country,
has experienced the strong positive impact that building
stronger, more inclusive and resilient societies can have
on the ground, and recognizes the importance of a
political vision focused on rights and on the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. We also believe that women
have a key role to play in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and would like to emphasize the importance
of ensuring their effective inclusion in peace agreement
frameworks and peacebuilding processes.

Today more than ever, we have a moral obligation
to renew our political will and commitment to peace.
The humanitarian crisis that Syria and Iraq are facing,
the recent terrorist attacks in Beirut and Paris and the
deaths caused by the actions of Boko Haram compel us
to commit to and support the millions of civilians who
are demanding answers.

