Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): Before
I begin, I would like to say that it is an honour and a
privilege for me to take the floor for the first time in
the Council and herewith to proudly represent Canada.
Allow me, in the name of Canada and the women and
men of Canada, to offer to all of the recent victims of
terrorism and their families our sincerest sympathies
and expression of support and friendship during their
difficult time.

I will treat two aspects of the topic before us: on
the one hand, the values that inform our policy and
actions and, on the other, the nature of Canada's efforts
to counter terrorism concurrently at the national and
international levels. First, on the subject of our values,
let me say that in Canada, we aspire to create a society
that is characterized by inclusive and accountable
governance, peaceful pluralism and respect for diversity
and human rights. Our fight against extremism is,
after all, at its core, a battle of values. We do not
seek divisiveness but rather diversity and a society in
which everyone feels that they belong, all rights are
respected, and every individual is treated with dignity.
We seek to build accountable institutions within
a framework providing opportunities to everyone.
Societies that pursue such goals are, we believe, more
resilient in dealing with extremism. We do not claim
to have achieved those goals. Much remains to be
done. Nevertheless, we are convinced that efforts in
that direction are an integral part of building a more
secure society and of countering terrorism. Moreover,

it is essential to promote critical thinking through
education, to support the empowerment of women and
to ensure the active participation of our young people in
society, thereby establishing peaceful and prosperous
societies and preventing violent extremism.

(spoke in English)

Countering terrorism is not only about law
enforcement and security measures. It is also about
engaging with local communities in many ways.

(spoke in French)

Efforts carried out locally have shown promising
results. For example, the Centre for the Prevention
of Radicalization Leading to Violence, which is in
Montreal and which the Secretary-General visited
during his recent visit to Canada in February, and the
ReDirect programme, under the aegis of the Calgary
Police Service, are two local initiatives that have the
potential to inspire the international community.

I will also talk about our strategy for combatting
terrorism. Canada believes that the only way to ensure
that our efforts in the fight against terrorism bear fruit is
through collective action aimed at ending the activities
of terrorist groups. Canada believes that the United
Nations has a crucial role to play in that approach. The
Organization is uniquely placed to increase coherence
and coordination in international efforts aimed at
fighting violent extremism. Canada fully endorses
the work of the Security Council directed towards
establishing a unified approach to countering terrorism.
Accordingly, we co-sponsored resolutions 2178 (2014)
and 2253 (2015). Our support is also demonstrated by
Canada's intention to seek a non-permanent seat on the
Security Council for the 2021-2022 term. As a country
for which the greatest strength resides in its respect
for diversity and pluralism, Canada believes that it
can benefit other countries by sharing its experience
in building a peaceful and resilient society, especially
given the present need to prevent violent extremism.
Canada fully supports in its entirety the approach
set forth in the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674), as well as his
call for improving regional cooperation in that area.
Ensuring coherence throughout the United Nations
system will be essential to the effective implementation
of the Secretary General's Action Plan.
(spoke in English)

In order to protect Canadians from the evolving
threat of terrorism, the Government of Canada has,
over the past few years, enacted legislation that has
provided new tools that allow law enforcement and
national security agencies to take appropriate measures,
including addressing the issue of extremist travellers.
The Government of Canada is committed to ensuring
that our tools strike the appropriate balance between
our collective security and our rights and freedoms.
Canada strongly supports ongoing efforts to cut off
terrorists' access to funds. Terrorist organizations
and other criminals have proven themselves to be
adaptable and opportunistic. They exploit weaknesses
in international regulatory systems that allow them to
finance their illegal activities undetected. In order to
mitigate terrorist-financing and money-laundering,
all countries need to eliminate those regulatory gaps
through the effective implementation of the Financial
Action Task Force's global standards. We continue
to work closely to build upon the Task Force's recent
review of countries' implementation of measures to cut
off terrorist financing. Countries should immediately
take action in areas where gaps have been identified.
Canada is committed to a strong and comprehensive
regime that is at the forefront of the global fight against
money-laundering and terrorist-financing.

Canada is also working to combat terrorists' use of
the Internet. At the same time, however, we recognize
that free speech needs to be protected. Canada is working
with a number of countries to counter the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant's (ISIL) propaganda on the
Internet and thwart its ability to recruit members and
finance its operations through online appeals. Canada
is also working with a number of countries to counter
ISIL on the Internet through strategic communications
and counter-narrative activities. Those activities help
thwart ISIL's ability to recruit members, finance
its operations through online appeals and spread its
ideology. Canada welcomes efforts aimed at supporting
third parties as they counter ISIL messages and promote
positive and realistic alternative narratives in the region
and beyond.

As we embark upon the ten-year review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
we are mindful of the new challenges but also believe
that there is reason to be hopeful. We are aware that
terrorism has evolved, and we are seeing new methods,
tactics and tools exploited by terrorist groups. We are

cautiously optimistic, however, because we have seen the
international community move towards a coordinated
and comprehensive response. We need to keep moving
in that direction and strengthen our approach through
working together. Canada looks forward to being part
of the solution.

