Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks you, Sir, for convening today's meeting.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman,
Ambassador Cardi and Ambassador Vale de Almeida
for their briefings, and I commend the parties for the
work they have done. Since its start, over one year
ago, the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) has been steady, leading to
gradually increasing, positive effects. The conclusion
of the JCPOA represents a firm step towards a political
settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue. It did not come
easily. Now it is imperative to continue to promote
follow-up implementation and the steady and long-term
progress of the JCPOA. China would therefore propose
the following.

First, the important significance of JCPOA
implementation must be fully understood. The JCPOA
is a successful example of addressing international and
regional hotspot issues through political and diplomatic
means. It means a lot in terms of strengthening the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime and
the maintenance of international and regional peace
and security. Certain difficulties and challenges are
unavoidable in the implementation of the JCPOA. The
parties must proceed from the bigger picture, consolidate
political will, avoid external influences and build
confidence regarding the prospects of implementation.

Secondly, parties should earnestly implement their
respective obligations and commitments. As indicated
by the reports of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, Iran has implemented its nuclear-related
commitments under the JCPOA. China appreciates
Iran's efforts to implement the agreement and calls
on the parties to continue to be guided by the JCPOA,
stick to the step-by-step approach and the principles of
reciprocity, equity and balance, honour their respective
commitments and build mutual trust.

Thirdly, existing mechanism must be well-utilized.
China has taken note of the report (S/20l7/495) on
the activities of the Procurement Working Group
submitted by the Joint Commission to the Council.
We welcome the briefing by the Coordinator of the
Procurement Working Group to the implementation
mechanism of resolution 2231 (2015). We will continue
our active participation in the activities of the Joint
Commission and the Procurement Working Group.
It is China's hope that the working mechanisms can
work within their mandates, yet form a synergy to
jointly promote the implementation of the JCPOA.
The parties should demonstrate mutual understanding
and accommodation, and resolve their differences
properly within the existing framework in an effort to
seek consensus.

The Secretary-General's reports must be
well balanced. China has taken note of the report
(S/2017/515) submitted by Secretary-General Guterres.
The Secretary-General's reports are an important part
of the process of implementing the resolution and
the JCPOA. Parties should bear in mind the larger
picture and consider the Secretary-General's reports in
conjunction with the overarching goal of implementing
the resolution and the JCPOA. It is vital for the reports
of the Secretary-General to reflect the efforts of the
parties to fully implement the resolution in an objective
and balanced way.

The reports should send a positive message,
namely, that the parties are committed to implementing
the resolution and the JCPOA. China notes that the
Secretary-General has, in his report, underscored
the significance of the conclusion of the JCPOA, and
China has encouraged parties to support that historic
agreement by fully and effectively implementing
the agreement, so as to ensure that all participants
can benefit.

With regard to Iran's missile launches, the parties
should accurately interpret the relevant Council
resolutions and handle that issue with great care so
as to avoid undermining the implementation of the
JCPOA. The Secretary-General's reports should benefit
the maintenance of regional peace and stability, while
relevant information should be accurate and credible.

China has taken note of some legitimate concerns
of Iran about the content of the report, and hopes that
those concerns can be reflected in the document in
the future.

China has always maintained that the Iranian
nuclear issue should be resolved through political and
diplomatic means. We are committedto the consolidation
of the international nuclear non-proliferation regime
and the maintenance of international regional peace
and stability. China firmly supports and safeguards
the JCPOA, which is a historic achievement, and is
working actively to promote the renovation of the Arak
heavy-water reactor, thereby playing a constructive role
in promoting the implementation of the resolution and
the agreement.

China will continue its active participation in
the implementation process of the agreement, push
for continued materialization of the dividends of the
agreement to the benefit of the parties, so as to make
our contribution to the comprehensive, long-term and
proper settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue.

