Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): I am very happy to see
you, Sir, presiding over this meeting today. I should
like to congratulate you very warmly on your
assumption of the presidency for this month.

My delegation warmly welcomes the Secretary-
General's report, which we consider very useful and
helpful.

The issue of the illicit traffic in small arms and
light weapons continues to be a matter of great concern
to my delegation, considering the fact that the use and
ready availability of those weapons are a major source
of insecurity and contribute to socio-economic
stagnation throughout the developing world, especially
sub-Saharan Africa, the region to which we belong.
They have become the most common means of
prosecuting armed conflicts, civil wars and criminal
acts in our societies. It is important to recognize that
while nuclear weapons - weapons of mass
destruction - may present a grave danger to the world,
it is small arms and light weapons that have been
responsible for the death of hundreds of thousands of
people in the world today.

The ever-expanding use of these weapons and
their consequences present the international community
with a new challenge. This is mainly because their
proliferation sustains conflicts, exacerbates violence,
contributes to the displacement of civilians and
undermines respect for international humanitarian law.
It poses a new threat to humanity in the form of
terrorism and organized crime. It has a negative impact
on women and the elderly and devastating
consequences on children. The world must seriously
face the grave challenges posed by these weapons if
our civilization and economic progress in the twenty-
first century are to be maintained.

Unfortunately, this problem has grown to such
immense proportions that it is practically impossible
for many countries in sub-Saharan Africa to focus
attention on issues of development without first
resolving the problem of the illicit transfer of these
weapons to their territories. Any action by the
international community that could put an end to this
negative phenomenon would, no doubt, constitute the
first major step towards helping Africa to achieve
sustainable and meaningful development.

My delegation is deeply concerned that, despite
the serious danger that the illicit use of these weapons
poses, there is currently no international treaty or other
legal instrument to control their use. We therefore wish
to reiterate the call made by my President,
Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, to the General Assembly on
15 September 2002 for a legally binding international
instrument to control access to these weapons by non-
State actors. We are, however, encouraged by the
attention the Council has so far given to this matter.

It is gratifying to note that there is increasing
multilateral cooperation on the issue of small arms and
light weapons. This was demonstrated last year with
the convening, here in New York, of the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which adopted a
Programme of Action to prevent, combat and eradicate
the illicit trade in these weapons. The Programme of
Action contains a comprehensive set of measures to
address the problem. We note with appreciation and
satisfaction that that Conference - the first of its kind
on this issue - generated political will and momentum
for efforts to control these weapons. We urge the
international community to sustain that momentum for
progress. We also emphasize the need for full
implementation of the Programme of Action.

My delegation is also pleased with the successful
negotiation of the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition, which was
adopted on 31 May 2001. Although the Protocol is
supplementary to the United Nations Convention on
Transnational Organized Crime, its adoption was a
positive development in the fight against the illicit
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. We
therefore appeal to all Member States to sign and ratify
the Protocol.

While these are welcome developments towards
combating this menace, we should not indulge in the
euphoria of victory, as there are still hurdles ahead.
Because of the multifaceted nature of the causes of
armed conflicts that partially prompt the proliferation
of these weapons, it is imperative that this problem be
tackled in a comprehensive and integrated manner. In
that regard, we wish to express our belief in the need to
build on the existing national and regional initiatives
and develop a common international approach to
control the illicit spread of these weapons. Equally
important is the need to address the underlying causes
of conflicts in general, including issues of poverty and
underdevelopment as well as socio-political issues.

My country, Nigeria recognizes the importance of
this subject matter, and has initiated action at various
levels to combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. At the national level, Nigeria has put in place
practical measures to tackle the problem with the
establishment of the National Committee on Small
Arms and Light Weapons. Last year, Nigeria declared
the first day of the United Nations Conference on
Small Arms as Small Arms Destruction Day in
conformity with the decision reached at the Preparatory
Committee of the Conference.

At the subregional level, Nigeria joined other
countries members of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) in October 1998, to
declare a three-year moratorium on the import, export
and manufacture of small arms and light weapons. This
was accompanied by a Programme for Coordination
and Assistance on Security and Development in order
to address the security and development problems
associated with the proliferation of these weapons in
West Africa. ECOWAS has renewed the moratorium
for a second three-year period with effect from 5 July
2001. My delegation wishes to reiterate our call to the
international community to support the implementation
of the moratorium. We also urge other regions to
follow the example of ECOWAS by imposing similar
moratoriums in their respective regions.

At the regional level, Nigeria joined other African
countries in December 2000 to adopt the Bamako
ministerial declaration containing Africa's common
position on the illicit proliferation, circulation and
trafficking in small arms and light weapons. We take
this opportunity to reaffirm our belief in the principles
enunciated in the declaration, including the one that
calls on the international community, particularly arms-
supplier countries, to limit the trade in small arms to
Governments and registered licensed traders.

As part of our efforts in this area, Nigeria, along
with South Africa, Mali, Kenya, Norway, Austria,
Canada, Switzerland, the Netherlands and the United
Kingdom, sponsored the African Conference on the
Implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action on Small Arms: Needs and Partnerships, which
took place in Pretoria, South Africa, from 18 to 21
March this year. The Conference brought to the fore
the need for the Security Council to pay particular
attention to this problem.

It is our strong belief that efforts aimed at
addressing the problem should be multidimensional if
they are to succeed. The international community
should demonstrate its sincere will to rid the world of
these weapons by enacting appropriate international
legislation to control arms transfers. This should
include mechanisms that would facilitate the
identification of such transfers. It is also important that
such mechanisms ensure appropriate sanctions against
manufacturers and suppliers that violate relevant global
regulations. This calls for transparency and confidence-
building measures.

Of even greater importance is the need for us, as
members of the international community, to promote
conflict prevention measures and the pursuit of
negotiated solution to conflicts. Our emphasis should
be on promoting structures and processes that
strengthen democracy, human rights, the rule of law
and good governance, as well as economic recovery
and growth, as means of eliminating conflicts and
generating durable peace. It is evident from this that
our task in this area is enormous and calls for genuine
commitment and concerted action on the part of the
global community.

