Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): Through you, Madam
President, I should like very sincerely to thank Sweden
for having convened this very timely and salient debate.
The personal participation of His Excellency your
Prime Minister in the debate on this issue places this
issue at the highest political level, which is the level at
which we need to place such an important matter. We
are also very happy to see that a number of very high-
level officials were here this morning. We were here
this morning - not among the high officials - and
were very happy to see that the issue is being put at the
highest political level. This does not come as a surprise
to us; we still recall vividly Sweden's first presidency of
the Security Council, which put prevention of conflict
at the heart of its work; that was the very first time
our Secretary-General participated in the work of the
Security Council. So it is only fitting that today we are
moving one step forward by putting a focus on children.

Rwanda welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2427 (2018) and is very pleased to be one
of the sponsors of this important resolution, which
bolsters the mechanisms to prevent violations against
children in conflict situations.

I should like also at this point to thank very much
this morning's briefers, in particular the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Gamba, as well as the
survivor - I will call her a survivor - Ms. Londono,
who really shared with us her testimony this morning.

The impact of armed conflicts on children is
catastrophic; we cannot overemphasize this. They have
serious consequences for children's development, both
in terms of physical scars and of the invisible ones that
can be perceived only in children's learning and their
emotional and social development.

Nearly 250 million children live in countries
affected by violent conflicts. In the relatively recent
past, Rwanda was a country in conflict, and the
perspective I would like to offer the Council today is
based on the fact that when we were in conflict and
experiencing the genocide of 24 years ago, children
were not spared on the sides of either the killers or the
victims. If it is any inspiration, what I can say is that
a large part of what we are still dealing with today is
related to the trauma experienced by today's young
adults, who were children then. The consequences are
far-reaching and last a very long time. Simply based on
our experience, therefore, I can say that it is not only
absolutely essential to protect children today in order
to enable a country's rapid and inclusive development,
but also to enable it to be resilient and get back on its
feet as soon as possible. That is what we can share from
our own experience.

My delegation is very concerned about the increase
today in the documented cases of verified violations
of children by both Government forces and non-State
armed groups in conflict. What is even more worrying is
that those are just the documented cases, and the extent
of the undocumented cases is essentially unknown to
any of us. Our efforts to ensure that the international
community provides the tools necessary to address
violations with the greatest possible focus, break the
cycles of violence and address the root causes of armed
conflict, while preventing new armed conflicts from
breaking out, should be our collective focus.

Even if it is stating the obvious, the rights of
children must be respected and protected, regardless of
the context or circumstances, and even when they are
in very poor, vulnerable or disadvantaged conditions.
The fact is that the only side that children belong on in
any armed conflict is the side of the victims. Whether
they are combatants or direct victims of a conflict,
they are still victims. We would like to propose some
recommendations by Rwanda. Many of those here will
already have heard many of them today.

First of all, we really have to focus on prevention,
with preventive tools and strategies for protecting
children at risk of being affected by armed conflict.
Secondly, we must put in place the means for
strengthening accountability. Thirdly, we need to
ensure that the protection of children is included as a
separate part of every peace process and negotiations
on peace agreements. And fourthly, we must support
Member States and the various parties to a conflict
by providing them with the tools to help them protect
children. Lastly, we must ensure that our reintegration
efforts are very specific - specific to girls, for example,
and to children in particular circumstances.

Rwanda believes that it is crucial to strengthen the
links between the protection ofchildren, the rights ofthe
child and conflict prevention. The importance of access
to education and health care cannot be overemphasized.
I would like to echo the brilliant words of the Prime
Minister of Sweden this morning when he said that this
is simple. It is about providing security, safety, health
care, education and food - just putting food on the
table. It is as simple as that. This is not about a very
sophisticated mechanism. More importantly, those are
our obligations. They are not optional. We may have
optional protocols, but our obligations to our children
are not optional. We urge the members of the Security
Council to consider consulting with child protection
experts in order to ensure that adequate capacity
is provided in order to meet the mandates of peace
operations with regard to children and their needs.

I should not conclude without recalling
Ms. Londofio's powerful remarks this morning, which
showed that all children, including former combatants,
have the power to become agents of change if they are
just given the chance and a platform. Children are more
resilient and more likely to become positive agents for
change if we give them that chance and platform. The
case of Ms. Londofio speaks for itself.

Today the importance of collecting best practices
has also been mentioned, and I would like to share with
the Council one that we in Rwanda provide today and
the platform that we use. Every year in Rwanda we hold
a Children's Summit, organized by children and held in
our national Parliament. All the recommendations that
emerge from the summit integrate the children's needs,
priorities and demands. As a Government, we are
accountable for following up and implementing those
recommendations. If that might be of use for others'
consideration, I would be happy to elaborate further on
our annual Children's Summit.

Lastly, I would again like to echo something
discussed by many speakers today, which is that if we
do not protect and provide children living in conflict
situations with what they need, we will have to deal
with the adults that they will become on the battlefield.
To cite the words of one of our colleagues this morning,
the representative of the United States, ifwe do not deal
with those children, we will have to deal with the adults
that they will become.

I would like to conclude by reiterating Rwanda's
commitment to ensuring that the rights of all children
are respected and protected, regardless ofthe context or
circumstance. Rwanda is a signatory to the Convention
of the Rights of the Child and the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers.
