Mrs. Rodriguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We have requested the floor again to respond to the
slanderous statements made by the Secretary of State
of the United States of America, Mr. Michael Pompeo,
and Mr. Elliott Abrams, which we categorically reject.

In response, I would just ask Mr. Pompeo or his
representative in this Chamber if it is not true that
the attempt to impose on Venezuelans an illegitimate
president, whom no one had heard of until a few days
ago, was orchestrated and motivated by Washington,
DC. Was it not his country that organized and
immediately recognized the coup d'etat that took
control for a few hours in Venezuela in April 2002,
at the cost of many lives? Was it not his Government
that, for years, has subjected Venezuela to an
unrelenting economic war intended to damage the
living standards of the Venezuelan people, restrict their
potential for development and provoke suffering and
social instability?

The delegation of the United States America
should clarify whether or not it was its Government
that deliberately undermined the attempts to reach
a negotiated solution in the Dominican Republic
when the Bolivarian Government and representatives
of the opposition were ready to ratify a negotiated
agreement that was mutually acceptable to both sides.
The delegation of the United States of America should
also clarify what its country's attitude will be and what
responsibility it will assume if its irresponsible acts
provoke a situation of rampant instability for Venezuela
and the entire region, whose victims will be the people.

The cooperation and solidarity between Cuba and
Venezuela - like that we offer to almost all countries
of Latin America and the Caribbean and to many other
countries in the so-called third world - is dedicated
to help meet the essential needs for life, in particular
health care and education. That is well known to all
in this Chamber, including the representatives of the
United States. The Organization recognizes it, as
do many specialized agencies of the United Nations
system. To state the contrary, as the Secretary of State
of the United States of America did this morning, is an
undignified attack on the truth and demonstrates his
Government's lack of respect for the Security Council
and the United Nations.

Both Mr. Pompeo and Mr. Abrams, I repeat, are
intentionally lying and failing to recognize that the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is a free, sovereign
and independent nation that makes its own decisions.
Venezuela is not and cannot ever be anybody's satellite.
It has its own institutions, a people who overwhelmingly
support the Bolivarian and Chavista revolution and the
constitutional President, Nicolas Maduro Moros.

We reiterate that the main threat to international
peace and security in our region is the interventionism
of the United States of America, the return to the
Monroe Doctrine and the bullying of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela with the declared aim of regime
change and the imperialist goal of looting the greatest
oil reserve on the planet. We recall that it is the United
States, not Cuba, that has set up military dictatorships
and organized bloody coups d'etat in Latin America.
It is the Government of the United States of America,
not that of Cuba, that unscrupulously intervenes in
the electoral processes and the internal affairs of the
majority of the States of the planet, seeking. It is trying
to replace by force the legitimate Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and conducting
a brutal campaign of defamation against it and by
threatening military action, while it calls for violence
and a coup d'etat.

I suggest that Secretary of State Michael Pompeo
review the history. He must not blame others for the
attempts of the United States of America to impose its
imperialist hegemony on our America by invoking once
again the obsolete, aggressive and dangerous Monroe
Doctrine and gunboat diplomacy.

