Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to begin by welcoming Ambassador Osman
and Minister Deng Alor Kuol to the Security Council
today. I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Menkerios, President Mkapa
and the head of the African Union Liaison Office in the
Sudan for their briefings, for the support that the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) has
provided to the Southern Sudan referendum process,
and for the work that the Secretary-General's Panel on
the Referenda in the Sudan has done to monitor that
process.

The Panel's assessment that the process as a
Whole was free, fair and credible confirms that the
results announced by the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission on 7 February reflect the will of the
people of Southern Sudan, freely expressed. I welcome
this. Above all, I warmly welcome the statements that
we have heard today from Ambassador Osman and
Minister Deng Alor Kuol, which echo the positive
reaction of both President Al-Bashir and First Vice-
President Salva Kiir to the results of the referendum.
As the United Kingdom Prime Minister David
Cameron said on 7 February, this moment is a
testament to the leaders in both North and South Sudan
who ensured a credible and peaceful process. I echo his
sentiment today. This is indeed an historic moment,
and great credit is due to all those who helped to bring
it about.

Courageous political leadership, underpinned by
the hard work and dedication of the Southern Sudan

Referendum Commission and Special Representative
Menkerios, has enabled the people of Southern Sudan
to make their voices heard and to determine their
future. The Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)
gave them the confidence that their choice would be
respected. It is worth reflecting for a moment on the
significance of this achievement.

But there remains much to be done before the end
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. The violence
in Upper Nile state on 3 to 5 February underlined the
urgency of reaching agreement on all outstanding CPA
issues, including Abyei, the border, citizenship and
wealth-sharing. We welcome the commitments made at
the 27 January presidency meeting to resolve these
issues, and urge the parties to make the compromises
necessary to securing long-term peace and stability. We
welcome also the invaluable work of President Mbeki
and the African Union High-Level Implementation
Panel in supporting these negotiations.

If we look to the future, it is clear that the peace
and prosperity of all Sudanese people will depend on
sustained cooperation between North and South. The
community of nations, which the people of Southern
Sudan will soon join, must work with both North and
South to support their development and to help
strengthen friendly relations between them. As my
Foreign Secretary told this Council on 16 November,
"[t]he United Kingdom stands ready to play its part,
based on our historic and enduring commitment to all
the people ofthe Sudan" (S/PV.6425, p. 15).

The United Kingdom is working with others on
the handling of the Sudan's international debt. We are
supporting the CPA parties on the demarcation of the
border, and we are providing $60 million to the United
Nations Common Humanitarian Fund for the benefit of
the people of the Sudan, both North and South.

That commitment of course also extends to the
people of Darfur. I therefore cannot conclude without
addressing the situation there, which remains of deep
concern. The displacement of thousands of civilians
highlights the impact of the ongoing violence on the
most vulnerable. We call on all parties to cease
hostilities and to ensure full and unhindered access for
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and humanitarian workers.

With concerted political will, we believe that
peace in Darfur can be achieved. We continue to
support the work of African Union-United Nations
Joint Chief Mediator Djibrill Bassole' in his efforts to
negotiate a peaceful settlement in Darfur. We call on all
rebel groups that remain outside the negotiations to
join the peace process without delay or preconditions.
Those that refuse can expect to be sanctioned by the
Council. A lasting peace can only be based on the
consent of, and justice for, the people of Darfur. We
therefore recognize the contribution that Darfur-based
consultations could make once a genuine enabling
environment has been created in the region.

As we reflect on the historic achievement of the
parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in
holding a peaceful and credible Southern Sudan
referendum, all the people of the Sudan can be assured
of the commitment of the United Kingdom to support
them in building a peaceful and prosperous future.

