Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing today's open debate on an issue that is of
interest and importance to the entire membership of
the United Nations. I also thank Mr. Ian Martin for
his briefing.

As the organ of the United Nations tasked with
the maintenance of international peace and security
on behalf of the comity of nations, the Security
Council - its work and the way it chooses to organize
it - is as a matter of interest for all. The edifice of
the working methods of the Council is erected on the
nebulous expanse of rules of procedure that remain
provisional even after 70 years and on a series of quasi-
formal presidential notes. Therefore, the field is rich in
terms of opportunities for making practical suggestions
for improvement. However, I will focus on the thus far
neglected but growing arena of work of the Security
Council's subordinate sanctions-related organs.

There are 14 such sanctions committees established
under various resolutions of the Council. Drawing on
delegated authority from the Council, those committees
perform the functions of the Council in terms of
designation of individuals, entities and undertakings
deemed to be threats to international peace and
security. Cumulatively, as of 31 December 2017, those
committees have listed a total of 678 individuals
and 385 entities as subject to United Nation targeted
sanctions and restrictive measures such as assets
freezes, travel bans and arms embargoes. In terms
of numbers, those decisions far exceed the outcomes
arrived at by the Security Council in open meetings
during public sittings over the same period. That
large number of decisions flows from the universe of
sanctions committees that comprise representatives of
Council members who decide on behalf of the Council.
Those decisions are binding on Member States.

Yet each of those decisions of the sanctions
committees is taken beyond the gaze of the public,
with no explanation of the inputs that go into the
decision-making. For want of a better depiction, it
would appear that the committees form the subterranean
universe of the Council. That universe functions in
accordance with decision-making methods that are not
the same as those of a normal functioning Council.
For example, in practical terms, the decisions of the
sanctions committees can be placed on hold or blocked
by any of the 15 members of the committees. While
decision-making on Security Council resolutions is
based on clearly defined thresholds provided for in the
Charter of the United Nations and the provisional rules
of procedure, in the case of the subterranean universe,
each and every one of the Council's members now has
an effective veto on decision-making.

What is worse is that no one except the members
of the subterranean universe is aware of the use of a
veto while deciding on a reference made to any of the
sanctions committees. Such is the effective impact
of that anonymous veto that a proposal that has been
blocked is not even made public. In addition, no rationale
is provided for the anonymous vetoing of a submission.
Unlike in the Security Council, where vetoes are cast in
public meetings and explanations made publicly, in the
subterranean universe no such practice exists; in fact,
the principles of anonymity and unanimity reign.

That is not the only difference between the working
methods of the subterranean universe of the Council
and the official Council meetings. No one other than
the members of the Council is aware of the total
number of decisions made by the sanctions committees.
For example, in 2017, by our estimates, an additional
53 individuals and 19 entities were listed by the
sanctions committees. However, how many others were
considered but placed on hold or blocked from being
listed is neither available on the record nor made public.
The rationale for the use of the anonymous veto is never
provided to the general membership.

Even though the Permanent Representative of
Kazakhstan - your predecessor as President of the
Security Council last month, Mr. President - has
set high standards of transparency by issuing press
statements after every consultation of the Council, no
such practice exists in the subterranean universe of
the Sanctions Committees. The challenges relating to
the Sanctions Committees' working methods have to
do not only with transparency and accountability, but
also with the diversity of the mechanisms for reviewing
decision-making in cases of differences among
members. For example, if after consultations consensus
still cannot be reached, two of the Committees provide
that the matter may be referred to the Security Council
by the member concerned; in four other Committees,
the matter may be referred to the Security Council by
the Chair; in six more Committees, the matter may be
submitted to the Security Council, without specifying
by whom; in one other Committee, the matter may be
referred to the Security Council by the Chair or by
the Committee member concerned; and in one final
Committee, we could not find any explicit option for
referring the matter to the Council. The divergences do
not end there. While 13 Sanctions Committees function
without the need for an ombudsperson to submit
recommendations for a review, one specific Sanctions
Committee provides for an Ombudsperson.

Clearly, there exists a case for the Council to
address the anomalies in the working methods of its
subterranean universe of Sanctions Committees. They
not only affect the efficiency and credibility of the
Council's work but also the larger membership, which
has to implement the Council's decisions. It is in that
spirit that my country, along with so many others, has
called for reform of the Security Council's composition
and working methods. Until that happens, we want to
make it clear that we do not aspire to a utopia and nor do
we believe that the current situation is dystopian. Our
objective in pointing out these issues is to move beyond
the status quo to what we may term a protopia - a
state that envisages a better tomorrow than yesterday,
even if it is only a little better. We hope that this debate,
Mr. President, and what you add to the work done by
your predecessors as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, will lead to a protopian Council that strives
every day to make its work methods better than they
were the day before, even if only slightly.

