Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia pays particular attention to the
developing situation in the Sahel and has consistently
favoured active coordination between the United
Nations and the African Union and subregional
organizations to normalize it.

Wewishtorecallthatthephenomenaofterrorismand
violent extremism in the Sahel have sharply increased
in recent years. The situation has sharply deteriorated
since the situation in Libya was destabilized. The
security situation is still negatively affected by porous
borders, which enable the trafficking in drugs, weapons
and other contraband. Without making progress on a
settlement in Libya, it will not be possible to find a
lasting solution to terrorism in the Sahel.
We are convinced that we should currently focus
on rebuilding and strengthening the counter-terrorism
potential of the States of the region, as required by
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
In that regard, we would like to thank the Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), Mr. Laborde, for his briefing. We
highly value the efforts of CTED in assessing the real
needs of States in terms of combating terrorism.

Russia has always focused on building countries'
capacities and providing bilateral support to train
professionals, including law enforcement agents.
Furthermore, we consider it crucial to work on
implementing resolution 1624 (2005), highlighting
terrorism prevention, by making terrorism less
attractive and by countering the dissemination of
terrorist ideology and violent extremism.

With regard to the specific problem ofdesertification
in the region, we agree that it undermines the traditional
way of life and the economic potential of the countries
in the region. At the same time, we believe that natural
phenomena, including land and soil degradation caused
by natural factors or human activities cannot a priori be
regarded as a threat to international peace and security.
Drought and land degradation could aggravate the
situation in areas of conflict, the causes of which, in our
opinion, can still be attributed to ineffective responses
by the appropriate political institutions to emerging
issues. The main platform for addressing desertification
and land degradation is the United Nations Convention
to Combat Desertification.

When considering the problem of desertification
in a cross-border context, we firmly believe there is
a need to find mutually beneficial solutions based on
partnership and respect for national sovereignty. We
should also focus on fostering technical cooperation
and training national staff on land use for countries in
need. Naturally, the assistance provided should take into
account the countries' specific national development
needs and strategies, as well as regional aspects.

That said, we feel it is inappropriate for the Security
Council to be directly involved. It does not have the
relevant expertise and the necessary tools in this area.
The Council's involvement could be counterproductive
and lead the international community away from
a search for practical solutions to combat land
degradation. Not one of the briefers mentioned the role
of the Security Council in combatting climate change
and desertification, and that was not by chance.
In New York, real value could be added by holding
substantive discussions on this topic in the framework
of the specialized Second Committee of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development,
especially since the importance of addressing
desertification and restoring degraded land in order to
achieve sustainable development was emphasized in
the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda (resolution 70/1), under Goal 15.

We believe that desertification is not the only
challenge to food and economic security in the Sahel
that might lead to radicalization and make it easier
for terrorists to promote their ideologies and recruit
adherents from among the hardest-hit segments of the
population. We are convinced that the whole range of
equally complex problems of the region needs to be
addressed through the consistent implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. This
is a useful initiative, which has proved its worth. We
have only just begun to tap into its full potential by
successfully implementing projects in several areas. We
hope that the merging in February of the Office of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel
with the United Nations Office for West Africa will
create the necessary synergy to implement this strategy.

