Mr. Zenawi (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the members of the Council for
giving us this unique opportunity to express our
concerns at the regional level and as individual
countries. I shall speak today in my capacities as the
current Chairperson of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and as the Prime Minister of
Ethiopia. I really have nothing much to add to what my
colleagues have already said, but I wish to highlight a
few points.

First, we as a region are not complaining about
the domestic policies of the Eritrean Government. We
may or may not like those policies, but that is not the
issue we wish to raise before the Security Council. Our
agenda is to address the fact that Eritrea is a prime
source of instability for the region as a whole.
The second point that I wish to highlight is the
fact that this is not a family quarrel between Ethiopia
and Eritrea. All States members of IGAD, including the
Republic of South Sudan, which joined us recently, are
represented here today to express the joint opinion that
Eritrea is the primary source of instability in our
region.

Of course, Ethiopia itself also has a problem with
Eritrea, which began when Eritrea invaded our
territory. That is not an allegation made by Ethiopia; it
is the finding of a neutral arbitral tribunal that was
established by Ethiopia and Eritrea. The arbitral
tribunal decided that Eritrea had indeed invaded
Ethiopia without provocation and should therefore pay
compensation. A boundary commission was established
and has pronounced itself on the matter. A delimitation
decision has been taken, and we in Ethiopia have
accepted it without precondition. We may or may not
like the delimitation decision itself, but we have made
it officially and abundantly clear that we accept it
unconditionally.

The Eritreans claim that the boundary
commission has actually demarcated the boundary on
the map. As a famous Foreign Minister of a permanent
member of the Security Council told our Foreign
Minister, the demarcation of boundaries on maps is a
legal fiction, and a very dangerous one. What we have
therefore asked the Eritreans to do is to engage us in
dialogue so that we can move towards demarcation.
That is what Nigeria and Cameroon did; they engaged
in dialogue to implement a delimitation decision. That
is What grown-up people should do. That, and nothing
more, is what we have asked of Eritrea.

That is the sum total of the so-called border
dispute between Ethiopia and Eritrea. It is not a family
quarrel because it did not start with Ethiopia. Eritrea
first invaded the Hanish Islands of Yemen. Its policy is
one of shoot first, start talking later. It invaded our
territory, and then started talking. It invaded Djibouti's
territory, denied that it had invaded that territory, and
in the end admitted that it had invaded that territory by
withdrawing its troops and allowing Qatari troops to
replace them.

This is not just about borders. In 1995, just one
year after it had achieved its formal independence,
Eritrea had a quarrel with the Government of the
Sudan; it closed the Sudanese embassy in Asmara, gave
it to the South Sudanese opposition, and publically
stated that it would arm and train any opposition that
was prepared to remove the regime in Khartoum. It has
characterized the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia as a puppet regime, and has openly and
repeatedly held conferences with armed opposition
groups of Somalia, including Al-Shabaab, in order to
try to destabilize Somalia. It is not a family quarrel; it
is a regional problem. It is not a question of lack of
communication; it is a problem of the attitude of a
certain clique in Asmara that has never grown up from
being a rebel group. It is a problem of lawlessness and
reckless disregard for international norms.

We ask the Security Council to help us to stop
that lawlessness because, as it is, the Horn of Africa is
a very fragile region. In the absence of the rule of law
and action by the Security Council, the implication
would be that we are all on our own and that we have
to defend ourselves or perish. That is not a choice that
we want to make. We believe in the rule of law. We
believe in the mandate of the Security Council. We
believe that the Security Council can, and must, act.

The Council has a draft resolution before it. We
in IGAD have been very actively involved in its
preparation. We would like to thank our African
brothers in the Security Council, in particular Gabon
and Nigeria, for working with us very closely in the
drafting process and in its presentation to the Council.
I am personally disappointed that many of the teeth of
the draft resolution were subsequently removed. But I
am convinced that, even as it is, it will convey the right
message. We therefore appeal to the members of the
Council, individually and collectively, to ensure that
the message that the clique in Asmara gets is that it
cannot continue to destabilize the region without any
consequences. We ask the Council to act and to do so
decisively.

