Mr. Pronk: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having given me this opportunity to
brief the Council on the current situation in the Sudan,
including in Darfur.

One year after its signing in Nairobi, on
9 January 2005, the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
between the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) stands firm. Its
implementation, although slow, remains on track and is
moving forward. The tragic death of John Garang, the
leader of the south, less than a month after he had been
sworn in as the new Vice-President of the Sudan, was a
major blow. It caused consternation and delays, but
neither party has found a reason to deviate from the
Agreement, which was his legacy. On the contrary,
parties realize that they depend on each other and that
they have to move forward.

In the space of one year two new constitutions
have been adopted - one for the Sudan as a whole and
one for southern Sudan. Two new Governments had
been formed. All of the institutions that had to be
established on the basis of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement have been established. Some have hardly
met, while others are facing political disputes.
However, the spirit of the Agreement stands tall. The
redeployment of the Sudanese army away from the
south has started. The target of 30 per cent
redeployment within one year has more or less been
accomplished. The United Nations has instructed the
forces on both sides to provide notification of all
movements seven days in advance, and so far there
have been only minor violations of those instructions.

As a matter of fact, the Joint Ceasefire
Committee - the only United Nations-led
institution - has been the most successful Agreement
institution. It started convening shortly after the
Security Council adopted resolution 1590 (2005) in
March last year mandating the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan (UNMIS) to monitor the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. It has met 15 times and has been
able to reach consensus on most issues regarding the
interpretation and implementation of the ceasefire
paragraphs in the Agreement. The talks between the
SPLM. and the other armed groups in southern Sudan
are proceeding very well. That could pave the way for
the integration of all combatants, either into one of the
armies or into civil society.

Of course, a lot still needs to be done. The peace
process must become more inclusive, incorporating
other political parties and civil society. The security
laws must be brought into line with the constitution.
The disarmament, demobilization and consequent
reintegration of the combatants is yet to commence.
The return of displaced persons and refugees has
started, but we lack the resources to support the return.
The rehabilitation and development of agriculture in
the south, of its economy, its towns and its villages,
including water, education and health systems, has yet
to start.

The capacity of the new Government of Southern
Sudan is still limited. Disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration, return, rehabilitation and capacity-
building all require more international financial
support. Without such support, the expectations of the
people in the south will not be met. That is a major
risk.

There is peace, indeed. Where is the peace
dividend? Conflicts emerge out of tribal disputes and
also with people returning to their villages. UNMIS,
through timely reaction in an integrated fashion, has
been able to defuse some of those conflicts with the
cooperation of the authorities. However, there will be
more conflicts. We have such concerns in Abyei, one
of the transition areas, where the Missiriya and the
Dinka on the ground have learned to live together but
where uncertainty about the future status of the region
continues to pose a threat. In the east, close to the
Eritrean border, a confrontation may arise as soon as
the SPLM. withdraws to the south, as it has committed
itself to do under the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement.

The Government and the eastern rebel
movements had agreed to start discussions leading to
peace talks facilitated by the United Nations in the
third quarter of last year, but thereafter the United
Nations was sidelined. The parties agreed to Libya as a
facilitator, but talks have yet to start - even though
the redeployment deadline of 9 January 2006 has
passed. This is creating a void with the potential for
new armed conflict, violating the gentlemen's
agreement between the parties, facilitated by the
United Nations in the middle of last year, not to attack
each other.

Finally, the attacks of the Uganda-based Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) on civilians and humanitarian
workers in the south are paralysing our activities in a
considerable part of the south. The situation there
directly threatens the potential peace dividends.

The sense of optimism among the people of the
south is therefore low. They have also become
suspicious. Many are losing their belief in the north's
sincerity regarding giving the south a chance to
develop beyond peace. The parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement have agreed that 50
per cent of oil revenues and the resulting income would
accrue to the south. However, there is no transparency.
The Khartoum authorities have been reluctant to
provide answers to all questions regarding oil. People
in the south are becoming less and less confident that
the Agreement's essential element on the sharing of
wealth will become a reality.

The international community and its
institutions - including all countries investing in and
buying from the Sudan, along with the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) exerting its mandate to assess
economic and financial governance - have a political
and an economic interest in the full and fair
implementation of that agreement on oil. The
upcoming meeting in March of the Sudan Consortium,
to be led by the World Bank, will be a good
opportunity to discuss that, in order to settle the matter
and to avoid having possible differences of opinion
lead to a real dispute.

Matching the cynicism in the south, there are
suspicions in the north that the SPLM. does not really
want to give unity a chance in the referendum to be
held six years after the conclusion of the Peace
Agreement. Making unity the attractive option is part
of the mandate that the Security Council has given to
the Mission. We are trying to do that by focusing in
particular on poverty reduction and on sustaining
peace, minority rights, human rights and constitutional
rights. In the referendum, people will be free to decide
either for unity or separation. If, six years after the
conclusion of the Peace Agreement people are less
poor, have more rights and live in peace throughout the
country in a still-united Sudan, they may consider it
attractive to stay together as one nation, albeit with two
systems.

The SPLM. leadership would be wise to show that
they have not decided otherwise, that is, to opt for
separation whatever the developments in the next five
years. The unity option should get a real chance when
people exercise their right to vote in the referendum.
However, the Government in the north should do
everything to make that attractive. It can do so by
guaranteeing a fair share of power, resources and
income to the people of the south for expenditure and
investment in water, infrastructure, schools, jobs,
agriculture, housing and health care for all the people
who for decades were deprived of such things.

Unequal distribution of power and wealth was
also one of the causes of the war in Darfur. There is not
yet peace in Darfur. Peace is indivisible. The
continuing violence, killing, rape and human rights
violations are not only a tragedy for the people of
Darfur, they also violate the requirements set out in
resolutions of the Security Council. Moreover, they are
a threat to the sustainability of peace in the south.

The deadline set at Abuja to reach a peace
agreement on the matter of Darfur before the end of
2005 was not met. The parties have failed. The passing
of the 31 December deadline was ignored and went
unnoticed. One cannot avoid the impression that the
parties have lost all sense of urgency and do not really
care about deadlines. They talk but do not achieve
results. Chairman Salim did everything he could to get
the parties to end the talks with an agreement, but the
parties shied away.

One wonders whether negotiators really care
about the fate of the 3 million war-affected people,
more than 2 million of whom live in camps for
displaced persons and refugees. Thanks to international
assistance and the commitment of humanitarian
workers on the ground - who deserve our
admiration - malnutrition and mortality figures have
decreased considerably. However, that decrease cannot
be sustained in an environment of insecurity, which
results in less and less access for humanitarian
assistance.

All of us will have to reconsider the strategy for
achieving peace in Darfur. The parties, having missed
the 31 December deadline, will now have to commit
themselves to reaching an agreement during this, the
seventh, round of talks. At the beginning of the seventh
round they pledged that it would be the last and that it
would end before 31 December 2005. The least they
can do now is to stop the clock. The parties should not
adjourn for an eighth round, but should instead
conclude an agreement for the sake of the people they
claim to represent.

Parties negotiating in Darfur could learn from the
way by which the north-south Peace Agreement was
reached in Nairobi. Before everything else in Nairobi,
a sustained and lasting ceasefire was agreed upon. In
southern Sudan the fire ceased, not only on paper but
also on the ground. That made it possible to continue
negotiations for a fair distribution of power and wealth,
which is the core of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement.

The same thing should also happen in Darfur.
Only when the fighting has stopped will the parties,
together with others who did not take up arms but who
have a real stake in the development of their part of the
Sudan - tribal leaders, civil society, representatives of
displaced people, intellectuals and others - be able to
reach a fair, inclusive and sustainable agreement on
governance, power, wealth, land, water and economic
development. Those who did not take up arms and have
watched the parties failing in Abuja should be given
the right to participate in a meaningful Darfur-Darfur
dialogue, which should begin soon.

Any agreement, whether in Abuja or in El Fasher,
will be sustainable only if the international community
assists in guaranteeing security. The African Union has
done an admirable job, but the African Union Mission
in Sudan (AMIS) has not been provided with adequate
resources and adequate means to prevent attacks. We
deplore the death of young African soldiers who went
to Darfur to help save the lives of innocent civilians
but who became targets themselves.

The security situation in Darfur is chaotic. The
perpetrators of the 2003 and 2004 violence have
attained their goal: many areas have been cleansed.
They have free passage in the countryside. Millions of
villagers sitting in camps are too afraid to leave. Terror
continues. At least once a month groups of 500 to
1,000 militia, on camels and on horseback, attack
villages, killing dozens of people and terrorizing
others, who flee.

Since I gave my last briefing to the Council, the
villages Aro Sharow, Tama and Abu Sorouj should be
added to Tawila, Labado, Hamada and Khor Abache -
all of which have witnessed cruel atrocities, terror,
killing and rape. It is no wonder that internally
displaced persons and refugees do not dare to return.
They do not trust anybody anymore. Only international
guarantees such as those provided by the African
Union can help.

The force which is necessary to provide such
guarantees should be big - much bigger than the
present one. It should not be on call but in place,
present everywhere where people may be attacked. It
should be strong, able to defend itself, able to deter
attacks on civilians and able to disarm militias and the
Janjaweed, which should have been disarmed by the
Government in the first place. That has not been done,
despite demands laid down in Security Council
resolutions. The force should stay long enough to
provide confidence - at least three to four years after
the reaching of a peace agreement. Its financing should
be guaranteed all along. It should have a broad
mandate - broad enough to deter non-compliance. It
should be an integral element of a unified approach
towards Darfur, with humanitarian, political, police,
legal, human rights, reconstruction and economic
development instruments. It should be supported by
sanctions - sanctions on troop movements which are
not in accordance with the agreement; sanctions on
arms deliveries; and sanctions against those who have
caused atrocities, and in particular those who have
instructed others to do so - not only foot soldiers, but
commanders and those political leaders who were
responsible for the carnage of 2003 and 2004 and who
refuse to stop the atrocities of 2005.

Many people have paid lip service to the need for
peace. Looking back at three years of killing and
cleansing in Darfur, we must admit that our peace
strategy so far has failed. All we did was pick up the
pieces and muddle through, doing too little too late.
The ultimate responsibility lies with the perpetrators,
but we should do more to stop them, to end impunity
and to offer prospects to the children of Darfur that
they can live without fear.

We hoped that there would be peace at the end of
the year. Did we do more than just hope? Hope is a
good thing, but it has its limits.

