Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, we would like to commend His
Excellency Mr. Charles Nqakula and to thank him for
his substantive briefing on developments in the
Burundi peace process. The Russian Federation
believes that the active mediation efforts of the
Republic of South Africa in support of peace in
Burundi are of fundamental importance for the
successful implementation by the parties of the
Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement - the basis for
stabilization of the situation in that country.

The situation in Burundi continues to be
extremely complex, but steps taken by President
Nkurunziza and the Government give rise to optimism.
Specifically, progress in the extended political process,
formation of a new Government and a resumption of
the work of the parliament give us hope that the
stalemate in the implementation of the Comprehensive
Ceasefire Agreement will also be overcome.

Now, Burundian society faces a range of
challenging problems. Finding successful solutions to
them will be, to a great extent, the key to the future
course of the country. The most important challenges
are to strengthen peace and democratic governance, to
carry out a national programme for the demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants, to reform the
security and justice sectors, to protect human rights, to
enact measures to fight corruption and impunity and to
combat the illicit circulation of small arms and light
weapons. The Minister made specific reference to
those problems today.

We note in this regard that responsibility for
peacebuilding in Burundi lies first and foremost with
the Burundian parties. The authorities and all political
forces in Burundi must continue the reforms agreed
upon in Arusha and Dar es Salaam and maintain a spirit
of dialogue, consensus and universal participation that
will make it possible for them to successfully complete
the transition in their country.

These key aspects are given specific emphasis in
the draft press statement on the situation in Burundi
prepared by our French colleagues. Full
implementation by the parties of the Comprehensive
Ceasefire Agreement is the key to the stable
development of Burundi in the future. We call upon the
PALIPEHUTU-FNL and its leader, Mr. Rwasa, to fulfil
their obligations under the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement and to resume practical activities in the
Joint Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, in the
spirit of the arrangements reached earlier with the
leadership of Burundi in Dar es Salaam.

We would like to take this opportunity to express
our gratitude for the activities of the Regional Peace
Initiative, specifically those of Uganda and Tanzania,
and for those of the Special African Union Task Force
and the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi.
We would also like once again to commend the
mediation efforts of Mr. Nqakula, who is doing his
utmost to stabilize the situation in that country.

In conclusion, we would like to state that we
support the draft statement to the press on Burundi
prepared by our French colleagues.

