Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We would like to join
others in thanking Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Sheikh Ahmed,
and Director ofthe Coordination and Response Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), Mr. John Ging, for
their updates.

We take this opportunity to reiterate our support for
the committed efforts of OCHA and other humanitarian
organizations aimed at easing the suffering of Yemeni
people in such difficult and challenging circumstances.
Since this is Ismail's last briefing, my delegation wishes
to sincerely thank for him for his dedication to his work
and for his contributions to finding a way to resolve the
protracted crisis in Yemen. We wish him every success
in his future endeavours. We welcome the appointment
of the incoming Special Envoy, Mr. Martin Griffiths,
and stand ready to extend our full support to him and
his mission.

We are alarmed by the continued dire humanitarian
situation in Yemen. It is necessary to increase the

humanitarian response and provide unhindered access
to all areas ofthe country, in compliance with the rules of
international humanitarian law. We therefore welcome
the decision of the coalition to keep all Yemeni ground,
air and sea ports open, in order to allow the flow of
supplies in and out of the country. In such critical
conditions, it is important that the United Nations
engage with all interested parties to have a clear plan
for further action to ease the humanitarian situation
and reach a comprehensive political settlement.

We welcome the United Nations 2018 Yemen
humanitarian response plan, which requires
$2.96 billion to assist more than 13 million people. We
express our appreciation to the Governments of Sweden
and Switzerland, together with the United Nations to
host a pledging conference for Yemen in Geneva in
April. We also express our appreciation for the pledge
made by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates to contribute nearly $1 billion to the
United Nations response plan and their commitments to
raising an additional $500 million from others donors
in the region. We welcome the delivery, with the help
of the United States, of four World Food Programme
cranes to Al-Hudaydah, as well as plans to install four
additional cranes in other ports.

Humanitarian aid may provide a temporary solution
but can never compensate for the absence of a fully
and adequately functioning Government. Efforts are
therefore necessary to settle the intra-Yemeni tensions.
To avoid further deterioration, all sides must demonstrate
sincerity and flexibility so as to adequately resolve the
complex issues of withdrawal of forces, disarmament
and the formation of a Government of National Unity.
We are confident that only a political settlement will be
able to end this human-made crisis, and we call on all
States that have influence on the parties to the conflict
to make every effort to end the hostilities through
inclusive and comprehensive dialogue and negotiations.

In conclusion, we welcome the adoption of
resolution 2402 (2018) yesterday (see S/PV.8190),
which renewed the sanctions regime until 26 February
2019 and extended the mandate of the Panel of Experts
until 28 March 2019, in order to allow the Council
and the international community to work further on
the conflict.

