Ms. Nakamitsu: l have been asked to brief the
Security Council today on the issues of missiles.
Missiles have constituted an acute concern for
international peace, security and stability ever since
the first V-2 rockets were fired indiscriminately at
cities in England during the Second World War. Indeed,
it was the movement of nuclear-capable missiles in the
Caribbean that sparked the most serious crisis of the
Cold War, almost 57 years ago.

Since that time, the acquisition, proliferation,
deployment and use of missiles have continued to
play destabilizing - even escalatory - roles in
international relations, with concerning implications
for crisis management, including between nuclear-
armed States, and, in some instances, causing serious
civilian harm. Today missiles add a dangerous and
destabilizing element to regional flashpoints from
North-East Asia to South Asia, the Middle East and
Europe. They directly contribute to renewed strategic-
arms competition and hamper the achievement of
broader disarmament objectives.

For decades, the role of ballistic missiles as a
means of delivering weapons of mass destruction has
been a central concern for the nuclear-disarmament
process. For example, the preamble to the Treaty on
the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons states that
its purpose is

"to facilitate the elimination from national
arsenals of nuclear weapons and the means of
their delivery".

That is why they have been the focus of bilaterally
agreed limitations and reductions of strategic arms for
over four decades.

Yet today more than 20 countries possess ballistic
missiles with capabilities that exceed the threshold
for "nuclear-capable", as defined in the guidelines of
the Missile Technology Control Regime. And nuclear-
armed States are actively pursuing novel missile
and missile-defence capabilities, with unclear and
potentially negative consequences for international
peace and security.

We have also seen increased use ofballistic missiles
in armed conflict over recent decades, most notably their
indiscriminate use against cities during the Iran-Iraq
war in the 1980s. Following the subsequent discovery
of the extent of Iraq's weapons-of-mass-destruction
programme in the 1990s, the Security Council
prohibited that country from producing, acquiring or
stockpiling ballistic missiles with a range greater than
150 kilometres. And resolution 1540 (2004) required all
States to prevent the proliferation to non-State actors
not only of weapons of mass destruction but also of
their means of delivery.

Moreover, conventionally armed missiles
today feature in the arsenals of many States and
some non-State actors and have been used as area-
bombardment weapons, often aimed at cities. Advances
in technology are enabling conventional missiles
to become more accurate at longer ranges, thereby
facilitating their increased development, transfer
and use. The development of weapons systems using
missile technology that can manoeuvre at hypersonic
speeds could further undermine security and spark a
destabilizing arms race.

The launch of ballistic missiles into Saudi
Arabia by Houthis in Yemen has been particularly
troublesome. And concerns regarding ballistic missiles
remain unresolved in connection with resolution 2231
(2015), which endorsed the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action.

Terrestrial-based and air-launched missiles have
been used to destroy satellites in Earth orbit, including
three times over the last decade, the most recent having
occurred earlier this year.

The recent collapse of the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty removed one of the few
constraints on the development and deployment of
destabilizing and dangerous classes of missiles. As the
Secretary-General rightly noted, that Treaty played an
important role in reducing risk, building confidence
and helping to bring the Cold War to an end.

The INF Treaty's ending should not be the catalyst
for renewed and unconstrained competition in missile
development, acquisition and proliferation. I echo
the Secretary-General's call for all States to avoid
destabilizing developments and deployments and to
urgently seek agreement on a new common path for
international arms control.

It is important to note that despite the various
alarming developments I have mentioned, there remains
no universal norm, treaty or agreement regulating
missiles. Today only the Russian Federation and the
United States are subject to legally binding restrictions
on the number of certain missiles they may possess.

Measures such as the Missile Technology Control
Regime and The Hague Code of Conduct against
Ballistic Missile Proliferation, while of clear value, are
not sufficient to deal with every aspect of the threat that
missiles and their proliferation pose to international
peace and security.

The three United Nations panels of experts on
missiles that met in the 2000s provided useful syntheses
ofthe various security issues related to missiles, as they
attempted to deal with the matter in a comprehensive
manner. However, the First Committee has not adopted
a resolution on the issue since 2008.

More and more countries, including those outside
of existing multilateral arrangements, continue to
acquire and develop their ballistic-missile capabilities.
The Security Council has been seized in particular of
activities in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
which is actively augmenting its missile capabilities,
contrary to the Council's resolutions.

As the Secretary-General made clear in his agenda
for disarmament, published last year, measures for
arms control and disarmament, including in relation to
missiles, played a crucial role in conflict prevention,
risk mitigation, de-escalation and tension reduction at
the height of the Cold War.

Preventing the spread and emergence of
destabilizing weapons remains a vital unfinished
task for the international community in our shared
endeavour to preserve international peace, security and
stability. Moving forward, there is an urgent need for
new international approaches, potentially including
legally binding multilateral approaches, consensus
and agreement in dealing with the various problematic
aspects of missiles. The Council's increased attention
to those challenges can give impetus to those efforts.

