Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): This open meeting of the
Council on the situation in Afghanistan is a timely one, and
my delegation commends you, Sir, for organizing it. It is
our hope that this debate will serve to bring the issue into
sharper focus for the international community at a time
when the conflict seems to be even more intractable than
ever before.

Without doubt, the civil war in Afghanistan has been
one of the most devastating and tragic in the history of
human conflicts throughout the world. Twenty years of
bloody war have left the country in a devastated state, with
no discernible signs of an early end to the conflict. There
had, indeed, been a number of positive developments
recently, developments that had led the international
community to believe that the end of the conflict was close
at hand. But these proved to be false dawns that did not
lead to the new day that the war-weary people of
Afghanistan have been yearning for.

Like other friends of Afghanistan, Malaysia is deeply
dismayed and saddened by the situation in that fraternal
country and by the plight of its people. Malaysia believes
that a durable peace in Afghanistan can be achieved only
through political, not military, means, and therefore strongly
supports any efforts for a political resolution of the conflict
through dialogue and the formation of a broad-based
Government that would take into account the interests of
the various religious and ethnic groups in Afghanistan.
Unfortunately, what has firmly taken root in that country is
a vicious cycle of violence and conflict in which the
inability of the Afghan factions to agree on a political
settlement is both the cause and the effect of interference
in the affairs of the country by external actors.

The long, debilitating war in Afghanistan has exacted
a heavy toll on the country and its people. With its scarce
resources being channelled to the war effort, the entire
country has been left in the backwater of economic
development, with dire consequences for its long-enduring
people. The costs to the people of Afghanistan, particularly
to a whole generation of young Afghanis, are enormous and
can be addressed only when the sounds of guns have finally
fallen silent, whenever that will be. In the meantime, when
all economic development is suspended and economic and
social concerns remain in abeyance, a new generation is
growing up with little education except in weaponry
training, and with no memory of life in a peaceful State.

Beyond the emotional scars left on the people of
Afghanistan, the war has also physically scarred the
country. Vast tracts of land have been sowed, not with
life-sustaining crops, but with life-threatening landmines
which have claimed many, many lives and limbs. These
problems are compounded by the existence of other ills,
not the least of which are the pernicious effects of drugs,
guns and violence; the use of child soldiers; and a
population dependent on handouts from humanitarian
agencies - perhaps for many, many years to come. In
addition to these ills, there are the catastrophic effects
related to internally displaced persons, effects caused by
the continuing war and exacerbating the already grave
humanitarian situation.

What is patently clear to many, apart from the
Afghan parties, is that the conflict is not likely to be
settled by military means. Military advantages gained on
the ground are merely temporary and will be reversed
over time. The history of Afghanistan, past and present,
has made this abundantly clear and should be well-heeded
by the Afghan factions so as to spare their people further
sufferings and hardships. After many years of conflict, the
lessons ought to have been learned. What should have
become clear by now is that the path to peace for
Afghanistan does not lie on the battlefield but at the
conference table. This reality should be accepted now by
all of the Afghan parties. They should rise above their
narrow factional interests and abandon their vain search
for that illusory military Victory that will settle the
conflict once and for all, for it will not come.

The international community should continue to play
a constructive role by exerting a positive influence on the
process; by encouraging the process of dialogue and
conciliation on the part of the contending parties in
Afghanistan; and, on the part of the external actors, by
pursuing a policy of scrupulous non-interference, for only
through this process can there be prospects of a durable
peace in that unfortunate country.

The signing of the Tashkent Declaration was an
important contribution to the search for a lasting peace in
Afghanistan. The principles contained therein are laudable
ones and were warmly welcomed by the international
community and the Council. Unfortunately, the
resumption, in spite of its signing, of military hostilities
immediately afterwards has raised questions about the
worth of a paper document, steeped in lofty principles, in
the absence of the requisite political will to adhere to
them. Indeed, the renewed fighting calls into question the
usefulness and relevance of the "six plus two" group

 

itself. The continuation of the conflict, with the involvement
of external actors, makes a mockery of the Tashkent
Declaration. It is a matter of profound disappointment and
regret that despite the pronouncements of the "six plus two"
group not to provide military support to any Afghan party
and to prevent the use of their territories for such purpose,
in reality the infusion of massive war materiel to fuel the
Afghan conflict has exacerbated the situation.

Given its important and influential membership, the
group was hailed, upon its establishment, as a significant
development in the search for a political settlement of the
conflict in Afghanistan that would be buttressed by strong
international commitment and support. Despite its
shortcomings, the "six plus two" group remains a useful
forum and mechanism in the peace process and should
therefore be strongly supported by the international
community and the Council. The group's members should
be strongly urged to reconcile their differences and to
recommit themselves to the important principles they signed
in Tashkent, lest the group, which was painstakingly put
together, become completely irrelevant. Perhaps a new
formula, as mentioned by Under-Secretary-General
Prendergast, or a new strategy is necessary to propel the
peace process forward.

In this regard, the role of the United Nations,
including in particular that of the Secretary-General and his
Special Envoy, Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi, should
continue to be recognized and strongly supported by the
international community. My delegation would like to wish
Ambassador Brahimi a speedy recovery.

Indeed, at this critical juncture, the facilitating role of
the United Nations in the search for a political settlement
of the Afghan conflict assumes even greater importance and
should be further enhanced.

However, with the best of intentions, the international
community can do only so much; it can play only a
supportive role in the process. The feuding parties in
Afghanistan will have to recognize that the search for peace
must begin and end with themselves. Clearly, any credible
peace process will have to begin with a ceasefire, followed
by the commencement of dialogue between the various
belligerents, predicated on the common objective of
attaining genuine national reconciliation and the
establishment of a broad-based, multi-ethnic representative
government.

Such a solution must be sought by the Afghan parties
to the conflict and supported by the people of Afghanistan.
It cannot - indeed, should not - be imposed from
outside, as any peace that is not supported by the parties
themselves and their followers will not stand the test of
time. If Afghanistan is to continue to exist as a sovereign
State and not be reduced eventually to the fate of a
"failed state" characterized by endless infighting and
contending for power and positions among its leaders, it
is imperative that its proud people seize the opportunity
now to steer a clear course towards national reconciliation
and unity.

It is a matter of great regret to my delegation that a
year after the Mazar-e-Sharif massacres of Iranian
diplomats and a journalist, the incident remains
unresolved despite the expressed commitment of the
Taliban leadership to continue its investigation and its
support for an international inquiry into the circumstances
surrounding the murders of the Iranians. It is imperative
for the international community to continue to call for a
full investigation of the incident leading to the
prosecution of those guilty of the crime.

While the war in Afghanistan is essentially an
internal conflict, its continuation over a period of 20 years
is due in no small part to the role played by external
actors. It is important, therefore, that the international
community and the Council in particular exert their
influence on all the parties concerned so that peace and
stability can be given a chance to return to that troubled
land.

