Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Madam President, I, too,
should like to once again wish a happy International
Women's Day to you and to our women Ambassadors
and Secretariat staff, as well as to all women around
the world.

I wish also to apologize on behalf of Vassily,
because I think that the Russian delegation forgot to
bring a bouquet to our dear Angelina; everyone but
her received flowers from that delegation. But she has
our flowers, and I think that Dmitry is also going to
send her flowers. I think that she deserves a bouquet
of tulips, not only because of International Women's
Day but for the excellent work that she has done in this
regard, particularly through her organization's work to
help the people of South Sudan. I also thank her for
her briefing.

I wish also to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General David Shearer for his important
briefing and to commend him for his tireless efforts
in ensuring the effective contribution of the United
Nations to peace and stability in South Sudan. I also
welcome my dear brother the Permanent Representative
of South Sudan.

My delegation is pleased to note that the South
Sudanese parties continue to make progress in
implementing the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. Most of the pre-transitional institutions are
in place and have commenced their work. The return
of senior opposition leaders to Juba to participate in
various meetings of those institutions is encouraging.

Indonesia also draws reassurance from the
improvement in the security situation, as set out in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/191). The
permanent ceasefire has largely taken hold, and the
political violence is decreasing. This has been made
possible by a rapprochement between the parties,
facilitated by the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS).

I am happy to hear that returns of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) have also been reported across
the country, although many remain where they are, as
reported by the Special Representative. Nevertheless,
there are positive developments and trends, which
clearly reflects confidence in the Government of South
Sudan. We hope that many other IDPs will return, and
I think that this is an important fact that we also must
take into account.

My delegation is also cognizant of the many
challenges faced by our South Sudanese brothers and
sisters. In this regard, I wish to underline following
three points.

First, Indonesia agrees that the Revitalized
Agreement is the best and only option to ensure lasting
peace in South Sudan. We must make this work. I also
concur with what David mentioned, that there should
be no Plan B, only Plan A. The Council must therefore
work very hard to ensure that the momentum generated
by the signing of the Agreement does not dissipate,
especially as South Sudan is now more than over
halfway into the pre-transitional period.

There is still a great deal of work to be done,
including on transitional security arrangements, the
incorporation of the Agreement into the Transitional
Constitution, and the resolution of the issue of
boundaries and states. I was also glad to hear from
David that the Agreement is widely embraced by the
population. I think that this is an important factor that
we should work on.

My delegation takes note also of the reconstituted
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission's
latest quarterly report, which found that funding and
technical expert support are major challenges in the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement. The need
for international support, including humanitarian and
development assistance, remains critical. We thank all
donors that have contributed. Hopefully, the expected
target of $1.5 billion will be reached, which will make it
possible to help the more than 5 million people in need,
as noted in David's briefing.

We encourage the continued and proactive
engagement of the countries members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the countries of the region, the African Union and
the United Nations in supporting the South Sudanese
peace process. And, of course, like others, we wish to
commend IGAD for its work.

Secondly, as the peace process moves forward,
there must be commensurate positive developments
on the ground, where the dividends of peace are felt
by ordinary citizens. The presence and destabilizing
activities of non-signatory armed groups remain a
source of insecurity. My delegation is concerned at the
continued clashes involving such groups, including the
National Salvation Front, in Equatoria, and supports
continued outreach by the IGAD Special Envoy, whom
we support, to non-signatories to the Agreement.

As we celebrate International Women's Day,
Indonesia is also deeply concerned at the widespread
sexual violence, particularly against women and girls.
It must be brought to an end. We call for further efforts
to strengthen the rule of law and accountability for
human rights violations. We call for the provision of
capacity-building and assistance, including in the
justice system. I think that the idea of having a mobile
court is quite innovative.

My delegation also devotes particular attention
to the needs of people who require humanitarian
assistance in South Sudan and stresses the need to
ensure its unhindered delivery.

Thirdly, Indonesia supports the renewal of
the mandate of UNMISS to include support for
the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement,
working in close cooperation with the South Sudanese
Government. We see a potential role for UNMISS in
the provision of good offices and technical expertise to
all parties, including the pre-transitional mechanisms.

My delegation wishes to see UNMISS further
explore the possibility of using community engagement
to accomplish its mandate, including enhancing its
ability to protect civilians. We have several Indonesian
military and police officers working on the ground
as part of the Mission, and we have women police
and peacekeepers on the ground. I would ask David
to convey to them our best wishes on International
Women's Day.

Here I wish to highlight the importance of women
peacekeepers in community engagement. In our case,
we also have training on community-building and
community engagement. I think that this is an important
point that could also help with the development aspect
so as to benefit our South Sudanese brothers and sisters.

We also noted in the report ofthe Secretary-General
that UNMISS has been mitigating the violence against
civilians, which is commendable, and I believe that this
should continue.

I should like to close by commending the South
Sudanese Government for its perseverance and
statesmanship during this difficult time. I affirm once
again Indonesia's long-standing support for peace
and stability in South Sudan, including through its
contribution to UNMISS.

