Mr. Khoc (South Sudan): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for inviting me to participate in this
meeting. Given that this is the first time that my
delegation is addressing the Security Council during
your presidency, let me begin by congratulating you
on your successful leadership and extending my best
wishes to you as you conclude your work in the coming
days. In the same vein, I reiterate South Sudan's
commitment to cooperating with the Security Council.
The Republic of South Sudan reiterates its
appreciation to the Security Council and the Secretary-
General for their continued attention to the issue of
Abyei. South Sudan also expresses its deep appreciation
to the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA) for its unwavering commitment to
protecting civilians and to the Government of Ethiopia
for its troops' contribution to that important Mission,
which supports peace and security in our region.
These complementary efforts, including the invaluable
contributions of the African Union through its High-
level Implementation Panel, provide momentum for
a resolution of the final status of Abyei, which is an
essential ingredient of lasting peace between the two
neighbouring States.

South Sudan welcomes the increase in UNISFA's
troop ceiling to allow more troops to be deployed to
support the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, which is being implemented by the Sudan
and South Sudan and which will greatly support
stability in the border areas between the two States.

I recall that in May 2012 the Council stipulated
that the parties must, under threat of sanctions, reach a
final agreement on all outstanding issues, including the
final status of Abyei, within three months. Regrettably,
that deadline was not respected. Nonetheless, the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel
submitted a proposal on the final status of Abyei, on
21 September 2012, which was characterized by the
African Heads of State and Government, in January,
as a fair, equitable and workable solution to the
dispute. In my Government's view, it stands as the
only viable solution for lasting peace, as it takes into
consideration the historical context in Abyei, while
adequately reflecting the challenges of implementing a
referendum, which was, of course, agreed by the parties
in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement of 2005. We
regret that the Sudan continues to reject the proposal
of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel,
despite its being a proposal that both Heads of State had
mandated the Panel to develop.

As highlighted in the Secretary-General's latest
report on the situation in Abyei (8/2013/294), there
have been reports of armed Misseriya attacking the
Ngok Dinka of Abyei, killing people, looting cattle and
burning villages. To that end, the Government of South
Sudan commends the Security Council for reviewing
and re-emphasizing that the protection of civilians
mandate has broader implications in the case of Abyei,
given the historical context of conflict between the
Sudan and South Sudan. We join the Security Council
in commending the efforts of UNISFA in its ongoing
facilitation of the peaceful migration of the Misseriya
through Abyei.

The unfortunate assassination of the Ngok Dinka
Paramount Chief, Mr. Deng Kuol Deng, and the killing
ofa UNISFA peacekeeper on 4 May have brought much
grief to the Ngok Dinka and the Ethiopian people. We
welcome the Republic of the Sudan's commitment to
a transparent, comprehensive and just investigation to
hold all those involved in that incident to account. There
must bejustice and those responsible must be punished.
However, given the historical challenges between the
Sudan and South Sudan, we call for an international
investigation to ensure the credibility and transparency
of that process. That unfortunate incident is viewed
neither by the Ngok Dinka nor the Government of South
Sudan in isolation, but as the culmination of a trend
that must be stopped. It is hoped that this tragedy will
provide the necessary impetus for the parties to end the
territorial dispute through the agreed mechanisms.

I note that my Government has called for peace and
calmamongtheNgokDinkainAbyei duringthis difficult
time. The skirmishes that took place are a reflection of
the frustration that the Ngok Dinka are experiencing
over the status of their homeland. To that end, the
Government of South Sudan commits to redoubling
its efforts to ensure that an Abyei administration and
police service are constituted. We further welcome
the continued call of the Council that the 20 June 2011
Agreement between the Government of the Sudan and
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement on Temporary
Arrangements for the Administration and Security of
the Abyei Area (S/2011/384, annex) and the decision
of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee of 3 May be
implemented to ensure that Abyei is a weapon-free
area and the demand that Sudan withdraw its oil police
from Diffra. We see those efforts as necessary to the
establishment of an environment conducive to the
impending Abyei referendum.

The Government of South Sudan reiterates
nonetheless that establishing temporary institutions
in Abyei will not create lasting peace and that their
establishment cannot be viewed as an end in itself. The
Sudan must also not be allowed to continue moving
the goalposts by changing the criteria for how the
temporary institutions are to be established. It must also
be prohibited from creating further facts and situations
on the ground by resettling and arming the Misseriya to
the north of Abyei. If the referendum ultimately results
in Abyei becoming part of South Sudan, the Misseriya
will be welcome to graze and water their cattle in Abyei
and beyond, as they have done for many generations,
provided that they come in peace and unarmed.

The Government of South Sudan has shown support
and appreciation to UNISFA through its assistance in
making Gok Machar the UNISFA base on its territory.
The Government will do its utmost to continue to
support UNISFA's important work.

Last but not least, South Sudan further recommits
itself to the promotion of peace and stability across our
region. We reiterate our appreciation to the Security
Council for renewing the UNISFA mandate and wish the
Mission fruitful engagement as it works to consolidate
peace and stability in Abyei.

