Mr. Ramos-Horta: Congratulations, Mr.
President, on your assumption of the presidency for
this month.

I apologize for not having a written contribution.
I will just add some comments to what President
Xanana Gusmao has just stated.

The first comment I would like to make is that by
June we will have dissolved the National Council of
Timorese Resistance (CNRT), an umbrella organization
that was Vital for many years in our struggle to bring
together all East Timorese groups for one common
goal. It was under that particular umbrella and that flag
that we went to the polls on 30 August 1999. But as the
political process unfolds, it is also time for us to give
space to and encourage the multi-party system:
plurality. It was our plan all along, from the very
beginning, to downsize the CNRT itself as the East
Timor Transitional Administration takes shape, so as
not to have a parallel and competitive institution. We
believe that in June it will be time for the CNRT to be
disbanded so that the parties can prepare much more
effectively for the elections for the Constituent
Assembly, which we hope will take place on 30
August.

After its dissolution the CNRT will be replaced
by an even more encompassing and important
instrument: the national pact. We have had discussions
with all political parties in East Timor, and we are in
the process now of drafting a comprehensive document
that would contain important elements such as
commitment to democracy, tolerance, non-violence,
respect for ethnic and religious minorities and
compliance with international standards of human
rights and the rule of law. But that document would
also bind all political parties, regardless of the election
results of 30 August and the composition of the
Government, to honour existing international
agreements. These would be signed by all parties in
East Timor and would be witnessed by the two
Catholic Bishops of East Timor and Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello. This would send a reassuring message to our
people and to the international community.

I would also like to add some comments on the
verdict handed down on the assassins of the three
workers from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). But before that
I would like to remind the Council of our efforts, which
have been known to you for many months - over a
year - to seek to understand the difficulties which the
democratically elected Government of Indonesia faces.

As you know, time and again we have stated, in
agreement with the position taken by the Secretary-
General, that we should allow time, we should trust the
Indonesian legal system to bring to justice the
perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against
humanity. We have expressed our trust and confidence
in the integrity of the Attorney General, our friend
Marzuki Daruzman. It was therefore with profound
sadness and shock that we heard of the sentence
handed down to the confessed assassins of three
international humanitarian workers - 10 to 20 months
for those who committed a crime and vaunted their
pride in doing it.

How can we, as human beings with a conscience,
react as if nothing really serious had happened? Can we
continue to place that trust and confidence in the
system that has produced this verdict? We are outraged,
like the rest of the international community, and it
really discouraged all of us, including the people of
East Timor, regarding the direction the Indonesian
justice system is taking in regard to other serious
crimes committed in the course of 1999 by senior
Indonesian military officers and East Timorese under
the responsibility of the Indonesian army. We hope that
we have not heard the last of this from the Indonesian
side.

I would also elaborate briefly on the question of
the reported violence in East Timor. As President
Xanana Gusmao has indicated, we have to make two
distinctions. First there is the situation along the
border, with sporadic incursions from West Timor into
the areas protected by the peacekeeping forces-
Australia, New Zealand, Nepal and others.
Unfortunately, this happens in contravention of so
many pledges we have received from the Indonesian
side with regard to disarming and dismantling the
militias to enable the refugees - as long as they are
unprotected refugees - to be there without fear. Yet the
militias continue to control the camps. Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi has referred to the
continuing presence of rape victims, who are
unprotected.

What is tragic is that on our part we have
explained to the Council and to the Indonesian
authorities our vision of peace, of friendship with the
Republic of Indonesia, in particular with the province
which is our neighbour, West Timor. If the militias
were to be disarmed, as has been promised; if West
Timor ceased to be a base of instability and aggression
against peacekeeping forces and East Timor, we would
create the conditions for East Timor - the independent
East Timor - and in particular West Timor, to develop
relations whereby we could have free trade across the
border and free movement of people; where we could
develop joint strategies for the eradication of malaria
and for reducing poverty.

West Timor - even though it has not faced a war
for the 50 years since Indonesian independence- is
even poorer than East Timor. The people in West Timor
rightly resent the fact that the international community
always pays more attention to East Timor than to them
in terms of their economic well-being.

We have discussed this vision with Indonesian
authorities, with President Abdurrahman Wahid and
Foreign Minister Alwi Shihab. But as long as West
Timor remains a very unstable region on our own
border - instead of conditions being created for West
Timor to attract international investors in order to
reduce unemployment there ~ we see that the
realization of this vision, this dream, is almost
impossible.

As the Assistant Secretary-General has
mentioned, the negotiations for a new revenue-sharing
agreement on the resources of the Timor Gap area, oil
and gas, are now proceeding at a faster pace, and very
positively. I would even dare to hope that in two
months a new agreement should be signed to enable the
investors to begin to draw up the contracts for pipelines
to bring the gas from the Timor Sea to the Northern
Territory of Australia.

The win-win theory suggests that the two sides
emerge from the negotiation process happy. Maybe the
two sides might not come out entirely happy, but
neither side is angry or disappointed. Australia is a
close friend and neighbour, a strategic partner of East
Timor, and we believe it is in our common interest to
reach an agreement sooner for the benefit of the
Northern Territory of Australia and particularly for the
people of East Timor, who need those revenues.

The Council has made a considerable investment
to bring this process to the point where we are today.
There were ups and downs, frustrations and
disappointments, but that is very natural in such a
complex process, particularly when we bear in mind
where we were in September 1999. Looking at where
we are today, we see that dramatic progress has been
made in every sector. Much more remains to be done.
For progress to continue, as President Gusmao has
stated, there has to be a positive, continuing signal on
the part of the international community of its
engagement with East Timor.

There are two pillars of the whole United Nations
mission in East Timor. First, the security pillar. That is
to say that as much as we understand that East Timor is
not, unfortunately, the only conflict in the world
demanding the Council's attention, it is an area where
the Council has made serious investments in resources
and time and where there is a real promise of success,
for the good name of the international community, for
each of you and, certainly more importantly, for the
people of East Timor. Therefore we ask you to continue
to insure that whatever consideration you will give in
terms of downsizing the peacekeeping force in East
Timor, it must also be conditioned by developments on
the security front.

We are conscious that we must intensify,
obviously, the process of Timorization and capacity-
building so that independence will take place, as we
have promised, in the first three months of next year.
So far, so good. The calendar can be implemented as
promised.

I turn to the subject of our own responsibilities,
what the East Timorese themselves will do, together
with the United Nations, to ensure internal peace in
East Timor. In terms of external security and other
aspects of security, including internal, we rely on the
peacekeeping force, the civilian police and the
institutions of law and order that have been created.
But there is also the process of reconciliation. That is
our responsibility, and we can assure the Council that
we are continuing to work hard on this front with those
who in the past favoured autonomy within Indonesia.
We have stated to them that voting for autonomy,
holding those views, does not constitute a crime. Any
East Timorese can say, "I want East Timor to be part of
Tasmania", or "East Timor should be part of Alaska." It
is their right, as long as no crime, no violence, is
perpetrated to achieve those goals. This is the message
we have conveyed to the pro-autonomy elements:
reconciliation, yes, but we cannot overlook crime and
disregard justice.

In this regard, the Timorese side will continue to
work with out brothers and sisters from the other side
in continuing the process of reconciliation. A week
from now a large group of pro-autonomy elements will
be travelling to Timor for a meeting with us. This will
be the fifth, sixth or seventh meeting we have had in
different locations and at different levels.

But the issue ofjustice remains a responsibility of
the international community. In this regard, I will
conclude by saying that the Serious Crimes Unit of the
Untied Nations in East Timor must be supported and
strengthened so that it can continue the extraordinary
work that it has already begun. At the same time, the
Indonesian authorities must not be allowed to forget
the pledges they have made, to us to and to the
members of the Council, that the perpetrators of war
crimes and crimes against humanity in East Timor will
be brought to trial.

