Mr. Markram: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013), on the elimination of the
chemical weapons programme of the Syrian Arab
Republic. The High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, is away on official
travel. I am honoured to be able to address the Council
in her stead.

Before providing the Council with the latest
information on the status of the implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013), I would first like to recall
the tragic anniversary today of the use of chemical
weapons - specifically the nerve agent sarin- in Khan
Shaykhun. The Director-General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
referred to this attack as an atrocity. The Secretary-
General, in speaking of the same, stated that there can
be no impunity for such abhorrent acts. Today seems an
especially fitting date to reiterate and underscore those
views, as well as to remember the victims of the attack.

As per established practice, I met with
representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic in advance
of these consultations. The Office for Disarmament
Affairs has also continued its regular contact with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
In view of the fact that, just over two weeks ago, the
Director-General briefed the Council on developments
related to the OPCW's work on the elimination of Syria's
chemical weapons programme, my own intervention
today will be brief.

Efforts have continued towards the destruction
of the two remaining chemical weapons production
facilities by the Syrian Arab Republic. The destruction
of these facilities, which will be verified by the
OPCW, is expected to be completed within two to
three months from the start of destruction. The long-
awaited and verified destruction of these two facilities
is an essential step towards the full implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013).

On the outstanding issues related to Syria's
declaration, discussions between the OPCW Technical
Secretariat and the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic are continuing. However, these discussions
have not permitted the resolution of any of those
remaining issues. The OPCW Technical Secretariat
continues to be unable to confirm the completeness and
accuracy of Syria's declaration. The Secretary-General
has repeatedly urged cooperation by the Government
of Syria with the OPCW. Resolving these outstanding
issues will permit shared confidence in Syria's
declaration within the international community.

The OPCW Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic is continuing its work. An Mission team
is currently in Damascus, looking into allegations of
the use of chemical weapons that were brought to the
attention of the Director-General by the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic. I understand that the next
report of the Fact-finding Mission will be submitted
when it considers that it has sufficient information and
is in a position to draw a conclusion.

However, and as we are all aware, conclusions of
the Fact-finding Mission do not entail attribution of
responsibility in those cases where the use of chemical
weapons is determined. The OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) was created
for that purpose, but regrettably its mandate was not
renewed. While allegations of the use of chemical
weapons have not stopped, the consideration of a
mechanism for accountability has apparently slowed, if
not come to a standstill.

The persistent allegations of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria underscore the need to identify
solutions and to reach agreement on an appropriate
accountability mechanism. The Secretary-General and
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs have
repeatedly underlined the need to avoid impunity and
to ensure that those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons are identified and held responsible. Let me take
the Organizationpportunity to reiterate that conviction
once again. Unity in the Security Council - unity of
the kind that gave rise to resolution 2118 (2013), to the
OPCW-United Nations joint mission and to the JIM
itself - provides the best foundation for success. The
Office for Disarmament Affairs stands ready to assist.

