Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this timely meeting and for the opportunity
to take part in it.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
earlier today by the observer of the European Union.

We welcome the adoption of a strong presidential
statement (S/PRST/2014/23) on counter-terrorism as
another step towards vigorous and continued action
within a framework for international cooperation and
response.

It is a fact that international terrorism has proliferated
with alarming speed. Several terrorist groups - the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS), the Al-Nusra
Front and Boko Haram - continue to operate, reinforce
and expand. Their extremist agenda is not new, but their
violent propaganda and ideology and their unparalleled,
ruthless tactics have adapted to modern times. Their
unspeakable crimes have shocked the world with their
barbarity and defied human understanding.

The issue of foreign terrorist fighters has become
a central topic in organizing the response to the ISIS
expansion strategy. Determined, well-organized,
tech-savvy fanatics continue, to the world's dismay, to
appeal to ever-younger people across the world. It has
been amply stressed and loudly repeated - ISIS is in no
way representative of the more than 1 billion Muslims
in the world, nor does it represent the mainstream
teachings ofIslam. ISIS is more a sect than the State it
pretends to be. Its religious narrative exploits ignorance
first, but also frustration with the reality and a lost
sense of future for individuals. They take pride in being
ruthless killers, war-crime perpetrators and promoters
of the most obscurantist model of society and not, as
their propaganda seeks to indicate, the United Nations
of Islam.
We applaud the resolute action taken by the United
States, European allies and other States, which, as we
have noticed, is producing encouraging results. ISIS
knows by now that their free walk in both Syria and
Iraq has come to a serious stop. This is important
momentum, which needs to be fully seized and
reinforced through strengthened measures. We know
that the fight to eradicate ISIS will take time, but ISIS
and all fanatics know that that time has begun and has
accelerated.

Since the very beginning of the crisis, Albania has
been part of the international coalition to fight and
eradicate ISIS, and we remain as committed as ever.
We have supported the new Iraqi Government in its
fight against terrorism, and we remain committed to
continuing to provide both military and humanitarian
assistance. We have already contributed in the fight
against ISIS, donating a sizable quantity of weapons
and ammunition, and will continue our support in the
future.

Albania is among the first countries in the region
to have adopted tailored legal measures imposing stiff
criminal penalties for participation, and incitement
to participate, in foreign conflicts and for promoting,
organizing and financing foreign fighters. We have
strengthened regional cooperation, including exchanges
of information on the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
We are cooperating very closely with our United States
and European allies in identifying foreign terrorist
fighters, determining the best response in every case
and prosecuting those who return from the conflict
area.

There is no doubt that terrorism and violent
extremism, including ISIS in particular, will be
defeated only through a combination of various
measures. The military defeat of ISIS remains the
most important immediate objective, and we think that
everything should be done in that respect. But that is
only one side of the coin. A much closer cooperation
among States - including primarily through early
warning, information-sharing, a proper implementation
of the United Nations counter-terrorism measures at
the country level and sharing of global terrorism best
practices - is needed more than ever. Successfully
countering the extremist ideology at the national level
is the most difficult part of this endeavour, and it is
a long-term objective. Education, communication and
community work remain key.

Finally, let us not forget that the world has had
success and gathered extensive experience in degrading
Al-Qaida with careful listing, disrupting financing
and targeted sanctions. That record should be further
strengthened and updated for the new requirements.

