Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting and this open debate. I also wish to
thank the Ambassador of Burundi for the comprehensive
information he provided for us this morning.

We commend the Secretary-General's efforts in
coordination with countries in the region to revive the
Arusha peace process. The situation in Burundi remains a
matter of great concern, as it poses a major threat to peace
and stability in the Great Lakes region.

The report presented a few days ago by the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, provides a clear picture of a tragic
humanitarian situation. A lasting solution to the crisis in
Burundi can be found only through political and diplomatic
means. We reaffirm our support for the efforts of African
leaders to achieve a negotiated solution to this conflict.

The Arusha peace process has been a relevant tool to
promote political dialogue in Burundi and should continue
to receive strong support from the United Nations and the
international community. We regret that the late Mediator
of the Arusha process, Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, can no
longer make his valuable contribution to the peace talks,
and we look forward to the timely appointment of his
successor. Peace in the Great Lakes region will be the best
tribute to his inspiring struggle for justice and development
in Africa.

We deplore the acts of violence committed against
humanitarian personnel in Burundi and the murder of two
United Nations aid personnel last October. In the light of
the recent upsurge of violence, the United Nations must
stand ready to react to a further deterioration of the
humanitarian situation. All parties concerned must refrain
from all acts of violence and commit themselves without
delay to a broad-based political dialogue with a View to
establishing conditions conducive to national reconciliation,
democracy and the rule of law. For its part, the
international community should be prepared to provide
support to the peace process and assistance to the
subsequent rehabilitation of the country.

I wish to recall that in March 1996, by adopting
resolution 1049 (1996), the Security Council requested the
Secretary-General to intensify the preparations for
convening a regional conference for peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region in order to address
the issues of political and economic stability, as well as
peace and security in that region. Unfortunately, as the
security situation in the region deteriorated the necessary
consultations for convening such a conference could not
be undertaken.

We continue to support this proposal, on the
understanding that such a conference, convened under the
auspices of the United Nations and the Organization of
Africa Unity, would contribute to the search for
comprehensive solutions to problems affecting the entire
region - such as poverty, economic stagnation, arms
trafficking, the flow of refugees and the persistence of
violence.

We look forward to the report of the visit by Under-
Secretary-General Prendergast to the countries in the
region. We hope that his report will provide the basis for
a greater involvement of the United Nations in Burundi.

