Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Allow me to join other
delegations in expressing our congratulations to the
United Kingdom on its assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of August. I also wish to
express my delegation's sincere appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to convene this
important debate on the maintenance of international
peace and security. We also welcome the resolution that
has been adopted unanimously by the Council on this
subject (resolution 2171 (2014)).

My delegation wishes to align itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries. Similarly, my delegation
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of the Republic of Zimbabwe on behalf
of the Southern African Development Community.

This debate could not have come at a better time, as
it takes place against the backdrop of violent conflict and
bloodshed in many parts of the world, from the Middle
East to Eastern Europe and Africa. We are witnessing
increasing trends of regional instability and insecurity,
which are posing serious threats to international peace
and security. The hard reality of such circumstances is
that no one country is ever truly immune from the direct
or spillover effects of conflict. It is therefore an absolute
imperative that the international community act in
unison and make concerted efforts to comprehensively
address those threats in order to create a world that
is safer, secure and prosperous for the benefit of both
present and future generations of humankind.

It is a fact that the Security Council has a vital role
to play in the maintenance of international peace and
security, as part of its responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations, specifically under Article 24.
However, it is also a fact that the effectiveness of that
role can be legitimately questioned at times when the
Council fails to act swiftly or decisively. Thousands
of innocent lives continue to be lost and humanitarian
crises reach catastrophic proportions, and the
fundamental United Nations objective of safeguarding
humankind is compromised by the selfish national
interests of some Member States. We therefore urge
the Council to definitively take on its responsibilities
and intensify its efforts to fight the just battle. It should
also ensure that commitments undertaken to respond to
international security crises are met without conditions,
in order to lessen the human cost.

Despite the Security Council's mandated
responsibilities, the burden of responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security does
not lie solely with it. Each region and each nation State
and its citizens has an important role to play in that
regard. It is our duty to shield our citizenry from all
forms of conflict that deprive them of their basic human
rights and livelihoods. It is also our responsibility to
protect them from crimes against humanity, genocide,
war crimes and crimes ofaggression. In that connection,
Botswana remains steadfast in its commitment to the
principles of democracy, accountable and inclusive
governance, the rule of law and the promotion and
protection of human rights for all. We continue to
strongly support action against impunity as well as the
strengthening of institutions of accountability at the
national and international levels.

The uncontrolled movement of small arms and
light weapons within and across borders also remains
a cause for our collective concern. Their presence,
illegal transfer and continued use create tensions in
communities, often resulting in the eruption of conflict
in one form or another. The highly destabilizing effect
of such weapons therefore impels us, as responsible
members of the international community, to exercise
great vigilance in controlling their stockpiles and
committing ourselves to ending their illegal trade.
One of the greatest threats to international peace
and security is the continued use and indiscriminate
testing by some countries of nuclear weapons. Until such
time as those weapons have been completely destroyed,
humankind's very existence remains in peril. Needless
to say, guaranteeing the preservation of our planet and
the human race compels responsible action not only on
the part of those who possess nuclear weapons but by
all who desire a stable, peaceful and secure world.

Let me conclude by reaffirming Botswana's
commitment to playing its part and to giving unwavering
support to the international community's efforts to
promote and protect international peace and security.

