Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Mr. Fernandez Amunategui for his briefing.
Since the powerful earthquake of January 2010, with
the support and assistance of the international
community, Haiti has resolutely undertaken post-
disaster reconstruction and strengthened national
security and institution-building with positive progress.

Last May, the swearing-in of President Martelly
marked a turning point. China wishes to register its
appreciation and to welcome him. We also wish to
thank the Organization of American States for the
positive role that it has played in that regard. At
present, Haiti is still faced with daunting challenges in
areas such as sustained stability and post-disaster
reconstruction. I wish to underscore the following.

First, continuing to advance the political process
to form a new Government as soon as possible is one
of Haiti's priorities. We hope that the parties will seize
the opportunity, strengthen unity, enhance mutual trust,
resolve disputes through consultations and consolidate
the hard-won gains.

The second point is supporting its post-disaster
reconstruction in response to the cholera epidemic. To
date, the pace of recovery and rebuilding in Haiti
remains slow. The international community needs to
keep its attention on Haiti, fulfil its contribution
commitments and seek to provide constructive support
and to create a favourable environment. International
assistance and training projects need to be tailored to
local conditions and real needs, taking the views of the
Haitian side into full account. We welcome the
Secretary-General's initiative to set up a senior-level
integrated task force to study the findings and
recommendations of the independent panel of experts
on the cholera outbreak in Haiti. We hope that
appropriate recommendations can be implemented as
soon as possible.

The third element is supporting the work of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). China welcomes the contribution of
MINUSTAH in helping Haiti to maintain security and
stability. China hopes that, under the leadership of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Fernandez Amunategui, MUNUSTAH will actively
implement its Security Council mandate and stay
focused on helping Haiti to maintain security and
stability, advance its political process and play a dual
role in strengthening the security sector and capacity-
building.

