I would like to thank Special Envoy Huang Xia for his briefing, which highlighted the numerous interconnected challenges in the region: conflicts with armed groups, human rights violations and abuses, health epidemics and socioeconomic difficulties. Even under normal circumstances, addressing their root causes would require a coordinated, comprehensive approach. As noted in yesterday's Council discussion on conflict and hunger, the far-reaching spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) can act as a risk multiplier in the region and actions must be taken to ensure that humanitarian actors are coordinated, ready and able to scale-up response efforts. In that connection, it must be noted that the region is already combating several epidemics, including malaria, Ebola and measles. Correspondingly, Governments and other stakeholders should prioritize the pandemic response and avoid impediments to the delivery of humanitarian assistance. Estonia remains concerned about restrictions on basic political freedoms and human rights in several parts of the region. In anticipation of several upcoming elections this year, we call upon all stakeholders to ensure that the elections remain peaceful, free and credible. Estonia condemns the violence perpetrated by armed groups in the region, in particular by the Allied Democratic Forces, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where the conflict is compounded by high numbers of grave human rights violations and abuses. During the last year alone, more than | million people were displaced from their homes due to conflicts in the Great Lakes region. It is also very worrying to see the increase in conflict-related sexual violence and in the number of serious violations of children's rights. Perpetrators of such crimes must be held accountable in order to fight a culture of impunity that, if left unchecked, will only breed more violence. Rapid and robust implementation of the Nairobi Declaration on Justice and Good Governance would greatly assist those efforts. Estonia commends the positive steps taken by countries and stakeholders of the region to alleviate tensions and strengthen relations, and welcomes further efforts in that direction under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. We also underline the importance of initiatives to promote the meaningful participation of women in political and electoral processes and to advance the women and peace and security agenda in the Great Lakes region. Given the current circumstances, Estonia reiterates the call of the Secretary- General for all to commit to a humanitarian ceasefire and to resolve their differences peacefully.
