Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): What began three months
ago as a political protest is increasingly taking on a
dimension that today can bestbe described as precarious.
We call on all concerned to abide by the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations, particularly Article
2, which calls on all States Members of the United
Nations to settle their disputes by peaceful means and
to refrain from the use of force against the territorial
integrity of any State.

The current situation in Ukraine, especially
in Crimea, represents a clear and potent threat to
international peace and security, and we would like to
see a rapid de-escalation of tension and hostile rhetoric.
The concerned parties must embrace dialogue as ameans
of resolving the crisis and facilitate an expeditious
return to normalcy in Ukraine. The prerequisite for that
is mediation, as other speakers before me have pointed
out. We therefore call on the international community
and particularly those who can exert a constructive
influence over the concerned parties to intensify efforts
towards mediation in the crisis. We firmly believe that
the use of preventive diplomacy tools at such a time
represents the most expedient and effective option for
bringing about a peaceful resolution.

We want to reiterate our call on all concerned to abide
by the provisions of the 1994 Budapest Memorandum on
Security Assurances, which guarantees the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. We note that the
provisions of the Memorandum call for the signatories
to consult when a situation arises that raises questions
concerning the commitments they undertook in the
document. That clause is even more relevant now and
indeed represents an opportunity to peacefully resolve
the current crisis.

We are encouraged by indications that the
Government of Ukraine is taking great strides to
ensure greater political inclusiveness in the governance
of the country. That, we believe, is a prudent way of
addressing one of the underlying causes of the dispute
and of ensuring an early return to peace and stability.

The call by the Secretary-General for cool heads
to prevail remains relevant under the circumstances,
and we urge all concerned to refrain from provocative
action that could precipitate now and in the future
unnecessary human suffering.

