Mr. Du Xiacong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes Mr. Nqakula's visit to
Headquarters. We would also like to thank him for his
briefing.

China notes that in recent years, under President
Mbeki, the Government of South Africa has held high
the banner of African recovery, calling for the unity
and strengthening of the continent and for the
resolution of its difficulties and problems, and
facilitating the resolution of many hot-spot issues,
including the situation in Burundi. That Government
has played an important role and has made important
contributions, winning praise from all sides.

Especially since the beginning of this year, South
Africa, as a member of the Security Council, has called
upon the international community to pay attention to
hot-spot issues in Africa and to facilitate cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union, and
has called for strengthened cooperation between the
two organizations. The delegation of South Africa,
under the leadership of Ambassadors Kumalo and
Sangqu, has participated actively in the consideration
of issues concerning the African continent. They have
spoken out, contributed and done a great deal of work
towards the resolution of those issues. The Chinese
delegation is deeply impressed.

China firmly supports the peacebuilding process
in Burundi. We appreciate that, under the leadership of
the Government, reconstruction efforts are making
progress. We have also noted that many political,
economic and security challenges remain. The progress
made thus far in the Burundi peace process has not
been completely satisfactory. We are concerned by that
fact, especially since the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement signed by the Government and the Forces
nationales de liberation (FNL) has not been fully
implemented. That is also cause for concern. We
believe that all sides should fully implement the
Agreement. We call on all sides to resolve their
differences and take steps towards the true
implementation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement, bearing in mind the overall interests of the
country.
China appreciates the work accomplished by the
Facilitator. We support the untiring efforts of the
regional partners. We call on the Government of
Burundi and the FNL to fully cooperate in
implementing the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement. China also calls upon the international
community to provide assistance to the Facilitator and
his team and to exert the necessary influence to
promote progress in the implementation of the
Agreement.

In conclusion, China thanks Mr. Nqakula for his
effective work as Facilitator, and we wish him every
success in his future work.

