Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I wish you and your friendly delegation every success. As Ambassador Pierce prepares to leave us, I would like to congratulate her on her new appointment. We thank her and appreciate all her work and cooperation and wish her every success in her new post. The Houthi militias continue to block United Nations peace efforts, including by refusing to honour their obligations under the Stockholm Agreement, which was sponsored by the Organization. The Government of Yemen signed the Stockholm Agreement in good faith with a view to ending the suffering of the Yemeni people and as part of the confidence-building measures undertaken to find a comprehensive political solution to the crisis in Yemen. In addition, the recent military escalation on several fronts, in particular the military operations in Al-Jawf, which have led to the displacement of civilians, are a serious indication that the Houthi militias were never serious about achieving peace and have, in the five years since they started this futile war, been indifferent to the suffering of the Yemeni people.The Houthi militias repeatedly bomb civilians in Ma'rib, Al-Jawf, Nihm, Taiz, areas on the west coast, Al-Dhale'e and Al-Bayda. For more thana year, they have targeted hospitals and refugee camps and escalated the situation while refusing to implement the Al-Hudaydah Agreement. They restrict the movement of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement, undermine the work of the Head and members of the Redeployment Coordination Committee and target joint observation posts. Yesterday, a Government officer, Colonel Muhammad Sharaf Al-Sulaihi, was targeted as he was performing his duties at one of the observation posts in Al-Hudaydah. He remains in very critical condition. As a result, the Government of Yemen has suspended the participation of the Government team in the Redeployment Coordination Committee. We hold the Houthi militias responsible for what has happened. Their acts are proof that those militias will not heed the voice of reason and choose peace. The Government of Yemen calls upon the Security Council and the international community to shoulder their responsibility and compel the Houthi militias to implement the agreements concluded, cease the aggressive military operations that have led to increased humanitarian suffering in all its manifestations, and end the killing, destruction, blockades and gross violations undertaken in total disregard for the efforts of the United Nations, the Security Council and the international community. Nopolitical negotiation can succeed when previously brokered peace agreements are not implemented. Nor can one succeed while military escalation and economic warfare are ongoing, while coercive measures are taken against humanitarian workers or when humanitarian aid is looted and diverted from those in dire need. The Yemeni people's desired goal is to achieve lasting peace in Yemen on the basis of agreed terms of reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcome of the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and all relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015). Any attempt to circumvent these terms of reference or to overlook the root causes of the crisis will serve only to prolong the conflict and crush the hopes of Yemenis for the building of a new federal Yemen, based on the values of justice, equality and the rule of law, and the fair distribution of power and wealth, while correcting all the wrongs of the past. The Government of Yemen underlines its rejection and condemnation of Iranian interference in Yemeni affairs. Iran continues to supply the Houthi militias with military support and weapons, encouraging them to block and undermine United Nations efforts aimed at ending the war, violence and terrorism. Iran's actions target the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, but they also constitute a serious threat to the countries of the region and to international and regional security. The international community and the Security Council should pressure Iran to end its interference in Yemen's affairs. Following instructions from His Excellency Mr. Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, the President of the Republic, the Government of Yemen is exerting tremendous effort to implement the Riyadh agreement, which benefits the State, the Yemeni people and all political actors. It is also an important step towards unifying under one banner all forces and efforts within the State to end the coup and abort the Iranian-Houthi project in Yemen and the region. We value the efforts of our brothers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia as sponsors of the Riyadh agreement aimed at guaranteeing the agreement's implementation. The Government of Yemen is sparing no effort to try to end the suffering of the Yemeni people by implementing incremental plans at several levels, including revitalizing State institutions, improving tax and customs revenue collection, resuming oil exports - which had ceased for a period of more than four years - as well as reactivating our financial, economic, service and control sectors. These efforts have helped us make certain strides in recovery. The decision to block the circulation of new bank notes in the national currency is a continuation of the economic war that has targeted citizens' livelihoods and undermined the national economy by creating a vast market for hard-currency speculation and exacerbating the humanitarian crisis. This irresponsible decision has deprived more than 120,000 employees and retirees in militia-controlled areas of their salaries, since payments could not be transferred to them. The Yemeni Government has adopted various financial and economic policies with a view to countering the impact of that decision, but we need the support of our brothers and sisters within the international community, without whose continuous assistance and help to reform - especially in the absence of a vibrant national economy - the situation could deteriorate once again. The Houthi militias have been standing in the way of humanitarian work, looting and imposing levies on relief aid. Their actions constitute a dangerous precedent that violates all principles of humanitarian work and aid and threatens to postpone the delivery of assistance needed by millions of Yemenis. The militias continue their acts of killing by targeting residential areas and places of worship. They also engage children in fighting their absurd war and arrest and sexually assault women. This phenomenon poses a serious threat to the Yemeni society and violates international law and accepted social norms. The Yemeni Government condemns the death sentences issued by the Houthi militias against 35 members of the House of Representatives and the confiscation of their real estate and other assets in Yemen and abroad. Such rulings are null and void. It is not the first time that the militias have issued such rulings against political opponents and others, with a view to financing their war effort. We call on the Council and the international community to condemn such practices and put pressure on the militias to revoke the sentences. Finally, we have come before the Council many times to speak about the issue of the FSO SAFER oil tanker, moored just outside the port of Ras Isa, which is under the control of the Houthi militias. We have called for pressuring the militias to allow a United Nations technical team to gain access to the tanker and provide maintenance so as to avoid the environmental disaster that would result if more than a million barrels of crude oil leak into the Red Sea. Yesterday, the Permanent Representatives of several Red Sea coastal States addressed a letter to the President of the Security Council and the Secretary-General of the United Nations indicating the potential risks of such an environmental disaster.
