Mr. Malmierca Diaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to speak at this meeting on behalf of
the members of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and
Libya on your impressive work as President of the
Council for the month of January.

The members of the Non-Aligned Movement
condemn the recent attacks by Israel, the occupying
Power, against the Palestinian civilian population in
the Gaza Strip, which has resulted in the death of
19 Palestinians and the serious wounding of 50 others,
as well as in widespread destruction of civilian
property and farmlands. The situation is of grave
concern to the NAM, because Israel's illegal actions
have caused the death of more than 150 Palestinian
civilians, including children and women, during the
past month and half.

This violent military escalation by Israel
constitutes a grave breach of international law,
including international humanitarian and human rights
law. It fuels the cycle of violence and threatens
08-21448

international peace and security as well as the fragile
peace process between the two sides. Moreover, such
actions exacerbate the dire humanitarian situation in
the Gaza Strip, where the civilian population continues
to be collectively punished under a crippling
occupation.

Israel, the occupying Power, has intensified its
closure of the occupied Palestinian territories by
hermetically sealing all border crossings, preventing
even the delivery of food supplies to the population
since Friday, 18 January 2008. At the same time, Israel
has persisted with the reduction of fuel supplies to the
Gaza Strip, completely cutting off fuel to the main
power plant on Sunday, 20 January 2008.

Such illegal measures of collective punishment
threaten to exacerbate the humanitarian crisis and are
hastening the deterioration of the situation on the
ground in all its aspects. The suspension of fuel
supplies has affected the provision of electricity to the
civilian population.

Israel should be called upon to lift the closures
and open the crossings to permit access, at the very
minimum, for necessary food and medical supplies.
Immediate action must be taken to ensure the entry of
essential supplies and the restoration of fuel to the
Gaza Strip.

The Non-Aligned Movement calls upon the
international community, especially the Security
Council, to shoulder its responsibilities and to urge
Israel, the occupying Power, to cease its violations
immediately and to comply with its obligations under
international law and relevant United Nations
resolutions as the occupying Power in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.

The Non-Aligned Movement expresses its
solidarity with the Palestinian people during this
critical period and reaffirms its long-standing positions
of principle. It calls, inter alia, for an end to the Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian territory and other Arab
lands occupied since 1967 and the establishment of a
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital.

