Mr. Covic' (Yugoslavia) (spoke in Serbian; English interpretation provided by the delegation): We
would like to extend our appreciation for the
understanding the two of us received. However, it
sometimes seems as if we were talking about two
different Kosovos.

I would like to comment on some of the
questions. We are fully in favour of cooperation with
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), but we want it to be sincere
cooperation based on mutual respect and not on the
optics of the past, when we had an undemocratic
regime in Belgrade. The Council will agree, I hope,
that we will continue to live in the area. We will have
to take responsibility for that. With due respect for Mr.
Steiner, and all the support we will give him, we have
to emphasize that he will finish his mission and leave,
while we will stay to share the destiny of the nations in
the region. We are truly grateful for all the support and
effort of the international community to solve the crisis
in the region.

With respect to the integration of Kosovo and
Metohija, there will be no integration without respect
for fundamental human rights, and the fundamental
human right is the right to return home. There can be
no freedom of movement without security and without
addressing the problem of crime.

In this part of the world, the connection between
crime and politics is deeply rooted. I fully concur with
Mr. Steiner's invitation to the members of the Council
to visit Kosovo, and I would greatly appreciate it if at
that time we could together visit Serbian enclaves,
spending not just an afternoon or a couple of hours
there. I suggest that we spend the night there and spend
lots of time with them to see how they live in those
enclaves. I think that would put us in a better position
to address their concerns.

We are fully prepared to support the integration
process. However, with regard to privatization, we
know who owes whom and we know that the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia has the responsibility of paying
pensions to the retirees. However, we also know that
we have had a lot of investment made by different
funds and we know how much those companies in
Kosovo owe to international organizations. The overall
debt totals about $1.5 billion. We in Belgrade have to
pay all the instalments at a time when the
commercialization is being carried out in Kosovo. I
think that this is a problem, and I hope that sometime
next week we will be able to find a joint approach on
this issue.

We support the position of Singapore that at a
certain time benchmarks should be used for the
assessment of the success of UNMIK and KFOR on the
ground. I am very happy to hear about the concept of
benchmarks. I regret that Mr. Steiner and I did not have
the opportunity to discuss this issue earlier. Some
people would say that Belgrade and Pristina did not
have a chance to discuss the issue earlier.

I regret that Mr. Steiner and I did not have the
opportunity to discuss this issue earlier. Some would
say that Belgrade and Pristina did not have a chance to
discuss this issue earlier either.

We now have certain benchmarks, and we believe
that those relating to regional harmonization must be
interconnected. I am glad that we have these
benchmarks, as well as agencies that will work to
achieve them and a time-frame for their use. I believe
that we will be able to achieve these goals, and we are
genuinely interested in being fully included in the
further detailed development of these benchmarks. We
hope that they will not prejudge the final status of
Kosovo. I was very pleased to hear Mr. Steiner
speaking about this and saying that he felt that this was
not the time to talk about the future status of Kosovo.

We support all of the positive statements made by
certain members of the Kosovo Government, and we
hope that those statements will bear fruit. In that
regard, we hope also that we will be able to facilitate
the return to Kosovo of a substantive number of those
Serbs that have been internally displaced.

In regard to Kosovo-Mitrovica, we do not support
any violence or conflict. We do not support any
provocation, poor command or any statements made by
police commanders who say that they have to fight
against "Serbian animals". I do not think that anything
can be solved in south-eastern Europe through the use
of force.

Let me assure the Council that if the only
problem in Kosovo had been Kosovska Mitrovica, we
would have been able to resolve it easily. We are fully
committed to this, and we have presented our approach
to the resolution of the situation in Kosovska
Mitrovica. We are not speaking of any horizontal
solution, division or partition. The issue here is that we
have to help ethnic communities to live normally and
exercise their rights.

Believe me: it will be very difficult to resolve the
issue of Kosovska Mitrovica if we do not find a way to
decentralize the Government in Kosovo and Metohija
and if we do not find a way to establish new local
institutions of self-government - one of them in the
north of Kosovska Mitrovica.

I am sure that if we cannot create normal living
conditions in Kosovska Mitrovica, we will have no
parallel institutions whatsoever. This is not the only
threat, however, because another problem is that the
people who live there have no confidence in us either.
That is a fact.

We are transferring Albanian prisoners from
detention facilities in Serbia proper to Kosovo and
Metohija. At our last meeting, I announced that I would
recommend that Serbian Return Coalition (Povratak)
accept Mr. Steiner's proposal to join the Government.
This has been done.

Regarding the transfer of Serbian detainees from
facilities in Kosovo and Metohija, I am sorry to note
that we have different approaches. Out of 17 detainees,
seven declared their desire to be transferred to prisons
in Serbia proper. Three were released because they had
served their time, one will be released on 17 May, and
five do not wish to be transferred from Kosovo and
Metohija to Serbia proper. The other is an Albanian
who wanted to stay in prison in Serbia proper. All of
them are common criminals.

However, what we have not mentioned today is
the fact that we are holding nine Serbs in prison in
Kosovo and Metohija. In these cases, the Supreme
Court of Kosovo overruled the first-instance decisions.
In all of the cases, the investigating judges and public
prosecutors were Albanians, and we hope that these
Serb detainees will also be transferred as soon as
possible.

It is not only UNMIK that needs to succeed in its
mission. Belgrade must also succeed, and therefore we
must jointly work on all of these issues. I must state
my concern about the situation in Kosovo. Any
instability, any hasty moves concerning final-status
issues could have a very negative impact and destroy
the democratic authorities in Belgrade.

I think that confidence-building measures are
essential in this process and that the benchmarks that
are being created must also address confidence-
building measures between different ethnic
communities. We cannot be forever taking vengeance
against each other.

We regret that fact that Polish policemen were
injured. I personally have had contact with senior
Polish politicians, and on the day when the Polish
Prime Minister visited Kosovo, I was there with the
Polish Ambassador. Although it had originally been
planned that the Polish Prime Minister and I would
meet, that did not happen. I hope that UNMIK police
will improve their command, and we are there to render
our support in that regard.

Concerning the return of internally displaced
persons, one need only look at our returns programme,
which has largely been coordinated with the UNMIK
Office of Returns and Communities. I hope that we will
be able to make some progress. We need funds, and the
budgets of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and of
the Republic of Serbia have already earmarked and set
aside certain funds. To that end, I would ask the
Council kindly for its support and assistance, so that
we can start this process and make progress as soon as
possible.

We believe that the Albanian detainees who were
released based on the files that we transferred to the
UNMIK judiciary must remain in custody. The
UNMIK judiciary decided that they should remain in
custody, and this should definitely be the case because
international legality reaffirmed the original judgment.
We hope that the same principles will be applied to the
Mazreku brothers.

With regard to the war crimes, I look forward to
progress being made in Kosovo with respect to
cooperation with the Hague Tribunal. We believe that
existing and potential indictees and their files will not
be used to discipline some Albanian leaders, to try to
blackmail them into engaging in constructive
cooperation in Kosovo.

We should like to express our sincere
appreciation for all the support and understanding
shown by the Security Council. We are fully committed
to the further improvement of living conditions in
Kosovo. However, we appeal to the Council to bear in
mind that resolution 1244 (1999) is still in force and
that Kosovo and Metohija is still a part of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republic of Serbia.

We want to be good hosts and to receive
constructive input in the process of finding a solution
to the problems in Kosovo. However, I am afraid that
we will not be able to share in the responsibility if we
are not treated as an equal partner in this cooperative
effort. I regret that when Mr. Steiner spoke of three
allies, he failed to mention Belgrade as a fourth ally.
However, I hope and believe that one day, Belgrade
will come to be that fourth ally in finding a solution to
the problems in Kosovo.

