Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Let me thank
China, Angola and Senegal for proposing this debate,
as well as Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing.

Piracy and armed robbery at sea are serious crimes.
They involve not only the theft of private property,
but also a disrespect of many fundamental rights and
obligations, since in some cases deaths, kidnapping
and the demand for ransom are present. In the Gulf
of Guinea, this constitutes a challenge that needs to
be addressed by the countries in the region with the
support of the international community. In order to face
this challenge, we need to understand the situation in
the Gulf of Guinea by analysing recent statistics, as
well as the specific characteristics of piracy and armed
robbery in the area.

According to the International Maritime
Organization, there has been a decrease in the number
of incidents of piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea over the past years. There were 45 and 54
incidents in 2014 and 2013, compared to 64 and 61 in
2012 and 2011. In 2015, the International Maritime
Bureau (IMB) of the International Chamber of
Commerce (ICC), a non-profit organization established
to act as a focal point in the fight against all types of
maritime crimes, registered 31 actual or attempted
attacks in the area.

It is also important to underline that other regions
recorded significantly more incidents in the same
period. The ICC-IMB, for instance, recorded, in 2015,
147 cases ofthis kind in South-East Asia. In the Horn of
Africa, during the peak of their activity in 2011, Somali
pirates attacked 286 ships and hijacked 33 of them.
There are also significant differences in the nature of
incidents when we compare piracy and armed robbery
in the Horn of Africa and in the Gulf of Guinea.
Somali pirates were usually involved in kidnapping
and demand for ransom. Their activities took place
mostly in international waters and are therefore legally
considered piracy, according to article 101 of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which
defines piracy as occurring "on the high seas" or "in a
place outside the jurisdiction of any State".

The majority of the incidents in the Gulf of Guinea,
on the other hand, were aimed at cargo robbery,
especially oil, and mostly took place in territorial
waters or in port areas, therefore are considered armed
robbery, according to international law. Accordingly,
problems regarding piracy and armed robbery on the
West and East coasts of the African continent are
distinct and therefore require different solutions.

The Security Council adopted resolutions 2018
(2011) and 2039 (2012) on piracy and armed robbery
in the Gulf of Guinea. In 2013, the Yaounde Summit
of Heads of State and Government on Maritime
Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea adopted a
Declaration, a memorandum of understanding between
the Economic Community of West African States,
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Gulf of Guinea Commission, and the Code of
Conduct Concerning the Repression of Piracy, Armed
Robbery Against Ships, and Illicit Maritime Activity in
West and Central Africa. It also decided on the creation
of the Interregional Coordination Centre, which was
opened in 2015.

Brazil believes that the countries in the region should
play the leading role in addressing the issue of piracy
and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea. Any regional
strategy in this direction should be comprehensive and
take into consideration not only security questions, but
also the strengthening of institutions and the sustainable
development of the region.

The international community should support
the region with cooperation activities that respect
national ownership. This is what my country has been
trying to do. Brazil has signed military cooperation
agreements with nine countries on the west coast of
Africa - Namibia, Cabo Verde, South Africa, Guinea-
Bissau, Sao Tome and Principe, Nigeria, Senegal,
Angola and Equatorial Guinea. A naval mission in
Namibia has been maintained by Brazil since 1994 and
has so far helped to train more than 2,000 members of
the Namibian navy. New missions have recently been
opened in Cabo Verde and in Sao Tome and Principe.
Officers and other members of the armed forces from
the region have studied at Brazilian military academies.

The cooperation offered by Brazil is concentrated
in capacity-building, training, military doctrine
and maritime exercises. In recent years, Brazil has
conducted exercises with Benin, Cabo Verde, Sao Tome
and Principe and Nigeria. Since 2013, the Brazilian navy
has taken part in an international maritime exercise
designed to improve cooperation among participating
nations in order to increase maritime safety and security
in the Gulf of Guinea. The latest edition of the exercise
ended last month. These are the kinds of initiatives that
we believe to be necessary for improving cooperation
with the countries in the region and for enhancing their
capacity to combat piracy and armed robbery.

Any initiative in the region of the Gulf of Guinea
must to be in harmony with the objectives of the
zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
(ZPCSA). I would like to recall that the zone comprises
24 countries, including all the countries situated on the
west coast of Africa, from Cabo Verde and Senegal,
in the north, to South Africa, as well as three South
American countries across the ocean - Argentina,
Uruguay, and my own country, Brazil.

In this regard, the members of the ZPCSA have
agreed to consolidate the region as a zone of peace and
cooperation to ensure that it remains free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons ofmass destruction, as well
as to respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of its countries. The Montevideo
Declaration, adopted in 2013 at the ministerial level by
the ZPCSA, directly mentioned the problem posed by
piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea.
The Declaration recognized the leadership role that the

States of the Gulf of Guinea should play in this regard
and the need for regional coordination of efforts to
counter activities of piracy and armed robbery at sea.
It also urged international partners to assist States and
organizations in the region in the enhancement of their
capabilities to counter this kind of threat.

Since 1986, the General Assembly has adopted
22 resolutions on the ZPCSA. In the most recent
resolution, adopted in 2015, the General Assembly
stressed the role of the ZPCSA as a forum for increased
interaction and support among its member States and
recalled with appreciation the holding of the seventh
ministerial meeting of the ZPCSA and the adoption of
the Montevideo Declaration (resolution 69/322).

Considering that the issue of piracy and armed
robbery in the Gulf of Guinea is primarily a matter
of cooperation among States, we believe that the
General Assembly is the appropriate forum to lead the
discussion. Consistent with the statement made earlier
by the State Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Sweden,
we believe that the Peacebuilding Commission also
has a role to play. Brazil stands ready to continue to
cooperate with the region in order to face this challenge.

