Mr. Petrie (Slovenia): Slovenia aligns itself fully
with the statement of the European Union that was
delivered by the distinguished representative of
Sweden on behalf of the European Union and
associated countries.
It is an honour to greet among us Mr. Srgjan
Kerim, the Foreign Minister of a country that has in a
decade of crisis and wars in the Balkans showed great
restraint, maturity and persistence in resolving
peacefully complicated and dangerous situations. His
country has participated actively in a set of initiatives
to stabilize the region and to promote cooperation and
development - such as the Southeast European
Cooperative Initiative, the Stability Pact for
Southeastern Europe, the South East European
Cooperation Process and others. Let me mention that
Minister Kerim himself has been one of the most
outstanding promoters of the Stability Pact for
Southeastern Europe. His personal engagement has
contributed to the success of this important
international initiative.

To keep Macedonia out of conflicts during the
last decade has not been an easy achievement in an
often unfriendly environment and in extremely difficult
economic circumstances. In spite of the negative
effects on Macedonia's economy of the sanctions
established against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and in spite of its delicate ethnic composition,
Macedonia has successfully protected not only its
territorial integrity but also its internal stability,
democratic process and economic progress. During the
times of Kosovo crisis Macedonia has, at great
sacrifice, given refuge to hundreds of thousands of
Albanian refugees from Kosovo, victims of ethnic
cleansing, and has extended its full support to the
United Nations, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
and other international organizations in their
involvement to resolve the Kosovo crisis.

And most importantly, in the years when
aggression and ethnic and religious conflicts seemed to
be a normal state of affairs in parts of former
Yugoslavia, Macedonia has successfully integrated its
Albanian population and other minorities in political,
economic and social life.

In the last weeks, we have witnessed violence by
extremists and terrorists near the border of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and Macedonia. The acts of the
extremists endanger the stability of Macedonia and
could provoke a new crisis. Indeed, the escalation of
Violence, if not checked immediately, can endanger not
only Macedonia, but the larger region as well. We
should not underestimate the extremely dangerous
consequences, if the extremists are not checked and if
de-escalation of tensions is not achieved.

It goes without saying that Slovenia strongly
condemns the violent acts. Slovenia urges political
leaders, in particular the leaders of the Albanian
community in Macedonia and the leaders of Kosovo
Albanians, to isolate the extremists and perpetrators of
violent acts in Kosovo, in the Presevo Valley and now
in the border region of Macedonia. Slovenia also urges
leaders to shoulder their responsibility and show active
support for peace and stability in the region. Kosovo
Albanian leaders should not forget that only through
the support of the international community, including
the support of Macedonia, have they successfully
sustained the onslaught of the Milosevic regime on the
Albanian community in Kosovo.

The presence and involvement of the
international community in Macedonia and in the
Balkans in general in the past decade has brought peace
to the region. Let us now, through timely and vigorous
action and through full support for Macedonia, prevent
the results achieved from being endangered. We are
sure that with the active involvement of the
international community, and with the activities of the
Macedonian authorities - which should, as they have
up to now, remain measured and restrained, and
political rather than military - a de-escalation of the
situation can be achieved and an emerging crisis
avoided.

