Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate the Republic of Ukraine on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council

this month. I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
efforts to ensure transparency. I would also like to
congratulate the Kingdom of Sweden on its presidency
of the Council in January. We are pleased to welcome
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Iraq (UNAMI). We appreciate his efforts, both in
Baghdad and in New York, and those of his team.

We would also like to welcome Mrs. Nikki Haley,
who is assuming her position on the Security Council.
We wish her every success. We are keen to work on
issues of common interest.

The Government of Iraq highly commends
the sacrifices made by Iraqi forces under the joint
supervision of the international alliance. We welcome
the successful liberation of Mosul. The western part
of that city has been fully liberated, and that includes
87 neighbourhoods. Iraqi forces are completing the
preparations for taking over the eastern part of the
city. Mr. Al Abadi, who is President of the Governing
Council of Ministers, has signed a memorandum to
launch reconstruction projects in the various liberated
neighbourhoods and to undertake demining. That will
open the way for the return of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and for the provision of services to the
Iraqi people so that life can resume as normal.

More than 2,000 Iraqi families have been able to
return to their homes in the western part of the city,
which has been freed from Da'esh criminals. Their
return is continuing following the removal of explosives
and mines. We also thank the local population for their
active participation in the cleanup of the streets in the
liberated neighbourhoods.

The President of the Council of Ministers and Head
of the Armed Forces has issued urgent decrees, which
are to be implemented immediately. Those decrees go
to the relevant authorities to ensure security and the
provision of emergency aid and shelter to those displaced
from Mosul. This is based on the Ninawa liberation
humanitarian plan, which was a joint operation for the
liberation of Ninawa. They have informed the ministry
responsible for IDPs and immigration on the expected
number of IDPs before beginning the liberation of the
eastern side of Mosul so that the necessary steps can be
taken with regard to providing shelter and emergency
assistance.

The Ministry of Trade has quickly provided food
in the liberated areas, in cooperation with the local
Governments of Ninawa. I am pleased to inform the
Security Council that the Council of Representatives of
Iraq intends to approve the candidates for the positions
of the Minister of Defence and the Minister of the
Interior. This will allow the success achieved on the
ground to be consolidated.

The Government of Iraq welcomes the joint
communique adopted following the visit to Iraq of the
Head of the Turkish Government, Mr. Binali Yildirim,
particularly as concerns the Bashiqa camp in Iraq.
The communique also refers to the need for respect
for the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Iraq, and we look forward to its implementation as
soon as possible with a view to strengthening bilateral
relations in various areas, including the combat against
terrorism, so as to ensure security and stability along
the border between the two countries.

My Government calls upon all countries worldwide
to implement resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014), 2199
(2015) and 2253 (2015), in particular with respect to
putting an end to the flow offoreign terrorist fighters. The
Security Council sanctions Committees must shoulder
their responsibilities fully under their prerogatives in
order to neutralize these terrorist groups and dry up
their sources of funding. By this I mean follow-up with
respect to those States that provide financial support
and arms to terrorist groups, including Da'esh, thereby
enabling them to engage in the trafficking of Iraqi oil
and Iraqi archaeological treasures.

Iraq welcomes the actions of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, under the
chairmanship of Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, which have
provided Iraq with the means to combat terrorism,
including during the coordination meeting held in
Baghdad in the presence of UNAMI. In order to
coordinate international efforts aimed at providing
technical support to Iraq in the combat against terrorism,
we urge donors and international organizations to
provide the relevant technical support. We welcome
UNAMI's efforts in this regard, particularly its work
to promote national reconciliation and enhance the
role played by young people, as reflected in the youth
conference held in Basra, to which Mr. Jan Kubis
referred in his briefing.

The Government and the people of Iraq would like
to thank all of the States of the international coalition,
in particular the United States ofAmerica and the States
of the European Union, as well as other States that are
not part of the coalition, for the efforts undertaken to
combat terrorism, particularly the provision of military
and logistical support to Iraqi security forces, within
the context of strict respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq and in cooperation with the
security forces.

We welcome the election and inauguration of
Mr. Donald Trump, President of the United States.
However, we deeply regret the executive order of
27 January last, which includes restrictions on citizens
of seven countries travelling to the United States,
including Iraqis. This order is affecting a friendly,
allied State that is linked with the United States by
a strategic partnership. Given that it comes at a time
when our brave fighters have achieved major progress
in combating Da'esh in Mosul, we call on the United
States Government to rethink its position. In this
regard, we reiterate our resolve to enhance the strategic
partnership between our two countries and to broaden
the possibilities for cooperation, particularly in the
combat against terrorism.

Iraq thanks and attaches great importance to the
efforts of those friendly countries that have worked
to restore stability and ensure reconstruction in those
areas retaken from terrorist groups linked to Da'esh,
with a view to alleviating the humanitarian crisis
affecting displaced persons. This requires demining
and the provision of basic services and employment to
the local population. We deeply appreciate the efforts
of the United Nations and its specialized agencies in
supporting displaced persons, and we call upon all
States to provide funding in that respect.

For our part, we are doing everything in our power
to enhance our relations with neighbouring Arab
states, particularly Kuwait, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Iran
and Turkey; we have a Close relationship also with the
Syrian Government. In the context of enhancing our
brotherly ties to Kuwait, the high-level joint ministerial
commission met in Baghdad on 28 December 2016,
under the joint chairmanship of Mr. Ibrahim Al-Jaafari,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, and Sheikh Sabah
Khalid Al Hamad Al Sabah, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait. At that meeting, a number of issues
of common interest were discussed, and in this regard
the Iraqi Government reaffirms its commitment to
sparing no effort to achieve progress on the issue of
disappeared Kuwaiti citizens and Kuwaiti archives.

The joint commission as well as the national
commissions are interviewing witnesses to determine
the fate of disappeared persons, not only Kuwaiti
citizens but also nationals of other countries. The
Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs have stepped up their efforts to disseminate
information on this issue via television, satellite
stations and Government publications in order to
obtain testimony and reliable information, with a
view to carrying out visits on the ground and achieve
concrete results. A number of technical meetings
have been held, and excavations have taken place in a
number of regions; 158 trenches were dug in Karbala
recently, in the presence of Witnesses, but no human
remains were found. The Iraqi Ministry of Defence
is providing the funding necessary for 2017 so as to
ensure that excavations can continue in many areas,
including Khamisiyah, Radwaniyah, Aynial-Tamr,
Sulaymaniyah and Salman Pak.

The Iraqi Government attaches great importance to
the sincere relations that link us to the brotherly Kuwaiti
State. We greatly appreciate the tireless support from
that brotherly country, in particular the provision of
ready-made schools in liberated areas, which allows
students to return to classes until their permanent
schools have been rebuilt.

We welcome the efforts and the good offices of
Russia, Iran and Turkey to reach a comprehensive Syrian
settlement that can be accepted by all Syrian parties.
We thank them for the efforts they are undertaking
to eradicate terrorist groups in Syria, to put an end
to regional and international support for those groups
and to put an end to the recruitment of more terrorists.
We also thank them for their efforts to ensure respect
for the sovereignty of Syria, and to assist that country
in such a way that it can be freed from the scourge of
terrorism, destruction, death and displacement, thereby
ensuring that stability and security can finally return
to the region.

We would like to thank Kazakhstan for the efforts
that country is making to ensure that the dialogue
is successful. We also wish to thank its Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Kairat Abdrakhmanov, for his
efforts to ensure the principles of peace and to reconcile
the various points of views of the Syrian people under
the auspices of the United Nations.

In conclusion, we extend our sincere thanks to
Special Representative Kubis for the efforts that he
has continuously made on behalf of Iraq. We also wish
to thank his team for its valuable advice to the Iraqi
Government. Finally, we thank UNAMI for the efforts
it has undertaken to ensure that Iraq is unified, stable
and free of terrorists.

