Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for
her important briefing and the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2017/1025). We welcome the inclusion
in the report of recommendations that offer means of
implementation for Member States and the Secretariat
and provide a clear road map for the future. We also
welcome the initiative of the Secretary-General to
address past recommendations.

Today's discussion is particularly timely and
important as we approach the third United Nations
Conference to Review Progress Made in the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and its International
Tracing Instrument, which will take place in June 2018.
The humanitarian consequences of the illicit flows of
those weapons are devastating, resulting in civilian
casualties and hampering development. Weapons and
ammunition flows have a particularly destructive effect
in vulnerable and fragile settings. Preventing armed
conflict and building sustainable peace cannot be
achieved without addressing the wide-reaching harm
caused to civilians by small arms and light weapons.

For that reason, it is necessary to mainstream the
issue of small arms and light weapons into all relevant
discussions on the Council's agenda. That includes the
mandating of peacekeeping operations and efforts to
sustain peace throughout the conflict cycle. Sweden
will continue to support efforts to prevent the flows of
small arms and light weapons and ammunition as an
integral part of our work to sustain peace and prevent
conflict, including through our current membership of
the Council.

We are encouraged to see that significant
developments and trends in weapons and ammunition
management in peace operations and conflict-affected
settings are addressed in the Secretary-General's
report. It is vital to tackle the complex linkages between
transnational illicit trafficking in weapons and the
resilience of conflict-affected and post-conflict States,
especially in our discussions on peace operations.

The effective control of small arms and light
weapons requires the effective control of ammunition,
since those weapons can be operated and misused only
if ammunition is available. Significant efforts to further
regulate and control ammunition is therefore needed.

The illicit spread of small arms and light weapons
enables and fuels armed conflicts that are having
devastating effects on sustainable development. We
welcome the call for improved controls and regulation as
a means to reduce armed violence and achieve the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. We also welcome
the fact that the relationship between the international
trade in arms and the Sustainable Development Goals
is a theme in the Arms Trade Treaty.

We strongly welcome the focus on gender in the
report of the Secretary-General. Mainstreaming
gender issues in arms control efforts is of the utmost
importance to addressing the consequences of illicit
arms flows. Armed violence affects women, men and
children differently. While recognizing that women
and men alike can be victims and perpetrators of armed
violence, cases where small arms contribute to acts of
sexual and/or gender-based violence are of particular
concern. We must also promote the role of women in
preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons.

This has been a long-time priority for Sweden. One
example of Sweden's support is a project of the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament,
which actually commences today and which aims to
improve the contribution and participation of women
in disarmament work. The project focuses on the
prevention of acquisition of small arms, light weapons
and ammunition by terrorist groups in the Lake Chad
basin and countries of the Sahel. While the strength of
Boko Haram has been severely weakened, the threat
of attacks and the prevalence of terrorism remain all
too real for the people of the region. As members of
the Council witnessed and concluded during their visit
to Lake Chad, the recognition of women as agents
for change is central to countering radicalization and
building a sustainable future.

The European Union (EU) is currently in the final
stages of developing a revised EU Strategy to Combat
Illicit Accumulation and Trafficking of Small Arms
and Light Weapons and their Ammunition. The new
Strategy presents a shared vision on how to address the
threat of those weapons and their ammunition. It also
presents common actions to be implemented by the EU
and its member States.

The human, economic and social toll from the
use of illicit arms and light weapons is immense.
Preventing, combating and eradicating that destructive
trade is urgent and essential if we are to achieve both
the 2030 Agenda and the sustaining peace agenda. We
will continue to do all we can to that end.

