The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

1 will now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Australia.

While November was a busy month, the level of
Council activity tells us more about the breadth and
depth of the crises in the world than it does about the
Council's effectiveness in itself- and it is effectiveness
that must always be our focus.

Peacekeeping remains a paramount concern. The
informal interactive dialogue on Mali very usefully
addressed the unique situation of a peacekeeping
mission operating for the first time in an asymmetric
threat environment where there is effectively no
peace to keep. Contemporary peacekeeping is facing
unprecedented challenges. The Secretary-General's
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
is a necessary assessment 15 years after the seminal
Brahimi review. The Council had a useful initial
dialogue with the Panel, but we need to do a lot more
serious thinking about peacekeeping, the increasing
demand for it, the increasing difficulty of generating
and equipping peacekeepers, and the increasing threat
to our peacekeepers. At a time when civilians are being
deliberately targeted as a tactic of war and more people
are displaced by conflict than at any time since the
Second World War, the protection of civilians must
be at the core of our peacekeeping efforts, and our
peacekeeping missions must be postured robustly to
use force when required.

The Council has perhaps been most forensic in its
focus on implementation in the case of Syria on both
the chemical weapons and the humanitarian tracks.
The fact that progress has been made on chemical
weapons is primarily due to the demanding monitoring
and reporting framework established under resolution
2118 (2013). The Council must now ensure the complete
eradication of Syria's chemical weapons programme
and that the credible allegations of the use of chlorine
as a weapon by the regime, in violation of resolution
2118 (2013), are fully investigated and that those who
use chemical agents in warfare are held to account.
The regular analysis that the Secretary-General
provides us on the implementation of resolutions 2139
(2014) and 2165 (2014), on humanitarian assistance
and protection in Syria, is crucial. While some limited
progress has been made on humanitarian access, most
elements of the two resolutions - particularly as they
relate to the protection of Syrian civilians - have not
been complied with. The Syrian regime's military
strategy remains deliberately targeted at its own
civilians, and systematic violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law are massive,
savage and routine. The mandate on access contained
in resolution 2165 (2014) expires in early January and
must be extended in December. We need to give serious
attention to what we can do about implementing the
much more comprehensive obligations on all parties set
out in resolution 2139 (2014).

The centrality of human rights to the Council's
work is evident. In November, High Commissioner for
Human Rights Zeid Al Hussein briefed the Council for
the first time since his appointment (see S/PV.7314).
Those who heard his searing indictment of the horrific
crimes ofthe Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and its abuse of Islam's own precepts will not forget it.

As President, Australia has sought to make a
reality of the requirements of Article 24 of the Charter
of the United Nations to ensure that Council members
represent the broader United Nations membership and
that the Council builds strong partnerships with other
actors. Having heard the responses of members of the
General Assembly to the Council's annual report, we
conveyed those back to the Council.

In partnership with Argentina, we arranged for
the first open briefing by the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan in the Chamber for all to hear
(see S/PV.7320). We engaged closely with the African
Union Peace and Security Council in advance of and
during our presidency. We need, as a Council, to do a
lot more to ensure that our own protestations that we
will work closely with our African partners are better
operationalized. Joint visits and assessment missions
would be a good way to improve that.

While the three initiatives Australia has pursued
during its presidency are distinct, there is a common
philosophy underpinning them all. The Council must
make the best use of the tools it has to effectively
address the challenges it faces. The open debate on
counter-terrorism (see S/PV.7316) enabled the broader
United Nations membership to focus on one of the most
dangerous contemporary challenges to international
peace and security.

The need for concerted and coordinated efforts to
degradeISIL andotherAl-Qaidaaffiliatesis one defining
imperative; the urgent need to combat foreign terrorist
fighters and confronting violent extremism ideologies
is another. Presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23,
adopted on 19 November, provides practical steps to
build on the momentum generated by resolutions 2170
(2014) and 2178 (2014) (2014). Contemporary terrorism
is not just a threat in itself; it often takes advantage of
local or regional conflict, making the conflict worse
and in the process increasing its own lethal impact. The
Council needs to keep terrorism high on its agenda and
to ensure that the implementation of our resolutions and
November's presidential statement happens.

Our initiative on policing has filled a serious gap
by recognizing the vital importance of policing to
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, the rule of law and the
protection of civilians. Resolution 2185 (2014), the
first ever on policing, is designed to make a practical
contribution to improving the effectiveness of the
work of police components, and the joint briefing by
the heads of police components will be an important
annual addition to the Council's work.

The final initiative Australia has pursued, of
course, is on sanctions. Sanctions are a crucial and
often the only tool for the Council, and we need to do
much better on implementation. The high-level review
that Australia conducted with Sweden, Greece, Finland
and Germany reaffirmed the demand from Member
States for greater guidance and assistance, and the
need for better coordination within the United Nations
system - 20 United Nations entities contribute to
sanctions implementation- and between the Secretariat
and other institutions. We look forward to securing
agreement on a Council resolution in the coming days
that will respond to those needs definitively.

In closing, I thank all colleagues for their
cooperation and engagement in November. The month
has not yet finished. Together, we have made some
progress; we may well make some more in the next few
days.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the other members ofthe Council.
