The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Cuba,
Egypt, Israel, Malaysia, the Islamic Republic of Iran
and South Africa, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Aboul Gheit
(Egypt) and Mr. Jacob (Israel) took seats
reserved for them at the Council table;
Mr. DeRuyt (Belgium), Mr. Fonseca (Brazil),
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla
(Cuba), Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia) and Mr. Nejad
Hosseinian (Islamic Republic ofIran) took seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter a letter
dated 14 December 2001 from the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued
as document S/200l/1205, and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
today, Friday, 14 December 2001, regarding the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat reserved for him at the
Council table.


The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
14 December 2001 from the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
honour to request that I be invited to participate
in the debate on the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, under
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Security Council."

On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
the matters on its agenda. In accordance with past
practice in this matter, I propose that the Council
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to the Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fall
(Senegal), Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, took a seat reserved for him
at the side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in response to
the request dated 13 December 2001 from the
Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, document S/2001/1191.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2001/1199, which contains the text of draft
resolution submitted by Egypt and Tunisia.

I now call on the representative of Palestine.


