Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Egypt for bringing a very important issue to the
forefront of discussion in the Council. The interest of
the wider United Nations membership in today's debate
is a testament to the importance and the relevance of
this subject. I also extend my gratitude to all three
briefers for their highly useful and important briefings.

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union later. In
my national capacity, I would like to add the following.

It is obvious that peacekeeping in its current state
faces challenges that did not exist a decade ago, to say
nothing of the days when the concept of peacekeeping
was in its inception. Nevertheless, United Nations
peace operations have proved to be a highly adaptive
instrument that contributes much to the resolution of
numerous conflicts. In recent years, the Council and
the General Assembly have thoroughly considered and
passed several important decisions on United Nations
activities aimed at upholding and sustaining peace. The
imultaneous resolutions on sustaining peace (Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly
resolution 70/262) have become a significant step
forward in the implementation of a conflict-prevention
approach. The conclusions and recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
made us take a fresh look at the nature and challenges
of peacekeeping operations.

In today's highly volatile world there is a lot of
demand for greater United Nations engagement in the
area of peace and security. In most cases, sustainable
de-escalation and progress in peaceful settlements and
peacebuilding require a robust international security
presence. We fully recognize the critical importance of
peacebuilding architecture in finding effective ways to
support countries emerging from conflict.

To be successful in this endeavour, the United
Nations approach must be based on coherence among
the political, security and development pillars. Enabling
countries to put in place effective and inclusive
national mechanisms and institutions that can address
socioeconomic and political root causes of conflict
must become a priority for the whole United Nations
system. Those include issues that are related to the
promotion and the protection of human rights and to
ensuring that women play an active role at all stages
of peace consolidation. Incorporating human rights-
related tasks into peacekeeping operation mandates
and human rights components into peace operations
are also essential to prevent conflict, as doing so would
contribute to the de-escalation of and reduced potential
for conflict re-emergence.

When we consider the transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding activities, the following elements
are equally important. First, national ownership is an
indispensable condition for the establishment of both
effective and efficient core State capacities, leading
to a more stable and viable State. The purpose of
institution-building is to reduce the dependence of post-
conflict Governments on the international community
and to promote self-reliance. Yet, the fact that many
post-conflict countries relapse into violence leaves no
doubt about the need for extreme prudence in planning
the transition of responsibilities from the international
community to national authorities, especially in the
security sector.

Secondly, consensus between domestic and
international stakeholders on a broad peacebuilding
agendaisimportant forthe successofinstitution-building
and peacebuilding endeavours as a whole. If there is a
lack of understanding on either side, there will be little
tangible progress in securing a lasting peace.

Thirdly, given the crucial significance of post-
conflict institution-building to the success of the
overall peacebuilding efforts, my delegation supports
the approach of integrating the institution-building
perspective, tailored to each country and situation, into
the mandates of respective United Nations missions
from their early stages.

Fourthly, we believe in the transformative power
of relevant regional and subregional organizations in
connection with peacebuilding. Over the past decade,
the role of the African Union in promoting peace
and sustainable development among African States
has increased exponentially. The African Union has
demonstrated its ability to take the lead in the effective
resolution of conflicts, and its views and policies on
this matter are of particular value to the United Nations.

Finally, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
is ideally placed to bring together external State and
non-State actors with the aim of securing the creation
of credible, legitimate, accountable and resilient
institutions in countries emerging from conflict.
Therefore, the PBC should play a leading role in enabling
the United Nations system to establish an integrated
approach to institution-building. As an advisory body,
the Commission has a crucial convening role to bridge
security, development and human rights engagements.
The Council should consider it a viable tool at its
disposal when situations are no longer in a "crisis"
stage but are still considered fragile and deserving of
more dedicated, targeted and sustained attention.

That relates also to the consideration of
peacebuilding-related mandates of peacekeeping
and special political missions, as well as to debates
on possible drawdown and termination of missions.
For instance, the idea of inviting representatives
of the Peacebuilding Commission country-specific
configurations to take part in the Council's respective
field visits deserves thorough consideration. Such a
practice could contribute to better coordination of the
work done in New York and activities in the field.

