Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you and
Turkey on taking over the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of June. I would also like to
thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings.

In my statement today, I will first say a few
words about our national position regarding the
completion strategies of the Tribunals. Secondly,
following the practice of my Belgian predecessor, I
would like to take this opportunity to give an update on
the activities of the Security Council informal Working
Group on international tribunals, which Austria has
chaired since the beginning of this year. I therefore ask
for the President's forbearance, as I might need one or
two minutes longer than if I were to limit myself
exclusively to the national part of my statement.

Austria strongly supports all efforts to strengthen
international criminal justice, including through the
International Criminal Court, ad hoc or mixed tribunals
and truth commissions. We must ensure that those
responsible for the most serious crimes are held
accountable and brought to justice. We commend the
ICTY and the ICTR for their pioneering role in
combating impunity and for their contribution to the
development of international criminal law and
international humanitarian law.

Austria fully supports the efforts of the Tribunals
to complete their work at the earliest date and to
accomplish the completion strategy pursuant to
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004). We note that,
according to current projections, the Tribunals will not
be able to meet the date set forth in the completion
strategy but expect to complete their work by 2013. We
urge the Tribunals to take all possible measures to
complete their work expeditiously while maintaining
all standards of fair trial and due process.
The arrest of the remaining fugitives remains a
top priority for the completion of the Tribunal's work.
We call on all States in the region, especially those
where fugitives are suspected to be at large, to fully
cooperate with the Tribunals. Austria welcomes
Serbian efforts in tracking the fugitives Ratko Mladie
and Goran Hadzie and hopes that positive results will
be achieved in the near future.

We also welcome the efforts made by the
Croatian Government - in particular by you,
Mr. Prime Minister, and the Minister of Justice - and
hope that these efforts will lead to a further
strengthening of the constructive dialogue with the
ICTY Prosecutor. Allow me to add, Mr. Prime
Minister, that my Government is fully aware of your
long-standing personal commitment to full cooperation
with ICTY. We know that you have pursued this course
since you took office, and we also know that under
sometimes considerable difficulties, your commitment
was instrumental in locating Ante Gotovina and
transferring him to The Hague.

The referral of cases to competent national
jurisdictions is an essential part of the completion
strategy. However, it must be ensured that all referred
cases are administered in a fair, impartial and even-
handed manner. It is also essential that effective
measures be in place to protect witnesses, enforce
sentences and take action against those helping
fugitives evade justice. We note that the ICTR Trial
and Appeals Chambers have denied the transfer to
Rwanda of all five cases requested by the Prosecutor.
We hope that Rwanda's efforts to improve its judicial
system and witness protection will enable the
Prosecutor to re-apply for a referral of cases.

I would now like to give a brief update on the
activities of the Informal Working Group on
international tribunals since the beginning of this year.
Since January 2009, the Working Group has held 12
meetings to discuss the establishment of a residual
mechanism or residual mechanisms to carry out certain
functions of the Tribunals after their closure.

Another meeting of the Working Group with the
Presidents and Prosecutors present here today will take
place this afternoon. There is agreement among the
members of the Working Group that the most senior
fugitives of the Tribunals must face international trial
by the mechanisms. We also agree that the legacy and
archives of the Tribunals must be preserved. It is
further agreed that the mechanism or mechanisms will
have a trial capacity to try fugitives from the ICTY and
ICTR based on a roster of judges. The mechanism or
mechanisms is or are to be small, temporary and
efficient, commensurate with a reduced workload in
the post-completion period.

The Working Group has continued with an in-
depth examination of the eight residual functions
identified by the Tribunals as essential and to be
carried out after their closure: trial of fugitives; trial of
contempt cases; protection of witnesses; review of
judgments; referrals of cases to national jurisdictions,
including revocation; supervision of enforcement of
sentences; assistance of national jurisdictions; and
maintenance of archives. Discussions on whether all or
only some of these functions should be carried out by
the mechanism or mechanisms are still ongoing.

The Working Group has also discussed the
potential commencement date or dates of the
mechanism or mechanisms, as well as its or their
structure. This includes important issues such as
whether there should be one or two mechanisms, or
one mechanism with two branches, and the related
questions of the possible co-location of the Tribunals'
archives with the mechanism or mechanisms and its or
their location. The discussions were informed by
chairmen's non-papers, with input by the Tribunals,
which were produced with the most valuable assistance
of the Office of Legal Affairs.

The members of the Working Group also had an
informal exchange of views with the members of the
Management Committee of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. The Chair plans to convene informal meetings
with representatives of the States of the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda and the host countries of the
Tribunals, the Netherlands and Tanzania.

The Presidents of ICTY and ICTR have made a
number of written requests related to the completion
strategies, including the enlargement of the Appeals
Chamber through the redeployment of trial judges, the
extension of the judges' mandates and, as a temporary
measure, the appointment of an additional ICTY ad
litem judge in addition to the 12 ad litem judges
authorized by the statute. These requests are currently
being considered by the Working Group.

In its presidential statement of 19 December 2008
(S/PRST/2009/47), the Security Council requested the
Secretary-General to present a report on the
administrative and budgetary aspects of the options for
the possible locations for ICTY and ICTR archives and
the seat of the residual mechanism or mechanisms for
these Tribunals. It is my understanding that the report
has been finalized in substance and will be published
as an official Security Council document once it has
been translated into all official United Nations
languages. We intend to start discussing the content
and recommendations of the report in the Working
Group later this month. Subsequently, the Group will
resume negotiations on the draft Security Council
resolution to establish the mechanism or mechanisms.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Presidents, permanent and ad litem judges, Prosecutors
and Registrars of the ICTY and ICTR and all their staff
for their tireless efforts in the name of international
justice. Our special thanks go to the Office of Legal
Affairs, the expertise and assistance of which is
indispensable for our work.

Finally, I would also like to thank all the
members of the Working Group for their active and
constructive contributions to our discussions.

