Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): It is a great pleasure to
see you, Mr. Minister, presiding over our meeting.

At the outset, I should like to state that Ukraine
also aligns itself with the statement to be delivered on
behalf of the European Union.

The security situation in the Great Lakes region
remains a topical issue on the Security Council's agenda
after several decades of consideration and numerous
decisions taken on this subject. The root causes of
conflicts in the region are all too familiar: inter-ethnic
and intertribal rivalries, inefficient governance, weak
political institutions, judicial systems partial to the
views of those who happen to be in power, high levels
of corruption, widespread poverty, the pervasive and
deeply destabilizing activities of uncontrolled armed
groups, flows of refugees and displaced persons due to
armed conflicts and internal instability, and porous and
fluid borders.

In this context, the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains one of the biggest
concerns. As Franz Fanon, an influential thinker and
Afro-Caribbean philosopher, once said: "Africa is
shaped like a gun, and Congo is the trigger. If that
explosive trigger bursts, it's the whole Africa that will
explode". That is why I would briefly touch upon the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
the first place.

As the Council is aware, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has not had a peaceful transfer of power in
the 55 years since its independence. Even today, we all
have the same worries that the ongoing internal dispute
over the elections in that country could spark violence,
with a possible spillover of instability into neighboring
countries. The Constitution ofthe Democratic Republic
of the Congo limits a President's tenure to two popularly
elected terms. This provision was established after
years of the unchecked Mobutu rule, and it constitutes
a safeguard against a return to dictatorial practices.

It is an axiom that a democratic change of power
through elections is a fundamental principle and a
gateway towards progress in other areas of the social
and economic development of a country or community,
as opposed to a continued simmering of popular
discord, which can eventually erupt in a violent
protest, casting the country back to reliving earlier
distressful experiences. Bearing this in mind, we call
upon all national stakeholders, for the sake of their own
people, to pursue political dialogue and to accept the
international mediation of the United Nations, African
Union or other authoritative regional organization on
this issue.

One cannot but mention another issue that affects
the whole region - the irregular armed groups present
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They are still
active in the eastern part of the country and continue to
terrorize the civilian population, despite our numerous
calls for their neutralization and the deployment in the
area of one of the largest United Nations peacekeeping
missions, which we fully support. In this regard, as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic,
I would like to draw Council members' attention to the
fact that the Committee recently added to its sanctions

list the odious Lord's Resistance Army and its leader in
response to its destructive violent activities affecting a
large area of the region.

We believe that the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region remains one of the key multilateral
mechanisms that can bring stability to the country.
Proceeding from the main principles and provisions of
that document, it is of utmost importance for all parties
and other relevant stakeholders to continue undertaking
the necessary efforts aimed at fulfilling their obligations
and commitments arising from the Framework. Taking
into account the joint commitment not to interfere in
the internal affairs of neighbouring countries, we are
deeply concerned over reports, including those coming
from the Panel of Experts, about numerous cases of
the territory and capacities of neighbouring countries
being used to train armed groups and infiltrate them
into adjacent regions and conflict areas.

The continued smuggling of natural resources from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains among
other serious challenges to the peace and stability
of the region. Regrettably, in the regional context,
natural resources tend to fuel conflicts rather that
contribute to sustainable development and economic
prosperity. In view of recorded facts with regard to
the involvement of military elements in the smuggling,
and the inability of the relevant authorities to prevent
the illegal use of natural resources, we believe that
additional serious efforts are needed to address the
phenomenon and reverse the prevailing trend. In our
View, the International Conference of the Great Lakes
Regional Initiative against the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources is a good example of the search for a
common solution that could ensure that those resources
are used to generate much-needed revenue and to
promote regional development.

The flow of refugees is another pressing challenge
faced by the Great Lakes region. Internal instability,
poor governance, ethnic intolerance and violations
of human rights on a massive scale by illegal armed
groups cause people to flee. As a result, approximately
430,000 refugees from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are seeking shelter in Burundi, Rwanda,
Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania. In that
connection, I cannot overlook the situation in Burundi.
We cannot afford to waste the chance to prevent the
impending conflict situation from descending into
chaos. The wounds are still fresh, as we all remember
very well the terrible repercussions of the Burundian
genocide in 1972 and the 1993-2005 civil war there. It
is the duty of the Security Council and of the whole
international community to ensure that such tragic
events do not unfold again. All stakeholders must
spare no effort to prevent any development that could
increase the risk ofa full-fledged conflict and mounting
violence against the Burundian population. For its part,
the Burundian Government should not fail to live up to
its commitments and obligations.

I am proud of Ukraine's contribution to United
Nations efforts to bring stability to the Great Lakes
region, especially as one ofthe major troop-contributing
countries to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and as a former member and vice-Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission. We are resolved to
maintain that commitment, including as a member of
the Security Council in the period 2016-2017.

Peace, stability and prosperity in the Great Lakes
region require strong commitment, joint action and
dialogue. All of those are the necessary prerequisites
for addressing current conflicts and preventing future
crises and calamities. Let us hope that this discussion
will serve as a Council contribution to fostering that
commitment and as a sign of an unwavering dedication
to carrying out our responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security in that crucially
important region.

