Mr. Witschel (Germany): As a member of the Group
of Friends of the Secretary-General on Georgia, Germany
fully supports and welcomes the draft resolution before the
Council today. The draft contains several important
messages addressed directly to the parties, reflecting our
grave concern and the sense of urgency in the face of the
volatile political situation in and around Abkhazia, Georgia.
The fate of the many thousands of persons who were forced
to leave their homes, the lack of substantive progress
towards a political settlement and the continuing danger to
which peacekeepers from the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UN OMIG) and the Commonwealth of
Independent States are exposed are alarming indeed.

Let me try to elaborate in some more detail what we
consider to be the essential elements for a solution to the
conflict as reflected in the draft before the Council.

First, the territorial integrity of Georgia is and remains
the only basis for any solution of the Abkhaz conflict.
Secondly, there must not be another solution to the conflict
other than a peaceful arrangement between the parties.
Only a substantial dialogue marked by the genuine
political will of both sides to come to a fair settlement
can bring about a durable solution. Thirdly, all
mechanisms for this dialogue are in place. Therefore we
call upon the parties to use them in good faith. The
progress achieved in the Geneva process led by the
United Nations, and the momentum gained through the
two meetings in Athens and Istanbul on confidence-
building measures, must not be lost. We therefore appeal
to both sides to be as cooperative and compromising as
possible - both within the Geneva framework and in
direct bilateral contacts - and to go ahead with
implementing those confidence-building measures that
have already been agreed upon.
Let me add how much we welcome the
announcement of the Secretary-General on submitting a
paper on the status of Abkhazia within the State of
Georgia for the consideration of the parties this fall. We
are looking forward to participating actively - together
with the other members of the Group of Friends, as well
as with the Russian Federation as facilitator, and with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) - in the elaboration of this important document.
We hope that this paper will give fresh impetus to the
efforts of working towards a comprehensive solution to
the conflict.

One of the most crucial problems, if not the most
crucial one, that remains to be solved is that of refugee
return. We urge the parties to the conflict to reach a
sustainable and credible agreement on this matter now.
The Council may rest assured that we will feel a strong
resolve to actively support any concrete steps to
implement such an agreement.

The security situation remains, despite some
progress, very delicate, still making it impossible for
UNOMIG to completely fulfil its tasks. We continue to
follow very closely the security situation of our own
personnel. Part of the responsibility for the unsatisfactory
security situation continues to lie with elements operating
from the Georgian side of the demarcation line. Let me
therefore once again strongly urge Georgia to take
determined steps to stop guerrilla attacks and mine-laying
in UNOMIG's operation theatre.

Let me end by expressing Germany's deep
appreciation for the dedicated work done by the retiring
Special Representative, Mr. Liviu Bota, and the members
of UNOMIG, in a tense and dangerous environment. In

 

our opinion, it is a matter of utmost urgency to swiftly
appoint a qualified successor in order not to create a
vacuum which would only lead to the deterioration of the
situation on the ground.

