Mr. Belle (Belgium) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate. I also
thank the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Holmes, for
his report on his recent mission to Africa.

We would first like to make a few comments on
the situation in Darfur. Belgium is extremely
concerned by the worsening of violence and tensions in
Darfur since last summer. The death of five Senegalese
soldiers of the African Union Mission in Sudan offers
us a sad example of this escalation, and, like
Mr. Holmes, we wish to express our condolences to the
families of those soldiers. The attacks against civilians,

carried out as much by the Governmental forces as by
the rebel forces and militias, are continuing, and
serious violations of international law are increasing in
number. Such violations are clearly unacceptable, and
we cannot tolerate their continuation.

While underscoring the chief responsibility of the
Government of the Sudan, Belgium insists that all
parties must ensure the protection of civilians. In order
to halt the spiral of violence, the Government of the
Sudan must put an end to impunity and must
immediately arrest those responsible so that they can
answer for their acts. Belgium welcomes the consensus
last week in the Human Rights Council, which is a sign
of the profound concern of the entire international
community with the human rights situation in Darfur.

The deterioration in the security situation has also
hampered delivery of aid to Darfur. Mr. Holmes
touched upon this issue. Belgium is concerned that the
level of risk for humanitarian organizations has
become so high that the largest humanitarian
operations in the world are now threatened. In this
respect, Belgium welcomes the discussions with the
Sudanese Government on the access of humanitarian
assistance, on guarantees for security for humanitarian
workers and on the removal of red tape.

In addition, Belgium welcomes the signing
between the Government of the Sudan and the United
Nations on 28 March of the joint communique on the
facilitation of humanitarian activities in Darfur. We
hope that this commitment by the Government will be
swiftly put into practice.

More generally speaking, Belgium feels that to
ensure peace in Darfur, the international community
must pursue a global strategy made up of several
sectors. These sectors must be complementary and not
interchangeable. In parallel, we must increase the
efforts to restart the political process on the basis of the
Darfur peace agreement, rapidly deploy an effective
and robust peacekeeping force, and lastly, exert
pressure on the parties to cooperate.

In the short term, given the extreme volatility of
the security and humanitarian situation, it is important
that the heavy support package be implemented on an
urgent basis. We share Mr. Holmes' analysis that the
situation in Darfur has distracted the attention of the
international community from the implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) in
southern Sudan. We believe the international
community must prod parties to take effective
measures to accelerate the implementation of the CPA.
The international community must firmly pursue its
commitment to assist in this implementation.

Mr. Holmes mentioned the regional dimension of
the humanitarian crisis, in particular the fact that it
affects Chad and the Central African Republic. Like
Mr. Holmes, Belgium is concerned about the
repercussions of the various aspects of the
humanitarian situation on the civilian populations in
those two countries, Chad and the Central African
Republic. My delegation is convinced that the
protection of civilians, displaced persons and refugees
must be the absolute priority of the international
community. Indeed, we must act diligently in order to
stem the propagation of conflict in Darfur.

We are concerned about the continuing inter-
community and transborder conflicts in eastern Chad.
Over the last three months these conflicts have led to a
spectacular increase in the number of displaced
persons- now 140,000 individuals - and have
exacerbated the insecurity within and around the
twelve refugee camps, as well as in the towns and
villages.

Belgium strongly condemns any exploitation of
populations, any forced recruitment, including of
children, by the various rebel groups.

Belgium is also concerned by the security
conditions in the north of the Central African Republic.
The security situation there remains very precarious, as
Mr. Holmes indicated. Information that the number of
people who had to leave their homes due to violence
now exceeds 280,000 persons is disturbing. We note
that President Bozize is carrying out an in-depth
investigation of all the acts of violence of which
members of the military may be guilty. Here again, in
order to bring about lasting peace, it is necessary to
fight impunity.

More generally speaking, Belgium supports, in
principle, the dispatch of a peacekeeping force to Chad
and the Central African Republic in order to protect
endangered civilian populations and to prevent cross-
border attacks. Deployment should have the prior
agreement of the Governments concerned, and the
force should have sufficient means and a robust
mandate so that it can effectively ensure safety and
security both for itself and for the civilian populations.
For Belgium, one of the essential lessons learned over
the past few years has been that the dispatch of a force
must be planned with a view to supporting the
prospects for a political process.

I wish in conclusion to stress that the
humanitarian situation in other African countries too
demands the closest attention of the international
community.

