Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canada welcomes this opportunity to discuss the
situation in the Middle East, particularly given the
urgent need for the Security Council to take appropriate
action on Syria. The continuing violence, the worsening
humanitarian crisis and the growing threat to regional
stability clearly constitute a case in which the Council
must assume its basic responsibility to maintain
international peace and security. It is shameful that the
Security Council remains paralysed more than a year
and a half after the outbreak of the crisis.

Canada continues to call for a complete and
immediate ceasefire that will lead to a Syrian-led
political transition. Given the Al-Assad regime's failure
to honour its commitments, we all need to be fully
cognizant of one indisputable fact - Al-Assad will not
voluntarily end the brutal campaign of slaughter that
he has launched against his own people. He has a clear
interest in desperately clinging to power. All countries
must bring pressure to bear on Syria for Al-Assad to go.

As long as the Security Council does not adopt
tough, binding measures, those who want to protect the
Al-Assad regime with Syrian blood will benefit from
the political and legal cover this impasse provides.
Canada repeats our call for the Security Council to
impose binding sanctions and an arms embargo in order
to increase pressure on the Al-Assad regime to end the
violence and recognize the legitimate democratic rights
of the Syrian people.

(spoke in English)

In particular, Canada has been actively urging
Syria's neighbours to stop allowing arms and other
tools of war to reach Al-Assad in his bloody struggle
to cling to power. We commend Turkey on successfully
stopping one such shipment, as those efforts will help
to limit the Al-Assad regime's ability to kill civilians
in Syria.

Canada continues to be profoundly concerned by
the threat that Iran poses to regional and global security.
Iran's nuclear activities in defiance of Security Council
resolutions, State sponsorship of terrorism, appalling
human rights record and hegemonic interference
throughout the Middle East all endanger an increasingly
fragile regional balance. It is Canada's unambiguous
view that, beyond despotic regimes clinging to power at
the expense of their people, and beyond the carcinogenic
militancy of Al-Qaida and its affiliates throughout the
broader Middle East and North Africa, it is the Iranian
regime that poses the greatest threat to global peace
and security.

In addition, Canada is deeply concerned about the
regional implications of Iran's persistent meddling in
Iraq, a country struggling to rebuild itself after years
under the brutal Saddam Hussein regime. We urge
Iraqi officials to continue to assert their hard-won
sovereignty, notably over their skies, and to resist
Iranian influence. At the same time, we call on the
Security Council to take action and put a stop, once and
for all, to Iranian support for Al-Assad.

With regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
Canada remains wholly supportive of United States and
Quartet efforts, and we welcome their ongoing attempts
to encourage the parties to resume successful and direct
peace negotiations without delay or preconditions, in
accordance with the Quartet's statement of 23 September
2011. But let me be clear. Canada will oppose any
unilateral resolution in the General Assembly. In our
view, those measures will make a resumption of the
peace talks more difficult and raise expectations yet
not change the facts on the ground or improve lives,
leading to heightened frustrations and a review of our
relations with the Palestinian Authority.

Canada would welcome the establishment of a
Palestinian State as a result of negotiations with Israel.
However, in our judgment, any two-State solution
must be negotiated and mutually agreed upon by both
States. Pursuing a United Nations resolution is counter-
productive to achieving that trust. We should instead all
be focused on encouraging the Palestinians to return to
peace talks immediately.

