Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): 1, like
others, would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), Mr. Riicker, for his useful briefing. I would
also like to thank the President of the Coordination
Centre of the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and
Metohija, Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic, for her statement,
and the Prime Minister of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government of Kosovo, Mr. Ceku, for his
presence.

I associate myself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union.

We are pleased to note that the Provisional
Institutions have made significant efforts to improve
standards implementation since the previous report.
Denmark would like to welcome the commitment to
move forward shown by the Administration in Pristina,
especially on the 13 priority points identified by the
Contact Group. However, there are a number of areas
where further attention is needed, not least with regard
to the rule of law and freedom of movement.
Violence- whether or not ethnically motivated -
undermines reconciliation and threatens progress, and
we condemn the recent spate of violent incidents.

We welcome the concrete steps taken by the
Provisional Institutions to improve conditions for
Kosovo's minorities. However, it is also clear that
these steps do not automatically improve relations
between the majority and the minorities. The
leadership of the Provisional Institutions needs to
create confidence among all of Kosovo's ethnic groups.
That can be achieved only by reaching out and by
showing a genuine willingness to compromise.

We are very concerned about the steps taken by
the Kosovo Serb municipalities in northern Kosovo to
end contacts with the Provisional Institutions and set
up parallel structures. As the Secretary-General notes
in his report, by remaining outside the political process
in Kosovo, the Kosovo Serb leaders are doing a
disservice to their community. We thus urge Belgrade
to encourage the Kosovo Serb representatives to
participate constructively in the Provisional Institutions
in Pristina, not least in the municipal bodies.

We all hope for a sustainable solution to
Kosovo's future. Non-cooperation, isolation and
entrenched positions will not lead to a better future.
Flexibility and compromise are prerequisites for a
sustainable solution, and coordinated and forward-
looking actions on the part of all actors will be
required. The primary beneficiaries will be all
Kosovars, regardless of ethnicity; the population of the
Republic of Serbia; and, indeed, all the peoples of the
western Balkans. Cooperation and participation is in
everyone's best interest.

In that context, we would like to reiterate our full
support for the Status Envoy, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari. We
welcome his intention to present proposals for a
comprehensive status settlement to the parties after the
parliamentary elections in Serbia.

In our view, dragging out the process of resolving
the Kosovo status issue will not benefit regional
stability. The solution should meet the aspirations of
the majority of Kosovars and, at the same time, include
adequate minority protection and guarantees.

Denmark views the situation in Kosovo from a
regional perspective. We steadfastly support UNMIK
and KFOR. We look forward to the more peaceful and
prosperous future which the peoples of the region
deserve. That will entail close regional cooperation
towards the common integration of these truly
European countries into the Euro-Atlantic structures,
where they rightfully belong. However, the Euro-
Atlantic perspective depends on the implementation of
standards and a sustainable solution to Kosovo's future
status.

