Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I want to thank you,
Madam President, for scheduling this meeting today at
short notice following the announcements in the United
Kingdom yesterday.

When the Security Council last met on this issue,
on 18 April (see S/PV.8237), I undertook to update
the Council in the light of significant developments.
My Prime Minister's full statement to Parliament
was circulated to the Security Council as document
S/2018/814. As the British Prime Minister announced
yesterday in Parliament, the United Kingdom has
reached a significant conclusion in the Salisbury
chemical weapons investigation. I will come to that
later, but first I will provide a brief summary of what
happened in Salisbury earlier this year.

On Sunday, 4 March, Sergei Skripal and his
daughter Yulia were found unconscious on a bench
in the city centre after being poisoned by a Novichok
nerve agent. Detective Sergeant Nick Bailey, a Wiltshire
police officer, was also seriously ill after having been
exposed to a nerve agent. Following that attack, the
United Kingdom notified the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and invited
it to confirm the identity of the substance involved,
while we briefed members of the Security Council. The
OPCW's independent expert laboratories confirmed
the United Kingdom's identification of the Novichok
nerve agent.

Thankfully, the Skripals are recovering. But, on
30 June, 44 year-old mother of three, Dawn Sturgess,
fell ill in the nearby town of Amesbury after being
exposed to Novichok. Sadly, she died on 8 July. Her
partner, Charlie Rowley was also exposed to the nerve
agent and became seriously ill. Police have identified
that Sturgess and Rowley came into contact with a
counterfeit perfume bottle that had been discarded
in Salisbury. Tests of that bottle after its recovery by
police confirmed it contained a significant amount of
highly lethal Novichok nerve agent.

On 4 September, the OPCW's independent expert
laboratories again confirmed the United Kingdom's
identification of the Novichok nerve agent with a very
high level of purity. I remind Council members that the
very high level of purity means that it will have been
made by a State.

The inquiry into the Amesbury incident has now
been formally linked by the police with the attempted
murder of the Skripals. Independent experts of the
OPCW have confirmed the identifications as Novichok
nerve agents, and it is the exact same chemical that was
used in both attacks.

It stretches credulity that the identification of
such a nerve agent twice in close proximity could be
a coincidence. We have previously shared with the
Council the information about the Russian foliant
programme from the 20005, but to recap briefly, there
was development of Novichok outside the Chemical
Weapons Convention, and Russian agents were trained
in assassination techniques, including the use of such
agents on door handles.

In the United Kingdom, the police are independent
of Government, and they have been conducting a
painstaking forensic investigation. That investigation
has involved approximately 250 detectives, who have
trawled through more than 11,000 hours of closed-
circuit television (CCTV) footage and have taken more
than 1,400 statements. Working around the clock, they
have carried out painstaking and methodical work to
ascertain exactly which individuals were responsible
and the methods they used to carry out the attack.

That evidence has been independently reviewed by
the Crown Prosecution Service, and it has concluded
there is a sufficient basis to bring charges. We have thus
independently concluded that there is enough evidence
to bring charges against two Russian nationals for the
following crimes: conspiracy to murder Sergei Skripal;
attempted murder of Sergei and Yulia Skripal and
Detective Sergeant Nick Bailey; use and possession of
Novichok; and causing grievous bodily harm with intent
to Yulia Skripal and Nick Bailey. The investigation into
the murder of Dawn Sturgess remains ongoing.

The evidence reveals the following. It shows the

arrival of two individuals travelling under the names
of Alexander Petrov and Ruslan Boshirov to the United
Kingdom from Russia. CCTV and other evidence
records their travel to and from Salisbury and, crucially,
there are images that clearly places them in the vicinity
ofthe Skripal's house at 11:58 am. on Sunday, 4 March.
That was moments before the attack took place, which
involved placing the substance on the Skripal's front
door handle. Should any Council member wish, we can
share copies of those images. Furthermore, testing of
the hotel where the pair stayed in London revealed the
presence of traces of the Novichok substance in their
hotel room.

Based on a thorough analysis of our intelligence,
the United Kingdom Government has concluded that the
two individuals named by the police investigation are
in fact officers from the Russian Military Intelligence
Service, also known as the GRU. That is a body of the
Russian State.

When we briefed the Council before, we attributed
responsibility to Russia on the basis of technical
means, operational experience - and I recall the case
of Litvinenko here - and motive. Russian statements
have said that former Russian agents are, if you like,
fair game for assassination. Those arguments have now
been firmly reinforced by the clear evidence of the
involvement of identified Russian nationals travelling
to the United Kingdom from Moscow and returning
there on Russian passports. That evidence has been
sufficient for our independent prosecuting authorities
to bring criminal charges in relation to the Salisbury
attack and to issue European arrest warrants.

Those two individuals are no longer in the United
Kingdom. Were they with us, those two suspects, within
United Kingdom jurisdiction, would be liable to arrest
on a clear basis in law for their attempted murder crimes.
It is clear that the Russian State does not permit the
extradition of Russian nationals, and I understand that
is a prohibition in the Russian Constitution. Therefore,
with respect to those two individuals, we have obtained
a European arrest warrant and we will shortly issue
an INTERPOL Red Notice. Should either of those
individuals ever gain travel outside Russia, we will take
every step open to us to detain them, extradite them and
bring them to face justice in the United Kingdom.

We responded at the time to Russian behaviour
robustly. The Council will recall that we were joined
by 28 partners and NATO in expelling more than 150
Russian intelligence officers. That was a proportionate
and direct response to deter and degrade Russia's
ability to conduct further operations in future and to
reduce its ability to use the GRU network to cause our
citizens harm.

We have clear evidence of Russian State
involvement in what happened in Salisbury and the
use of chemical warfare - reckless involvement
endangering the lives of many citizens, and reckless
involvement engangering the universal prohibition on
the use of chemical weapons.

As the Council has discussed before, there is an
established pattern of maligned Russian behaviour
perpetrated by military and intelligence agencies
overseas, examples of which are the October 2016
coup attempt in Montenegro, the June 2017 NotPetya
cyberattack, which caused an estimated $1.2 billion
in damage worldwide, and other cyberattacks. The
GRU has time and again been responsible for Russian
interference in other countries' affairs, and most
recently we saw a United States indictments of GRU
individuals in relation to the 2016 Democratic National
Committee hack. Now, in the light of the evidence from
Salisbury, we see that GRU activity also encompasses
the use of an illegal military-grade nerve agent on
European soil.

The five permanent members of the Security
Council (P-S) bear a particular responsibility to uphold
global norms and international law, and all the more so
where weapons of mass destruction are concerned. One
P-5 member has not upheld those important norms. One
P-5 member has but undertaken a pattern of behaviour
that showed that it tried to murder the Skripals, played
dice with the lives of the people of Salisbury and
work in a parallel universe where the normal rules of
international affairs are inverted.

That is a direct challenge to the rules-based
international system, which has kept all of us safe,
including Russia, since 1945. In the face of such
behaviour, the international community needs to
continue to defend the laws, norms and institutions
that safeguard our citizens against chemical weapons
and safeguard them against the threat of hostile
foreign interference. That is why the British Prime
Minister yesterday set out the importance of using
transparent multilateral mechanisms to identify and
hold malign actors to account. Allow me to summarize
the steps that we believe should now be taken by the
international community.

We need to work together to strengthen the
Chemical Weapons Convention against the use of
chemical weapons around the world, which we saw most
recently violated on the streets of the United Kingdom.
We need to build further the capability of the OPCW to
attribute the use of chemical weapons. There can be no
place for such incidents as Salisbury again. We need to
shine a light on the use of State agencies to undermine
the rule of law and interfere in the domestic lives of
other countries' citizens. And we need to make the best
use of our established methods, including sanctions, in
curbing threats to our societies and our ways of life.

As Theresa May emphasized yesterday, the United
Kingdom has no quarrel with the Russian people. We
continue to hold out hope that we will once again enjoy
a strong partnership with the Government of that great
nation. We fought alongside Russian troops in the
Second World War. But we will respond robustly when
our security is threatened, the lives of our citizens are
endangered and the norms and rules of international
law and the international system are flouted in such a
brazen and reckless manner.

We stand with our partners and allies. We are
determined to continue to disrupt together the hostile
activities of foreign intelligence networks on our
territories. We will uphold the prohibition of chemical
weapons. We will protect our citizens. And we will
defend ourselves from all forms of maligned State
activity directed against us and our societies.

