Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): Armenia would like to
thank the Polish presidency for organizing today's open
debate. The participation of His Excellency Foreign
Minister Jacek Czaputowicz earlier in today's meeting
demonstrates the high relevance and importance of
this humanitarian and human rights issue. We also
thank Mrs. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Henrietta Fore,
Executive Director of UNICEF, and the other briefers
for outlining the complexity of the challenges related to
the protection of children in armed conflict.

The annual report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2019/509) reveals the
disturbing increase in violence against children. The
focus areas of the report, such as the recruitment and
use of children, abductions, sexual violence and attacks
on schools and hospitals are a stark reminder of the
gravity of the situation and the urgent need to address
it. Children living in conflict areas are particularly
vulnerable due to the lack of humanitarian access.
Attempts to isolate people living in conflict areas from
the outer world and denying their inalienable human
rights should be identified and effectively addressed.

We support the efforts of the Special Representative
to create synergies among the United Nations agencies,
regional organizations and international human rights
bodies. The mandate of the Special Representative
provides for a key role in streamlining and integrating
the activities of the international community around
the noble goal of protecting children.

This year marks the thirtieth anniversary of the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child,
one of the most widely endorsed and fundamental
treaties for the protection and promotion of universal
human rights. Armenia continues to prioritize the
protection of children's rights, as reflected in our
national policies as well as in the framework of our
international cooperation.

We work closely with the International Committee
of the Red Cross in creating shelters and safe rooms
in schools and kindergartens, located in the border
regions, and also undertake steps to ensure the safety
of schools in line with Armenia's commitments under
the Safe Schools Declaration. Armenia's endorsement
of the Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the
Paris Commitments and the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers is yet another reflection of
our commitment to promote the safety of children.
We are also a signatory to the Optional Protocol on
the involvement of children in armed conflict and we
encourage Member States that have not yet done so to
join those important instruments.

Regrettably, in our region too we have witnessed
violence against children in conflict situations. The
deliberate, indiscriminate targeting by Azerbaijan of
the civilian population and infrastructures of Nagorno
Karabakh and the bordering regions of Armenia,
including schools, kindergartens and hospitals,
has resulted in deaths and injuries among civilians
and schoolchildren.

Refusing the creation of an investigative mechanism
to identify the ceasefire violations, as agreed within
the framework of the internationally mandated format
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe Minsk Group co-chairmanship, which
would contribute to reducing the number of incidents
affecting civilians, including children, is beyond any
reasonable justification.

We have been observing an appalling practice
of involving children in State-led hate propaganda,
including through school curricula, in our neighbouring
country. Such a malicious practice of negative
stereotyping, fuelling hatred on the basis of national
identity among children and young people, is not only
reprehensible and incompatible with the international
humanitarian and human rights law, but it further
undermines efforts to create an environment conducive
to peace and reconciliation.

The effective protection of children in situations
of armed conflict requires strengthened commitment
to the implementation of the relevant international
instruments and necessitates early warning and early
action. Supporting free and unimpeded humanitarian
access is crucial to preventing and alleviating the
suffering of children caught in conflict. Today's open
debate once again reminds us that the imperative
of protecting children and ensuring their right to
life should prevail over political manipulations and
distorted narratives.

