Mr. Egunsola (Nigeria): My delegation would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his letter forwarding the
report on the Mission of the International Conference on
the Former Yugoslavia (ICFY) to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). We have carefully
considered the report and noted with satisfaction the
continuing political commitment of the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to the closure of the border
between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the areas
of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina under the
control of the Bosnian Serb forces. Furthermore, we note
with satisfaction the good working relationship between the
ICFY Mission's personnel and officials of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

However, we wish to express our concern at reports of
continuing violations of the border regime at certain points,
particularly the smuggling of fuel across the Drina river,
north of Trbusnica. In our View, these fuel shipments can
have only one purpose: to keep the war machine of the
Bosnian Serb army going, and that, we believe, is against
the spirit and letter of the Council's resolutions. We
therefore call on the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to take adequate steps to put a stop to all
illegal activities and border violations.

With respect to the draft resolution before us, which
would suspend for 180 days the measures referred to in
operative paragraph 1 of resolution 943 (1994), my
delegation is in a position to support it, not only because
of the favourable report from the Co-Chairmen, but
because we have seen signs that the Council's carrot-and-
stick policy is having its intended effect, which is to
modify the behaviour of the authorities in Belgrade. In
this regard, the restraint shown by the FRY during the
summer offensive in Croatia was commendable.

Finally, my delegation believes that the desire for a
peaceful settlement, which the Geneva declaration of 8
September 1995 represents, needs to be given all the
necessary encouragement. In view of the foregoing, my
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

