Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate,
since the United Nations peacekeeping operations
are one of the main instruments for the effective
maintenance of peace and security. In the light of
recent events in Africa and in the Middle East, the role
of peacekeeping activities is growing. It is therefore
necessary to discuss the existing approaches and to
outline further tasks.

A multilateral dimension requires that United
Nations peacekeeping activities should effectively
respond to arising conflicts, new political challenges
and threats to peace. Today, we can definitely say that
the potential of United Nations peacekeeping activities
has significantly increased in both quantitative and
qualitative terms. We support the measures aimed
at strengthening the operational potential of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO),
especially in promoting women to relevant positions
in United Nations peacekeeping missions, including
increasing the number of female police officers to
20 per cent by 2014. Other measures include the
systematic involvement of peacebuilding elements and
implementing better mechanisms in the mobilization
of resources for ensuring peacekeeping operations. It
is also necessary to effectively implement the global
field support strategy in order to improve the quality of
services and to carry out the mandate of the missions.

It is still imperative to support the global
partnership, including strengthening cooperation
among the Security Council, the General Assembly,
the countries sending peacekeepers and their host
States. It is also extremely important that peacekeeping
operations be continued with all possible preventive,
diplomatic and other measures. The experience of
last year's events proves again that we should strictly
observe the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. Accordingly, United Nations
peacekeeping missions should operate firmly within
the framework of the main peacekeeping principles,
namely, the consent of the parties, the non-use of force
except in self-defence and impartiality.

We believe that the modern peacekeeping tasks
and resource deficits require enhancing cooperation
with regional organizations in the framework of their
mandates. In that regard, it is important that DPKO,
along with its traditional partners, the African Union
and the European Union, increase cooperation with
other regional structures, in particular the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO).

Kyrgyzstan welcomes the signing of the
memorandum of understanding between the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in September 2012. That legal
framework will allow for the use of United Nations
experience in the peacebuilding field. We hope that the
working meeting of the CSTO delegation and DPKO
on the implementation of the memorandum, which will
be held this week, will result in elaborating concrete
measures for joint peacekeeping activities.

Today, Kyrgyzstan is represented in peacekeeping
missions in Liberia, South Sudan, Darfur and Haiti. In
recent years, effective cooperation has been established
with DPKO, which provides assistance to Kyrgyzstan in
training, the expeditious processing of the documents
of candidates for peacekeeping missions and expert
assessments of the most pressing peacekeeping
problems.

In our view, more attention should be paid to
improving the legal framework for international
cooperation and to the development of legislation at
the national level. Accordingly, Kyrgyzstan has made
additional efforts for the legal regulation of peacekeeping
activities. On 13 July 2012, the President of Kyrgyzstan
signed legislation on principles and modalities for the
participation of the Kyrgyz Republic in the activities
of maintaining international peace and security. In
October 2012, the Government of Kyrgyzstan approved
regulations on procedures for training military officers
to be deployed in United Nations peacekeeping missions.
To implement the adopted legislation, Kyrgyzstan
is currently considering deploying a military unit in
United Nations peacekeeping missions. We greatly
appreciate the readiness of DPKO to render assistance
to Kyrgyzstan as we undertake those efforts.

In conclusion, I would like to confirm that
Kyrgyzstan, as a peaceful country, will continue
to contribute to increasing the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations for the sake of the maintenance
of international peace and security.

