The President (spoke in French): I shall now make a
statement in my national capacity as the representative
of Luxembourg.

I, too, thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his
briefing and for the commitment he and his team have
shown in leading the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006). The quarterly report that
he presented to the Council today shows that the
Committee continues to perform important work in
support of the resolutions of the Security Council.
Luxembourg also expresses its appreciation to the
Panel of Experts created by resolution 1929 (2010) for
the valuable support it provides to the work of the 1737
Committee.

The interim agreement adopted on 24 November
last year in Geneva was an important step. For the first
time in a decade, it was possible to reach a detailed
agreement addressing the most concerning elements
of the Iranian nuclear programme. We welcome
once again the energy and determination of the High
Representative of the European Union, Catherine
Ashton, whose role in the negotiations between Iran
and the E3+3 continues to be central.

The implementation of the joint plan of action
defined by the interim agreement began on 20 January.
Negotiations aimed at a comprehensive long-term
solution have also begun, addressing the most crucial
questions, including uranium enrichment to 20 per
cent, the development of advanced centrifuges, and the
Arak heavy water reactor. Any comprehensive long-
term solution must take the resolutions of the Security
Council into due account - a principle that figures
explicitly in the plan of action.

Reaching a comprehensive solution is a difficult
and laborious process. We expect Iran to act in good
faith and to cooperate actively with the international
community. We note with interest the latest report
of the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), dated 20 February, on the
implementation of safeguards agreements under the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and of the provisions of the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council. For the first time, the report
also notes the progress made in implementing the
cooperation framework agreed between the Agency
and Iran on 11 November last year and the interim
agreement between the E3+3 and Iran.

We welcome the timely implementation by Iran
of the initial practical measures emanating from the
cooperation framework, as well as the fact that the
Agency has been able to begin its monitoring and
verification activities with respect to the measures
contained in the interim agreement. The development
of the cooperation framework between Iran and the
IAEA represents an important step forward towards
proving the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear
programme. As noted by the IAEA Director General,
the measures implemented by Iran and the other
commitments it has made are positive developments,
but much remains to be done to resolve all outstanding
issues related to the possible military dimension of its
nuclear programme. We therefore eagerly await further
detail from the Agency on the implementation by Iran
of the new seven practical steps that it must apply by
15 May, under the cooperation framework.

Restoring the confidence of the international
community will require Iran to respect its international
obligations under the relevant resolutions of the IAEA
Board of Governors and the Security Council. Pending
a comprehensive long-term solution, the Security
Council's resolutions impose sanctions on Iran, which
continue to remain in force, as clearly indicated in
the quarterly report of the 1737 Committee. In the
last quarter, we learned with deep concern of reports
on contracts for arms sales from Iran to Iraq that
allegedly were concluded in 2013. We also learned
of the interception in the Red Sea on 5 March of an
Iranian ship, the Klos-C, transporting missiles of
Syrian manufacture destined for Gaza. We recall that
all imports, all exports and all transfers of any weapons
from Iran are prohibited under the relevant Security
Council resolutions. In that regard, we look forward with
interest to additional clarification to be provided by the
parties concerned as well as the Panel of Experts to the
Committee.

The confirmed or alleged violations by Iran of the
sanctions regime remain a source of grave concern. We
regret the fact that the Committee was unable to take
decisive measures against reported violations, such as

the interception of a shipment of carbon fibre to Iran; the
Shahab-l and Shahab-3 missile launches in 2012 during
the Great Prophet VII exercises; and the interception
in 2013 ofa cargo of arms off the coast of Yemen. The
Panel of Experts also plays a key role in helping States
that are attempting to implement the sanctions. We
commend the work of the Panel to investigate Iran's
attempts to circumvent the sanctions. The Committee
must strive harder to make this information public
and to disseminate best practices to detect and prevent
violations.

Luxembourg wishes every success to the negotiators
who are trying to reach a comprehensive long-term
solution within the allotted time period of six months, as
defined in the joint plan of action agreed between Iran
and the E3+3 countries. We understand that they will
meet from 7 to 9 April in Vienna. Nevertheless, until
a comprehensive solution is found, the international
community must remain vigilant. All States must fulfil
their obligations to effectively and fully implement
the sanctions established by the Security Council.
In the same spirit, the 1737 Committee and its Panel
of Experts must continue their vital twofold work of
helping States to better understand and better implement
their sanctions work, and of establishing consequences
imposed for violations of Security Council resolutions.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.15 pm.
