The President (interpretation from French): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

In that capacity, I fully associate myself with the
statement made by the representative of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the States members of the European
Union and associated countries. However, I feel it would
be useful briefly to confirm publicly France's support for
the draft resolution under consideration.

The situation in Angola has seen some positive
developments, in particular the signing of an agreement
on 9 January on a timetable to complete the tasks of the
Lusaka Protocol. We cannot but encourage the
Government of Angola and UNITA to achieve the goals
set in the timetable. We hope in particular that the
planned meeting between President dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi will take place.

On the basis of observations and recommendations
to be submitted to us by the Secretary-General early in
March, the Security Council will consider how, if
necessary, to restructure the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola and adapt it to circumstances. In the
current phase, however, the three-month extension of the
Mission's mandate, as proposed by the Secretary-General,
will contribute to strengthening the positive trend. That is
why France will join all the other members who will vote
in favour of the draft resolution.

I resume my function as President of the Council.

I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/1998/62.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
The President (interpretation from French): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1149 (1998).

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 5.40 pm.

