Mr. Gnehm (United States of America):
Mr. President, I should like to begin by expressing to you
our congratulations as you assume your duties as President
of Security Council for this month. We look forward to a
productive month under your able and gracious guidance.
I should also like to thank Ambassador Li Zhaoxing for his
effective and even-handed leadership of the Security
Council during March.

Today we have taken an important step towards
making the world safe from the use of nuclear weapons.
The nuclear-weapon States parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) - which are
also the permanent members of the Security Council -
have cooperated in offering coordinated assurances to the
non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the Treaty. This
resolution incorporates those assurances, directly or by
reference. In addition, this resolution elaborates a series of
measures that the Council will consider taking in the
catastrophic event of nuclear aggression, including possible
measures to restore international peace and security. With
the adoption of this resolution, these assurances are
inscribed firmly in the United Nations framework.

This resolution recognizes the legitimate interest of the
non-nuclear-weapon States in receiving assurances from the
nuclear-weapon States. It promises that, in the event that
the non-nuclear-weapon States are the victims of an act or
a threat of nuclear aggression, the Security Council - and
above all its nuclear-weapon States members - will be
immediately involved. Although any State can bring such
a matter to the Council's attention, the nuclear-weapon
States promise that they will do so. And they will seek
Council action to provide the necessary assistance to the
State victim: this assistance can include humanitarian and
technical aid, help in getting compensation from the
aggressor, and, most importantly, appropriate measures to
settle the dispute and restore international peace and
security.

On 5 and 6 April, each of the permanent members
issued national declarations which include so-called
negative security assurances: explanations of the
circumstances under which we will not use nuclear
weapons. These national declarations are referred to in
paragraph 1 of the resolution. They are realistic, serious
and feasible considerations - the only basis on which
credible security assurances can be based - and are
highly responsive to the concerns expressed by non-
nuclear-weapon States.

The coordinated sponsorship of this resolution by all
the permanent members and the positive and negative
assurances are significant advances over the Council's
effort 25 years ago. Security Council resolution 255
(1968) was not co-sponsored or voted for by all nuclear-
weapon States parties to the NPT, nor did it incorporate
both positive and negative security assurances.

Indeed, the stable environment created by the NPT
has helped make possible the security assurances in the
resolution we have just adopted. The resolution's very
first paragraph encompasses the three aspects of the NPT:
prevention of nuclear war, non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons, and cooperation in the use of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. These goals, and the efficient
functioning of the NPT's verification and monitoring
mechanisms, have been a fundamental element of global
security for 25 years.

That is why the assurances in this resolution are
offered to States in full compliance with the Treaty. And
that is why my Government hopes that this resolution will
be seen by others as a further argument in favour of the
indefinite extension of the NPT, even though these
security assurances are not linked to the extension
question. As I said before, because there is a Treaty, we
can offer these assurances. If the NPT is permanent; if it
is fully complied with and if it is universal, not only do
these assurances become more meaningful: they suggest
a day when they may also prove to be unnecessary.

As the resolution calls for, the United States accepts
its obligations under the NPT. We reaffirm our
commitment to article VI of the NPT, which calls for

 

good faith negotiations aiming towards nuclear
disarmament. We are also actively involved in negotiations
to achieve a comprehensive test ban and we look forward
to the negotiations to achieve a treaty on the cut-off of
fissile material. We joined France, the United Kingdom and
the Russian Federation in reaffirming these goals in a joint
declaration in Geneva on 6 April. And we are committed to
ratifying the START II Treaty and going beyond it. The
nuclear arms race is over.

Today, largely because of the success of the NPT,
non-proliferation has become a norm in world politics.
States wishing to demonstrate their peaceful intent readily
join the NPT. States wishing to put their neighbours at ease
join the NPT. States seeking international legitimacy join
the NPT.

Today there over 170 States parties to the Treaty, and
soon more will become members. As President Clinton said
on 1 March 1995, the NPT is the principal reason why the
spread of nuclear weapons has not been more rapid or more
extensive. It is our firm hope that States share with us the
goal of supporting this valuable Treaty and the entire non-
proliferation regime. It is in this spirit that we adopt this
resolution today.

