Ms. Askira: I thank you, Sir, for allowing me to
speak at this meeting today.

May I kindly invite the Council to join me, here in
the outskirts of Maiduguri, the place where I live.

Please take a moment to picture a community
of vulnerable women and children outside the city,
with neither a floor nor a bed. There is a woman in
her early 70s lying sick in the sun, covering her body
with a carpet cloth; that is what she calls a blanket. Her
grandchildren, aged 4, 6 and 7, are sitting right next to
her, often with no idea of what to eat.

I was in this community, on the outskirts of
Maidugiri, three days ago. I went to give assistance and
give blankets to the children. This is to tell the Council
that such communities actually exist. They do not exist
because people choose to live there, but because people
do not have a better place to go.

Another is a young girl, Yaga, who looks a lot
like I did when I was 15 years old. We all know how
15-year-olds are. She was abducted by an armed group
and, fortunately, got released. Yaga is struggling to be
integrated into her community, her family, her friends,
people with whom she has been staying with her whole
life. I noticed the fear in her face when I was speaking
to her and she mentioned to me that she had suffered
from stigmatization. We all knew she was scared of
being alone. She was scared of people pointing to her a
terrorist. She was scared that people would look at her
as associated with Boko Haram. That girl could easily
have been me, but I had met her - who could not be
me - and she was in this situation because we did not

do enough to prevent violent conflict from affecting
her. We could not protect her and we could not protect
her community.

She said: "I really want to be like you, Fatima,
because you inspire me." That was so touching.
People here are not hopeless, but the frustration and
desperation make them want to make changes. I know
of many young people whose stories are inspiring. I
know a lady who actually volunteered her time to go
and teach the people in an internally displaced persons
(IDPs) camp. I know a group of young boys who came
up with a challenge to do something. They encouraged
many young people to engage in different ways to pass
on this message, enrol in school and even teach in their
community schools and in IDP camps, as well.

I started a campaign on 8 December to raise money
and get clothing and blankets for women and children
IDPs. Those who gave the most were people who did
not have much at all, but still gave because they did
not want anyone to sleep in the cold. By 3 January, we
were able to reach a little more than $1,500, with which
we managed to buy about 500 blankets and share them
with 500 people. It turns out that we are still receiving
a lot from people, because people are still supporting
one another. People are still believing that they should
actually help one another.

I launched the campaign through social media. It
got the attention of many and made an impact in the
community. I thought it was important to recognize
the collegial efforts of people on the ground who want
to remain your friends and who are changing life and
protecting the community to the best of their ability.
And to the members of the Security Council and the
Governments they represent, I want to say that ordinary
Nigerians like me are working every day to improve
security and reintegration into the community, and to
start rebuilding our lives and our region. We are grateful
for the Council's political, military and financial
support. While the Council debates, our region is in
shambles. I want to add two points.

First, we are grateful for all the humanitarian and
development assistance. As the United Nations and its
members' Governments design future programmes, I
would like to ask that they ensure that the programmes
they support have mechanisms to communicate with
and listen to communities, and that there is transparency
and flexibility. In some areas, we have seen that helping

people recover is a challenge, and support is needed for
that. In other regions, it is still too unsafe for people to
relocate and we need aid that is adequate to addressing
such emergency situations - aid that prevents trauma
and local conflicts, promotes people's coexistence,
affects communities and reduces tension.

Secondly, as the Council looks at security in our
region today, I would like to ask it to go beyond just
looking at the war against Boko Haram, extending it
to proactive prevention of violent conflict as a long-
term solution to the emergent threat to the ethnic and
religious balance here in Nigeria and in the Lake Chad
region in general. We need a peace architecture, a way
for citizens - young and old, male and female, boys
and girls - and the State working together to reduce
the scourge of Boko Haram, but also to address the
conflict between farmers and herders and ethnic and
religious conflict. Right now peacebuilding is urgently
needed, especially when it can be used to engaged
young people and women in dealing with the horrors
we have seen from Boko Haram and the Islamic
State - not that they should stop at that. Of course, it
is impossible to exaggerate the humanitarian need, as I
highlighted before. From my story, we can see clearly
that the need for scaling up is plainly there. I believe
that donor agencies and the members of the Security
Council will try their best to actually see this scaled up
to the maximum.

I am grateful for the rare opportunity to share this
experience and some of my recommendations with
the Council. As a young woman, I am truly honoured
that the Council is listening to young people on the
front lines.

