The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bangladesh, Brazil, Fiji, Japan,
Indonesia, New Zealand, the Philippines, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea and Spain, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
ofthe Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Chowdhury
(Bangladesh), Mr. Fonseca (Brazil), Mr. Naidu
(Fiji), Mr. Satoh (Japan), Mr. Widodo (Indonesia),
Mr. MacKay (New Zealand), Mr. Manalo
(Philippines), Mr. Seixas da Costa (Portugal),

Mr. Sun Joan-yang (Republic ofKorea) and

Mr. Arias (Spain) took the seats reservedfor them
at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
decides to extend an invitation under rule 37 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. John Howard, Prime Minister of the
Commonwealth of Australia.

There being no objection it is so decided.

His Excellency Mr. John Howard, Prime Minister
ofAustralia, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.


The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. John
Howard, Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of
Australia.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Transitional Administrator for East Timor.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello to take a seat
at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jose Ramos-
Horta, Senior Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Ramos-Horta to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2002/8O and Corr.l, which contain the
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor.

The Security Council will hear a briefing by
Mr. Vieira de Mello at this meeting. I understand that
he is also prepared to answer questions and provide
clarifications if need be.


