Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I would like to
thank Poland for organizing this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, a subject of
enormous importance that is a matter of high priority
and concern for my country, Algeria. I particularly
thank you, Madam President, for your concept note
(S/2018/444, annex), and we fully share your views on
the priority areas that you indicate. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his most recent report,
of 14 May (S/2018/462), and for the shocking picture he
has painted of the suffering of civilians in high-profile
armed conflicts.

When we look at ongoing conflict situations, we
cannot help being taken aback by the numbers ofcivilian
casualties and the challenges that civilian populations
are facing around the globe. The recent situation of
the people of Gaza, or indeed the Palestinian people
as a whole, is a blatant example of that. Needless to
say, civilians are now the most likely to be the primary
victims, if not the targets, of conflicts, either as direct
casualties or enduring the trials of life as refugees
who have been displaced and are now suffering the
evils of slavery, human trafficking, sexual abuse or
food shortages.

Since the publication of the first report of the
Secretary-General 19 years ago (S/1999/957), some
progress, while it is insufficient, has been made in
strengthening the mandate of peacekeeping operations
and in carrying out disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. But that is far from enough.
In the most recent report, the Secretary-General
describes the situation as one of immeasurable human
and societal decimation. Let me be clear: everyone must
respect international humanitarian and human rights
law, and in situations of conflict, particularly those
that are on the Security Council's agenda, protection is
an obligation, not an option. There is also still a great
deal to be done to improve the protection of society's
most vulnerable members - women, children and
the elderly. Terror attacks on civilians or the use of
sexual violence as a weapon of war cannot and must
not tolerated. Attacks on humanitarian personnel or the
creation of obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian
aid to the civilian population must be rejected and
denounced in the strongest terms.

I would like to share with the Council our vision
of the way forward and in particular how the Security
Council and the United Nations and its Member
States could act in that regard. First, while we have
international legally binding instruments and generally
accepted practices, we still lack a comprehensive,
coherent and specific approach to the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Second, we need a broad prevention strategy that
clearly should be focused on tackling the root causes of
conflicts and must encompass areas such as promoting
sustainable development, eradicating poverty and
fostering good governance and a culture of peace,
tolerance and the rule of law.

Third, the protection of civilians must be based
on the principles of universality and non-selectivity,
particularly where conflicts arising from foreign
occupation are concerned. The implementation of
international humanitarian law - and specifically the
Fourth Geneva Convention - is not an option. It is an
obligation that the international community, through
the Security Council, must impose when an occupying
or administrative Power does not respect it.

Fourth, we must address the issue of accountability
with regard to impunity for violations of international
humanitarian law.

Fifth, ensuring more effective coordination among
the United Nations mandated bodies - the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council - remains vital. The Peacebuilding
Commission also provides an appropriate framework
for such coordination in post-conflict situations.

Sixth, we urge the Security Council and the
Secretariat to strengthen their cooperation, common
approach and interaction with regional organizations
such as the African Union, which has made tremendous
progress in that regard and, I should point out, has
transitioned from a policy of non-interference to one of
non-indifference.

Seventh, the Security Council could consider the
systematic inclusion in all peacekeeping mandates
of an obligation to report violations of human or
humanitarian rights.

Lastly, this meeting must be seen as a reaffirmation
of our collective commitment to protecting civilians in
situations of conflict. We hope that at the conclusion of
this open debate the presidency will issue a summary
of the proposed recommendations, with clear steps to
be taken that we can build on in our proclaimed and
shared endeavour.

