Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we express our condolences to Russia for
those who lost their lives yesterday in Syria.

We appreciate the convening of this meeting, and
we are grateful to Mr. De Mistura and Mr. Lowcock for
their briefings and work. We acknowledge and support
their efforts to achieve a political solution to the conflict
in Syria and to protect the civilian population.

Peru notes with regret and deep concern the
continuation of the conflict and the grave humanitarian
situation. We regret the suffering and the high level
of vulnerability of millions of people, as well as the
evident disdain of the parties to the conflict for
international law and international humanitarian law.
As previously pointed out, it is essential to prevent Idlib
from becoming a new site of humanitarian tragedy or a
major factor of instability.

Peru strongly condemns terrorism and considers it
necessary that the remaining terrorist groups in Idlib
and in other areas of Syria be held accountable. We
also recognize the need to safeguard the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria. However, in
no way should that be interpreted as justification
for putting the lives of millions of people at risk. On
the contrary, the situation leads us to emphasize that
there is no military solution to the conflict. In that
regard, we would like to welcome the announcement
of the Presidents of the Russian Federation and Turkey
concerning the establishment of a demilitarized zone,
which indeed includes the distinguishing and the
separation of terrorists from other rebel groups and the
civilian population. We also wish to acknowledge the
intense efforts that the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General has been carrying out in that vein, in particular
the recent meeting he convened in Geneva with the so-
called small group.

We encourage all parties to maintain a constructive
and committed spirit, with a view to protecting the
civilian population throughout the Syrian territory, and
to advance the political process based on resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique (S/2012/512, annex). With regard to the latter, we underscore the
need to accelerate the implementation of an inclusive
and representative constitutional committee, especially
with respect to Syrian women. And we welcome the
progress in that regard that the Special Envoy has made
known to us.

We also highlight the need to accelerate the
process of releasing prisoners, of identifying missing
persons and of handing over human remains to
relatives. Furthermore, we underscore the need to
guarantee immediate, safe and unrestricted access to
humanitarian assistance from the United Nations and
other specialized agencies. That includes cross-border
assistance, which in the current context is essential for
the survival of millions of people.

Finally, we must not forget the need to address the
situation of the millions of displaced persons and to
consider that the achievement of sustainable peace in
Syria necessitates their ability to return to their homes,
properties and businesses voluntarily, under safe
conditions and in a dignified manner.

