Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): Pakistan supports a durable
and peaceful resolution of the Darfur issue through an
inclusive political process and in full respect for the
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Sudan.

The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) continues to play an
important role towards the realization of those goals,
as well as in the maintenance of peace and security
in Darfur. Pakistan has been closely associated with
the Mission. Our troops and police units have made
valuable contributions to its operations over the years,
and we will continue to support the important work
being undertaken by UNAMID in line with its mandate.

Pakistan believes that the effective implementation
of the UNAMID mandate and the objective of
establishing durable peace and security in Darfur can
best be achieved through cooperative and constructive
engagement with the Government of the Sudan.
Any actions or decisions to the contrary only risk
undermining the objective of peace and security in
Darfur.

Eight years after the Council took up the Darfur
issue, it is high time that we realize this imperative,
which is crucial to success in Darfur. We find it very
unhelpful that the text makes at best only a half-hearted
attempt at acknowledging the achievements of the
Government of Sudan and UNAMID. It also downplays
and trivializes the challenge posed by the ever-widening
network of alliances between Darfur-based rebel
movements and those outside Darfur with the declared
purpose of overthrowing the Government.

The refusal to mention the Sudan Revolutionary
Front in the Council's decisions is not understandable.
While some of these important issues have been
ignored in the resolution, several others have been
included on which several members have reservations
and which have not even found mention in the reports
of the Secretary-General. This is certainly not a helpful
approach to advancing the goals of peace and stability
in the region. The final text of the resolution could have
been improved by including a more objective reflection
of the issues. The Pakistan delegation made several
proposals to that end; we are disappointed that they were
not accommodated. A long-standing and complicated
issue like that of Darfur requires the Council to send a
united and consensual message based on a transparent
and inclusive approach involving all Council members.
Transparency and inclusiveness in the negotiations
would have stood us in good stead.

Despite Pakistan's several reservations on the
procedural and substantive aspects of the resolution,
Pakistan decided to vote in favour of the text in
order to support the efforts of the men and women of
UNAMID who are working for the establishment of
peace in the region. We will continue to play our role
in the establishment of durable peace in Darfur and the
broader region.

