Mr. Gebeyehu (Ethiopia): We thank the United
States presidency for organizing this high-level briefing
meeting on an issue that has serious implications for
regional and international peace and security. We
express our appreciation to the United States Secretary
of State for presiding over this important meeting. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his useful briefing.

We are indeed deeply concerned by the extremely
tense situation prevailing in the Korean peninsula.
No stone should be left unturned to de-escalate the
situation. There is a real danger that it could get out
of hand. That should never be allowed to happen; nor
should the situation be allowed to spiral out of control.

The activities of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea are no doubt extremely dangerous. Ethiopia
joins other members in once again reiterating its strong
condemnation ofthe latest launches ofballistic missiles
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, in
violation of the numerous resolutions adopted by the
Council. The need to find a lasting and comprehensive
political and diplomatic solution to this long-standing
issue through dialogue has never been more urgent than
today. In that regard, compliance by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea with its international
commitments on denuclearization, including full
compliance with the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, is indeed indispensable. That would no
doubt pave the way for a peaceful and comprehensive
solution through dialogue. The Democratic People's
Republic of Korea has the responsibility to do that. In
the meantime, it is important to reduce the tension in
the Korean peninsula in order to ensure that matters
do not get out of hand by accident. But the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea has to use the opportunity
to avert what otherwise could be a slide into war from
which no one would benefit.

The full implementation by Member States of the
relevant Security Council resolutions on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea is also necessary. We
believe there is an outreach activity by the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006) with different regional groups,
which will contribute to the implementation of the
sanctions regime against the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

For our part, we have taken all the necessary
measures to ensure that Ethiopia is in full compliance
with all that is called for by the relevant Council
resolutions imposing sanctions on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. We will continue with
resolve to meet our obligations in that regard.
I wish to conclude by reaffirming our commitment
to fulfilling our obligations and to continuing to
engage constructively with the Panel charged with the
responsibility of monitoring the implementation of the
sanctions regime imposed on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. We look forward to the restoration
of a trustworthy peace and security on the Korean
peninsula. We all need that.

