Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset let me express our appreciation
to members of the Security Council and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri,
for their condolences with respect to the terrorist act
that took place in Moscow. We will convey those words
of condolence to the Government and people of Russia.

We welcome you, Mr. President, to preside over
the Council this month and wish you every success at
this post. We also express our gratitude to the
Ambassador of Chile, Mr. Mufioz, and the entire
delegation of Chile for their skilful leadership in the
Council in January.

We express our appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his report on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), and also to the UNMIK head, Mr. Holkeri,
for the detailed briefing on the situation in the
province. We note the attendance at today's Council
meeting of the Assistant Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia and Montenegro, Mr. Perovic'.

The assessments in the report and the statement
of the Special Representative greatly coincide with our
View of the processes under way in Kosovo. The
central development at this phase of the Kosovo
settlement was the launching of the mechanism to
review implementation, by the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government, of standards established by the
international community for implementation of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) on the basis of
the "standards before status" policy, and also of
legislation now in effect in the province. It is important
that this process be implemented with the United
Nations taking a leading role and under the close
political leadership of the Security Council.

The "Standards for Kosovo" document endorsed
by the Council in the presidential statement of 12
December 2003 (S/PRST/2003/26) sets out a set of
criteria the implementation of which will be
compelling evidence of movement in the province
towards establishing a multi-ethnic and democratic
society, a society in which equal human rights must be
ensured, including security, freedom of movement and
return to their homes by all representatives of all
communities of Kosovo, regardless of their ethnic
origins. This is specifically why we support the clearly
stated position of the Secretary-General and the
UNMIK leadership that any attempts to blur or ease
standards under pressure from any quarter are
unacceptable.

We agree with the Secretary-General's View of
that movement forward in the Kosovo settlement is not
possible without achieving progress on standards.
Considerable effort is still called for in this respect.
The Provisional Institutions of the province clearly
have the responsibility for implementation of the
standards in their spheres of competences. Here, as is
clearly underscored in the Secretary-General's report,
statements by provincial leaders, including with respect
to their commitment to multi-ethnicity, must be borne
out by genuine actions. Unfortunately, we see that in
practice the interests of the minorities continue to be
frequently ignored. Key requirements regarding the
situation of non-Albanian inhabitants of Kosovo are
not being implemented with respect to the return of
refugees or internally displaced persons. There is no
reliable or equal security for the entire population of
the province, nor are there universally equal
fundamental rights and freedoms, including the right to
fair conditions of employment. There is no adequate
representation of minorities, above all Serbians, in the
structures of the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government.

Like other Council members, we are certain that
without radical improvement of the situation the
process of building a democratic, multi-ethnic society
in Kosovo will remain stalled.

We share the Secretary-General's concerns over
attempts by the leadership of the Provisional
Institutions in the province and in the Kosovo
Assembly to overstep their authority, to persistently
overlook the interests of the minorities and even to
challenge the authority of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. We believe that such
unacceptable actions are evidence of an effective
disengagement of the Kosovo Albanian leaders from
implementation of the international community's
standards for Kosovo.

We anticipate that UNMIK will rapidly complete
preparation of the plan for implementing the standards,
a plan that details the necessary specific steps for the
implementation of the "Standards for Kosovo"
document. We look forward to the presentation of the
draft plan to the Council and are ready to
constructively consider it. We welcome the Secretary-
General's decision to report quarterly to the Council as
part of the review mechanism on progress of the
Provisional Institutions in implementation of those
standards. Such reporting is necessary, since it is the
basis on which the Council will be able to objectively
assess movement towards implementation of the
standards. We share the View of the importance of
constructively involving all Kosovo communities in the
preparation of the plan and subsequently in its
implementation. We note the work of UNMIK in this
areas. Clearly, there is still a lot to be done.

An essential element in the "Standards for
Kosovo" document is the establishment of a direct
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina on practical
issues of mutual interest. We welcome the Special
Representative's efforts in this direction. We anticipate
a rapid naming of delegations of the parties to all four
working groups and their beginning their work within
the time frame set by Mr. Holkeri.

An important component of efforts to advance the
Kosovo settlement will also be to bolster a constructive
dialogue between UNMIK and Belgrade. One channel
for this could be the high-level Belgrade-UNMIK
working group established in 2001. Launching the
political process meant to determine the final status of
Kosovo must be conditioned on implementation of the
standards established by the international community
and the construction in the province of a democratic,
multi-ethnic society.

We share the View that the implementation of the
standards in the province and a positive outcome to the
comprehensive review of their implementation - the
first opportunity for which could be in mid-2005 -
will not automatically trigger the political process
determining the province's final status. We believe that
the Security Council must take the decision to begin
that process. As a permanent member of the Security
Council and as a participant in the Contact Group,
Russia intends to continue to participate actively in the
overall efforts to seek a just, balanced and lasting
settlement to the Kosovo issue.

