Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to welcome you, Mr. President, to
United Nations Headquarters and to express our pride
at seeing you assume the presidency of the Security
Council for this month.

Like other speakers, I would also like to warmly
congratulate and thank the Togolese delegation for
having taken this wise and timely initiative to organize
an open debate on the issue of transnational organized
crime, which is one of the major concerns of West
Africa and the Sahel region.
Given the numerous and diverse threats posed by
transnational organized crime to the African continent,
and particularly West Africa, it is appropriate that we
focus on this important issue. Unfortunately, the
combination of factors such as porous borders, poverty
and political instability create fertile ground for
organized crime in that part of the world. It goes
without saying that unless bold steps commensurate
with the danger are taken, this ever-growing scourge
will undoubtedly undermine our economic
development efforts and jeopardize the still fragile
national and social stability of several States of West
Africa and the Sahel region.

The danger is made even clearer by the many
reports of the United Nations Office for Drugs and
Crime, which establish that transnational organized
crime is fuelled in large part by trafficking in drugs,
weapons and human beings, as well as piracy and
money-laundering. If it is to be effective, the fight
against transnational organized crime must therefore
comprehensively address all the insidious facets of this
scourge.

The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
in our subregion remains a major source of concern,
given how cheap and easy they are to obtain. They
seriously jeopardize the security and economic and
social development of our countries, raising the spectre
of escalating conflicts, crumbling peace agreements,
increased violence and growing crime.

Recognizing this, in 2006 the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) adopted
the Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons,
Their Ammunition and Other Related Materials, which
came into force in 2009. The Convention offers a
gleam of hope that real progress might be made against
the spread of these weapons, whose circulation in West
Africa remains a dangerous spark in an already
inflammable region.

Through its regional action plan of 2008,
ECOWAS has established a unit dedicated to fighting
drug trafficking, which is the key mechanism for
cooperation and intelligence-sharing with similar
organizations engaged in the same battle in Europe,
Latin America and the United States. The States
members of ECOWAS attach considerable importance
to the development and harmonization of legislation
governing drug-related investigations and trials.

Also in the framework of the operationalization
of the action plan, a subregional conference on the
harmonization of efforts to fight drug trafficking was
held February 2010 in the capital of Senegal, leading to
the adoption of a road map commonly known as the
Dakar Initiative. This multisectoral response is
principally aimed at reducing supply and demand
through the suppression of drug trafficking and the
strengthening of operational mechanisms for
information exchange, the creation of a subregional
crime database, and improved border controls.

The development of international law
enforcement in the fight against money-laundering is a
key part of the drive to eradicate all activities related to
organized crime. In that regard, cooperation must not
be limited to the financial sphere, but must include in
particular strategic support among the various partners
in the form of a strategic alliance against drug
trafficking.

Clearly, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime remains the main
instrument of the international legal response to this
scourge and continues to generate real hope that the
spread of such crime can be halted. To achieve the aims
of the Convention, the task force set up to monitor its
implementation must be given the resources it needs.

Another major focus of our concern continues to
be the worrisome increase of acts of piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea and the Sahel region. We must do more to
counter such activity, which, in addition to
jeopardizing the freedom of international shipping,
hampers the economic development of the countries
affected.

Despite all the individual and collective efforts of
States to avert the many disastrous consequences of
this scourge for our countries, much remains to be done
if it is finally to be wiped out. If we are to address the
full scope and various facets of the struggle, we must
not merely enhance national and regional regulation
and surveillance capacities. My delegation therefore
believes that, in addition to the domestic adoption of
the principles of economic and political good
governance, the international community must support
the efforts of the countries of West Africa and the Sahel
to fight poverty, social insecurity, political instability
and the disruption of the ecological balance.

