Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canada is pleased that the Security Council is once
again addressing the important issue of HIV/AIDS. We
are grateful for the briefings provided by Dr. Piot and
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno on the ongoing
efforts across the United Nations system and on the
efforts, pursuant to Security Council resolution 1308
(2000), within the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, to deal with the tragedy of AIDS.

We would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Mr. Guehenno and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for the efforts they have
made, with resources that remain too limited, to
enhance training for Blue Helmets, both in general and
regarding HIV/AIDS prevention in particular. We also
wish to encourage them to go further in their
endeavours.

(spoke in English)
In last year's Council consultations on resolution
1308 (2000), led by Ambassador Holbrooke, Canada
particularly welcomed the early engagement of troop
contributors in the process, because HIV/AIDS in the
context of peacekeeping is a matter that affects them
directly. At that time we recommended that this process
be a model for future Security Council consultations,
and underscored our belief that the views of troop
contributors should be given particular weight on
issues such as HIV/AIDS.

We would therefore like to suggest now, in line
with the important open debate on strengthening
cooperation with troop contributors, held earlier this
week, that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and UNAIDS meet soon with troop contributors to
assess the progress made in undertaking the
requirements of resolution 1308 (2000).

At the same time, let us take care not to demonize
peacekeepers. Every aspect of HIV/AIDS is important
and needs to be addressed effectively, but I trust that no
one here believes that peacekeepers are at the heart of
this problem. HIV/AIDS is, nonetheless, as
Ambassador Holbrooke so well demonstrated in his
remarks this morning, a very serious security
challenge.

During our recently ended tenure on the Council,
Canada consistently argued that the Council must
broaden its definition of security to include non-
traditional threats, particularly those that affect human
security. As we stated exactly a year ago in this
Chamber, there is no question that the HIV/AIDS
pandemic has reached proportions that pose a clear
threat to stability and development.

Like others, we wish to express our appreciation
for the work of Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, who
brought such commitment, determination and
humanitarian energy to this crucial issue.

No region of the world is unaffected by the
HIV/AIDS pandemic, nor can any region be
complacent. This morning Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno and Executive Director Piot discussed the
truly shocking statistics on this issue. Those numbers
are seared into the minds of everyone in this Chamber.
They tell of devastation with long-term consequences
potentially the equal of conflict and war; indeed, left
unattended, these consequences can lead to State
failure.

There are fortunately, however, some bright spots
with regard to the international community's response
to HIV/AIDS. We would be remiss if we did not
recognize efforts made by many countries to address
this issue through the adoption of comprehensive
national strategies, integrating prevention, treatment,
support and human rights, and aimed at all segments of
society.

No country is spared this problem. In Canada, we
are currently implementing our own national strategy,
and we urge all countries that may not have done so to
put into place their own strategies. While there is
clearly an important role for the international
community to play in assisting this process, it cannot
succeed in the absence of national efforts.

But the international community does have a
major responsibility. For this reason, Canada is
quadrupling its spending for international efforts in the
fight against HIV/AIDS, for a total investment of
approximately $270 million Canadian dollars, which is
about US$ 170 million, over the next five years. This
increase in funding underlines our recognition of the
magnitude of the crisis and our determination to do our
share.

Beyond additional funding by the international
community is the fact that there has been a turning
point in the fight against HIV/AIDS. HIV/AIDS is now
firmly on the international political agenda. And the
first step in solving a problem is acknowledging that
one has one. Thanks to Ambassador Holbrooke's work,
the Security Council has taken that step.

We look forward to concrete results being
achieved this summer at the June special session on
HIV/AIDS. The AIDS pandemic poses a fundamental
challenge to human security and, above all, to our
humanity. It is a challenge that we can and must meet.

