Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The working
methods of the Security Council are absolutely key.
Done well, they facilitate our work, provide a framework
for our deliberations and allow us to take decisions that
can help maintain international peace and security.
Done less well, they prevent all that. Japan wrote the
working methods bible, presidential note S/2010/507,
and it is right that Japan is updating it.

How we work has a direct bearing on the impact that
we have in the real world. The United Kingdom, like
most of the rest of the General Assembly membership,
I am sure, wants the Council to be more transparent,
more inclusive, more interactive, more action-oriented
and more efficient. Let me highlight two areas where I
think we can improve our efficiency.

First, with regard to speaking limits, I hope that
everyone can distil their points on any particular issue
into five minutes, or today four minutes, in order to
be efficient in our deliberations. Taking excessive time
over interventions is counterproductive. People switch
off. The shorter an intervention, the more likely it is to
have an impact. We cannot, in any case, hope to cover
everything that there is to say about a topic, so let us
all - Council members, non-Council members and
briefers - focus only on the things that really matter
to us and stick to time, both here and in consultations.
Secondly, building on one ofAmbassador Delattre's
points, our programme of work is overloaded. It
is driven more by reporting cycles than by what is
happening in the real world. The globalized world is
getting more complex, and we must ask ourselves if we
are keeping up. So far, we have reviewed the periodicity
of mandate and reporting cycles to try to address this,
but I think we need to go further. Instead of receiving
a programme of work filled on the basis of reporting
cycles, incoming presidencies could set out what reports
we expect to receive in a month and ask if there is a
need for a meeting. That should cut out some meetings.
We will always have the option of adding a meeting to
the programme should the need arise, or of raising an
issue under "other matters".

Finally, one of the risks to the Security
Council - perhaps the greatest risk - is irrelevance.
If we keep sticking to the status quo in our working
methods, that risk will grow. We will need a more
radical approach if we are to remain relevant. I support
many of the proposals already put forward in the course
of this debate. Let us get on and implement them.

