Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I have
asked to speak before the voting in order to make a
number of points about the draft resolution before us.

We share the concerns expressed at our previous
meeting today about the regional and humanitarian
2

situation in Chad. We welcome the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad, which is beginning to play
an important role in building up policing capacity in
both Chad and the Central African Republic. We agree
that, in principle, a follow-on United Nations force
should replace the European Union-led peacekeeping
force (EUFOR) in Chad, and for those reasons we shall
support the draft resolution.

But there is much work to be done before the
Council can take a firm decision on a new
peacekeeping mission. An expanded United Nations
mission in Chad needs clear objectives, an achievable
mandate, a sensible time frame for deployment,
measurable benchmarks and a realistic end state that,
once achieved, will enable the force to withdraw. We
also question whether a force twice the size of EUFOR
is needed.

We also continue to have reservations about the
case for a military presence in the Central African
Republic. We share the concerns expressed by the
Secretary-General in his report in that regard. We have
yet to see persuasive evidence that such a presence
would bring real value. We look forward to receiving
the detailed advice on those issues that will be included
in the Secretary-General's November report.

In his address to the General Assembly yesterday,
the Secretary-General highlighted the pressures on
United Nations peacekeeping. Mr. Ban Ki-moon said
that Member States cannot continue to mandate
ambitious peace operations without the necessary
troops, money and materiel. It is our view that the
Security Council needs a disciplined and strategic
approach to the management of scarce peacekeeping
resources. Missions should not be considered in
isolation. We need to take into account ongoing and
future peacekeeping commitments and be realistic
about the resources likely to be available. We believe
that it would be helpful in the weeks ahead for the
Council to hear the Secretariat's assessment of the
pressures faced by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations at present on how collectively we can
achieve a more strategic approach to peacekeeping.

