Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I am pleased to congratulate you, Madam,
and your delegation on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I wish you every
success.

I also wish to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her important briefing. The Libyan authorities
understand that they are responsible for combating
impunity and achieving justice throughout Libyan
territory. They also realize that the role of ICC is an
auxiliary one within the framework of the principle of
complementarity between the national and international
judiciary systems.

At this time, I would like to express our satisfaction
with the cooperation and meetings held between the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC and the Prosecutor
General of Libya, and the emphasis the two parties
have placed on implementing the memorandum of
understanding on burden-sharing signed between them.
I welcome the proposal of the Prosecutor concerning
the establishment of an international contact point on
justice to support the judiciary authorities in Libya.
We will consult with interested States on that matter.
By the same token, I emphasize the readiness of the
Libyan mission to the United Nations to facilitate the
travel of officials from Misrata and Tawergha to New
York should the Security Council find it useful for the
resolution of the issue ofinternally displaced persons.

Libyan judiciary authorities are determined to fulfil
their commitments despite the difficult circumstances
faced by our judiciary, particularly the Office of the
Prosecutor General and judges, given the state of
insecurity. That insecurity arises from the control
by outlawed militias of the capital since August 2014
and their shared authority over civilian areas in the
absence of any political authority able to issue orders
or force them to respect the law and human rights. This
situation led, inter alia, to delaying the trials of officials
of the Al-Qadhafi regime, including Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi.

Despite the difficult circumstances, the Libyan
authorities have proven their effective and practical
ability to guarantee the conduct of fair trials for those
accused ofthe most serious crimes perpetrated in Libya
since February 2011. They have made progress in the
investigation proceedings undertaken by the Prosector
General's Office and the staging of public trials, at
which all the guarantees for the accused enshrined in
national legislation and international instruments have
been taken into consideration. Militia control of prisons
where the accused officials from the previous regime are
incarcerated, involving one case in particular in Tripoli
and Misrata, and the impossibility of bringing that case
before the Criminal Chamber, have necessitated a delay
in the resumption of the trial sessions until the rights
of the accused can be protected in accordance with
international law. We hope that legitimate authority can
be restored over the capital so that these trials may be
resumed in a normal environment.

In that connection, the Parliament and the interim
Government reiterate their commitment to restoring the
institutions of the State to the capital, Tripoli, extending
the authority of the State to the detention centres and
jails currently under militia control, and adopting the
measures necessary for the resumption of fair trials
for the accused, in accordance with international
instruments, as soon as possible. They emphasize their
resolve to achieve criminal justice and to prosecute
perpetrators of crimes, including those responsible
for destroying private and public property and
installations and for breaching human rights in Libya
since 15 February 2011, regardless of the identity of the
victim or the perpetrator. They are also determined to
ensure reparations for the victims for the harm done to
them, to achieve national reconciliation and to return
refugees and evacuees to their homes.

While the Libyan authorities commend the interest
shown by the ICC in consolidating the principle of
accountability, achieving criminal justice and pursuing
the perpetrators of crimes of humanity and other
serious crimes, they emphasize the need to uphold the
exercise of their legal jurisdiction andjudicial mandate
in trying the accused, in accordance with the provisions
of national laws and international instruments,
including the Rome Statute through which the ICC was
established.

We reiterate that Libya's exercise of its national
judicial jurisdiction does not mean it will not respect
the decisions of the judges of the ICC or cooperate
with the Court. It means that we will continue to apply
our national judicial proceedings as we establish the
necessary procedures with the ICC to convince it to
amend those decisions that we disagree with. Since
2011, the Libyan authorities have been eager to promote
cooperation with the Court as a complementary organ
supporting the Libyan judiciary. Numerous meetings
have been held between the Prosecutor of the Court
and the General Prosecutor of Libya. Important
proceedings have been adopted to enshrine cooperation
and complementarity between the national judiciary
and the judges of the ICC.

Undoubtedly, the end goal of these trials is to
combat impunity and achieve justice. Conducting
proceedings and trials in Libya would consolidate
that goal at the national level, since these crimes
were committed there. It is easy to bring the case,
evidence and witnesses there, in addition to the fact
that the case of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi includes a
number of officials of the previous regime. However,
partitioning the case may spoil the evidence and
mislead the investigations. Conducting trials in Libya
generates a sense of justice, and public opinion will
be the cornerstone of national reconciliation, security
and stability in the country. The Libyan authorities
reiterate their hope that the ICC will acknowledge the
Libyan judiciary's jurisdiction in trying Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi, just as it acknowledged its jurisdiction in
trying Abdullah Al-Senussi.

In conclusion, the Libyan authorities look forward
to further support of the Security Council for the
creation of conditions conducive to implementing and
fostering the rule of law in Libya as soon as possible.
We hope for further positive cooperation with the
ICC to achieve criminal justice in the framework of
Libyan sovereignty. We hope that the Libyan dialogue
currently under way in Skhirat in fraternal Morocco
will succeed in achieving broad agreement among
the participants to form a national unity Government,
even if some interlocutors decide to withdraw for any
reason. Restoring State institutions and extending State
authority to all its territory is the only way to end the
criminality and human rights violations and to achieve
justice for all.

