Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank Mr. Guterres, Secretary-General of the United
Nations; Mr. Bousquet, Senior Director, Fragility,
Conflict and Violence Group of the World Bank;
Mr. Baldeh, Director, Transition States Coordination
Office of the African Development Bank; and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, who is
with us in his capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission. I would also like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this important
debate and for having invited current host countries of
peacekeeping operations.

The transition phases of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are important and delicate junctures that
require us to work together.

I should like to begin by welcoming the measures
introduced by the Secretary-General to reform
peacekeeping and strengthen the coherence of the
United Nations system in terms of peacebuilding.
These reforms should in particular serve to enable
preparations for the transition and peacebuilding phases
from the very moment an operation is deployed. The
deployment of transition experts and the releasing of
guidelines in February on planning transition processes
are also welcome developments.

The withdrawal of an operation must be anticipated,
in particular by strengthening coordination between
the mission and the country team. In this regard, we
commend the efforts of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur aimed at funding
joint projects and allowing the country team to take over.

The Peacebuilding Commission also has a major
role to play in preparing and supporting the transition
phases. The diversity of its membership and the
flexibility in its functioning allow for long-term
dialogue to support the host country in developing its
peacebuilding strategy. I would also like to commend
the work of the United Nations Police units and the
Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions
of the Department of Peace Operations for having
strengthened good governance and the institutional
capacities of States in transition phases.

That brings me to my second point, which is on
strengthening partnerships with national actors.
Transition means, first and foremost, handing over
responsibility to national authorities. Building their
capacities is therefore essential. However, beyond
resources and capacities, it is essential to listen to the
priorities of the host State. Successful examples of
transition in Cote d'Ivoire in 2017 and Liberia in 2018
have shown us the extent to which national ownership
is essential.

In order to sustain national ownership, it must be
inclusive and involve all peace actors, underpinned
by the strong participation of women. Such peace
also means putting the concerns and rights of future
generations at the forefront as they will be the guarantors
of its sustainability. That includes the reintegration into
society of children recruited by armed groups. France
has been and will remain active on that issue.

It is imperative that any approach aimed at
preventing the resurgence of conflicts incorporate the

fight against impunity and create favourable conditions
for the flourishing ofcivil society and a pluralistic media
with the freedom of expression guaranteed. Experience
has shown that without those elements peace is rarely
sustainable. That is a priority for France as part of our
prevention, resilience and sustainable peace strategy,
adopted in 2018, and in that regard I welcome the
projects financed by the United Nations Peacebuilding
Fund to step up the international community's actions
on the subject.

I would also like to touch on the partnerships
between the United Nations and institutions with
the means to complement our efforts. We must think
in terms of complementarity, coherence and the
multiplication of our efforts. We need to be innovative
and intervene in a coordinated and large-scale manner
in order to prevent countries emerging from a crisis
from relapsing into instability a few years later.

Financing for peacebuilding remains a major
challenge. The quantum leap that the Peacebuilding
Fund has experienced sets a good example, but we must
do more to devise innovative financing and involve the
private sector. France fully supports ongoing efforts
to strengthen the partnership between the United
Nations and the World Bank. More generally, we also
encourage partnerships with major donors, including
the European Union and, at our national level, the
French Development Agency, which now has a peace
and resilience fund financed in part by a financial
transaction tax and which will be endowed with
€200 million per year by 2020.

Partnerships with regional organizations are
obviously essential. France is particularly committed
to the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. In the Sahel, where the international
community must remain fully mobilized for the long
term, the Alliance for the Sahel was conceived as the
essential complement to what the Group of Five for
the Sahel has achieved in the field of security. Several
transitions will soon test our collective ability to
properly address this crucial phase. I would mention in
particular Darfur, Haiti, Iraq and soon the Democratic
Republic of Congo. We cannot afford to fail.

