Let me join others in congratulating Indonesia on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of August, and we thank you, Sir, for having organized this important open debate. We also thank our briefers for their presentations. The effective fight against terrorism and crime necessitates an understanding of how poverty, underdevelopment, socioeconomic and political exclusion, irresponsible arms sales, persistent conflict and other factors contribute to this scourge. We must attack root causes and terrorism itself sensibly and collectively. Anti-terrorist intervention should not be shaped by the side of the border that atrocities are committed on or by whether particular groups are useful to narrow and cynical short-term political objectives. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines condemns all forms and manifestations of terrorism, whether State-sponsored or not. We remain committed to the implementation of the relevant international instruments, resolution 1373 (2001) and all subsequent resolutions - 2195 (2014) and 2462 (2019). Further, as a small island developing State with limited resources, porous borders and a large maritime territory to patrol, we believe that regional and international coordination is critical. Consequently, we continue to work closely with a wide array of partners in our region and beyond through initiatives such as the Caribbean Community's Implementation Agency for Crime and Security, the Caribbean Basin Security Initiative and the Regional Security System, in order to address transnational crime in our region. Today transnational crime is on the rise. It has become increasingly difficult to eliminate illicit activity across widespread networks of disparate groups, especially since many of those groups are dynamic, amorphous and constantly evolving. Similarly, Member States must also be dynamic and genuinely committed in their efforts to address those threats. Rising to the challenge will require greater cooperation among United Nations and regional and subregional organizations, increased support to vulnerable countries and adequate training, both on the evolving threats posed by crime and terrorism, and on intelligence-collection and reporting techniques. Strategic-level decision-makers should place particular emphasis on the reporting of transnational crime and terrorism by State, local and national- level authorities to the appropriate domestic, regional and international intelligence entities, where appropriate. The evolving and interconnected dimensions of crime and terrorism present a number of challenges, especially in the field of domestic intelligence. We urge States to improve the flow of criminal intelligence and information-sharing across all levels of Government and at the national, regional and international levels. We also encourage a renewed focus on initiatives geared to enhancing sustainable development in fragile contexts in order to draw people away from the lure of illicit activity and fully embed them in legitimate economic enterprise. Further, initiatives to combat transnational organized crime must be designed in such a way that they bolster rather than undermine legitimate socioeconomic activity. In conclusion, let me reiterate that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is confident that with capacity-building, the strengthening of law-enforcement agencies and other institutional arrangements, enhanced regional and international cooperation and the use of financial intelligence, Member States can better confront crime and terrorism and the other security challenges that they face.
