I wish to begin by extending my heartfelt gratitude to the Saint Vincent and the Grenadines presidency of the Security Council this month for organizing today's important debate. Today the international community is facing a global crisis unprecedented since the establishment of the United Nations. The coronavirus disease pandemic has already claimed more than | million lives, shattered societies and plunged the global economy into a deep recession. Furthermore, by exacerbating the underlying root causes of armed conflicts, placing limitations on existing peacebuilding action and putting additional pressure on already fragile security, political, socioeconomic and humanitarian environments, the pandemic has left its lasting imprint on all three pillars of the United Nations. At the same time, the climate-change-related crisis has continued to aggravate hitherto fragile situations, including by heightening competition for such scarce resources as land and water, depriving populations of their livelihoods and inducing forced displacements. Preventing looming calamity must be placed at the very heart of our global peacebuilding and sustaining peace efforts. While Governments have the primary responsibility for peacebuilding and sustaining peace, the United Nations system can do more to build more peaceful and resilient societies. In this context, we recognize the particular role that the Peacebuilding Commission plays in providing support for peacebuilding efforts and in fulfilling a bridging function across the United Nations system. Preventing and addressing overlapping and interconnected threats can be successfully accomplished only through coordinated actions across all three pillars of the United Nations system. Accordingly, marshalling effective relations between the main organs accountable for peace and security, development, human rights and the rule of law must become a primary task for the United Nations system today. Overlooking the hazards triggered by the ongoing crisis will indisputably cause greater instability, particularly in conflict-affected and post-conflict countries, where already-fragile security, humanitarian and social situations can easily explode. Georgia is among those countries that have themselves experienced the grave consequences of the newly emerging global threats. Against the backdrop of the pandemic, our sovereignty and territorial integrity have been systematically targeted by one of the five permanent members of the Security Council. Indeed, during the pandemic, the Russian Federation has heightened the scale of its provocations directed against Georgia, in blatant violation of its international obligations and commitments and despite the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire. Together with military exercises anda military build-up, persistent fortification of the occupation line, the illegal practice of arbitrary detentions, kidnappings, violations of the basic human rights of the conflict-affected people and denial of humanitarian access to Georgia's occupied regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali, the Russian Federation has intensified its use of hybrid warfare tools against Georgia and has been fabricating propagandistic myths to target one of the laboratories of my country's National Centre for Disease Control and Public Health - the Richard Lugar Centre - which plays a central role in the fight against the spread of the coronavirus in Georgia. Notwithstanding this harsh reality, Georgia remains committed to doing its utmost to show care and ensure humanitarian relief for the conflict-affected people who have been carrying the heavy burden of Russia's illegal occupation and its grave consequence in the time of the pandemic. Let me conclude my remarks by once again calling on the international community to urge the Russian Federation to immediately start fulfilling its international obligations pursuant, first and foremost, to the European Union- mediated 12 August 2008 ceasefire agreement. Moreover, Georgia stands ready to contribute to the global efforts aimed at strengthening the implementation of the United Nations peacebuilding and sustaining peace agenda.
