Mr. Mercado (Philippines): We join other
delegations in welcoming Mr. James Morris, and we
thank him for his briefing on the food crisis in Africa.
We commend Mr. Morris for his work as the helmsman
of the World Food Programme (WFP), a very important
agency which brings the United Nations presence right
to the hearts of the peoples of the world.

Mr. Morris's briefing today reinforces the
incontrovertible link between the maintenance of peace
and security and development, the nexus mentioned in
the report of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change and in the report of the
Secretary-General entitled "In larger freedom"
(A/59/2005). Mr. Morris's briefing clearly shows that,
in addressing issues of conflict prevention, conflict
management and post-conflict peacebuilding, we
should also take into account more earthly concerns,
such as food security.

The fact that this is the third briefing to the
Council by Mr. Morris since 2002 signifies that, after
several years, the international community still needs
to devote a huge amount of time and a great many
resources to the food crisis in Africa. We therefore
welcome this opportunity to exchange views with Mr.
Morris about what the Council still needs to do in
addressing food security in Africa, in the overall
context of its work on peace and security.

In this regard, we would like to ask Mr. Morris a
number of questions. First, the World Food Programme
coordinates and cooperates with national Governments,
the rest of the United Nations system, non-
governmental organizations and corporate partners,
both in emergencies and in development projects.
While those entities are important, we believe that
regional organizations can also help. As such, we
would like to know whether the WFP has also
established some sort of relationship or arrangement
with regional organizations such as the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States.
Secondly, are there any success stories in any of
the African countries in addressing food insecurity
which could be used as a model by other countries in
the region?

Lastly, a lot has been said in other forums about
the need to empower women, who are both the key
food providers and crucial to fighting AIDS. Are there
any specific WFP projects that target women?

