Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We
thank Mr. Inzko, the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for his briefing and for his report
(S/2011/682, annex). We welcome the stability in the
security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
regional cooperation with neighbouring States. We
hope that the upcoming efforts will lead to the
formation of a representative Government that provides
momentum to a number of necessary constitutional and
economic reforms and that will positively affect the
political climate and economic stability of the country.
The establishment of a new Government will also
hopefully have a positive effect on Bosnia and
Herzegovina's efforts to fulfil the conditions and
objectives established by the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board. We hope that will happen soon
and will ultimately lead to the closure of the Office of
the High Representative.

While it is important to find common solutions
for the various issues between the local parties, with
great care and mutual respect for the common interests
of the various groups, it is also important that that
takes place within the legal framework established by
the Dayton Peace Agreement and the country's
Constitution. Therefore we hope that the parties refrain
from taking steps outside that legal framework. In fact,
the creation of national institutions and strong
representative structures will be beneficial to all
citizens of all groups and identities.

In this context, I would like to mention and
commend the concept paper prepared by the delegation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina when they held the
presidency of the Council, which indicated that the
creation of solid institutions, if carried out
appropriately, would help re-establish and reaffirm the
pillars of security, legitimacy, accountability and
efficiency, and thus peace will bring dividends. It is
also important for political leaders to avoid divisive
and strident rhetoric, which is an obstacle to dialogue
and reconciliation, both of which are important for the
creation of sustainable peace.

The political leaders are capable of playing an
effective role in negotiating controversial issues and
offering mutual compromises to reach solutions that
will be satisfactory to all parties. That approach,
although difficult, is important and indispensable in
diverse societies and it is important that local parties
and actors play a principal role in such settlements.
In another context, we commend the role of the
Serbian Government in arresting General Ratko
Mladic. We hope that bringing him to justice will be a
further step towards holding all perpetrators
accountable, as a firm pillar in restoring justice, in
consolidating reconciliation and in the creation of a
sustainable peace in the West Balkan area.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our support for the
independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina, its
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and we hope that it
will qualitatively progress towards a peaceful and
prosperous future, as its citizens deserve.

