Mr. Motoc (Romania): I join others in thanking
Ambassador Denisov for his comprehensive
presentation of the work and the priorities of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) in the coming
period. I take this opportunity to congratulate him on
his assumption of the CTC chairmanship and wish him
every success in his undertakings. I also wish to
acknowledge the stewardship that Ambassador
Ruperez demonstrated at the helm of the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate.

Since Romania aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered shortly by Ambassador van den Berg of
the Netherlands on behalf of the European Union, I
shall confine myself to a few brief remarks of a
complementary nature.

A significant number of timely and important
initiatives in the fight against terrorism have been
taken by the Security Council since Romania became a
member of this body at the beginning of this year.
Romania was among the most active participants in
fostering successive initiatives: the process of
revitalizing the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
which culminated in the adoption of resolution 1535
(2004); the establishment of the 1540 (2004)
Committee; and, just recently, the adoption of
resolution 1566 (2004). Romania supported the recent
strong drive towards increased interaction between the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council established
under resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004).

As a consequence, new instruments are now
available for the Security Council to deliver on
expectations related to countering the increasingly
ominous threat of terrorism. Over the coming period,
however, much remains to be done to get that
machinery fully operational and running. The
endorsement of the organizational plan of the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) by the
Security Council on 12 August should be followed, as
a matter of priority, by the approval of its budget by the
Fifth Committee. Similarly, the 1540 (2004)
Committee got a partial approval of the requested
funding for the first experts it needs to hire to allow
proper consideration of the first national reports to be
submitted by States Members of the United Nations
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Those two
instances reveal a more profound need to improve the
system's ability to respond to priorities, as the people
we serve see them at present. The concrete elements
related to the future activity of the working group
established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004) are still
to be discussed and agreed upon among Security
Council members. Nonetheless, we trust that what
matters most - the political will needed to speedily
carry forward those processes - is soundly secured.

Our debate today and our work in those areas in
general take place against the backdrop of an
unprecedented surge in terrorists' activity. Their
reckless acts are intensifying, growing in horror,
claiming more victims and affecting more countries
and regions than ever before. Terrorists do not pause
and therefore neither should we.

Romania fully shares in the sense of urgency
bearing on the finalization of all ongoing processes
aimed at strengthening the response which the United
Nations is capable of giving to terror. We definitely
need both the additional support expected from the
CTED, as well as a new set of practical measures to be
impressed upon all those involved in, or associated
with, terrorist activities, as provided for in resolution
1566 (2004).

At the same time, strengthening cooperation and
coordination among what we can call the "borderless"
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council - the CTC
and the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004), each dealing with
specific aspects of the global fight against terrorism -
is vitally essential for ensuring a coherent and
proactive approach of the Council in combating
terrorism. Romania welcomes the important steps
already taken in that direction by the Chairmen of the
CTC and the 1267 (1999) Committee. I also stand
ready, for my part, to join in those efforts in my
capacity as Chairman of the 1540 (2004) Committee.

For sure, the CTC cannot afford to keep its
activity at a lower pace throughout the current
transitional phase, which is to end at the moment
CTED becomes fully operational. Its work, in
particular on monitoring the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), has to continue at the same
pace, for it is apparent that States continue to face
significant difficulties in that process.

One relevant indicator in that regard is the
continuous increase in the number of States which are
late in submitting their reports, over a third of United
Nations Member States now being in that position.
That is a worrying situation that, on the other hand, is a
strong incentive for the CTC to make facilitation of
technical assistance to Member States a top priority for
the near future. On-site visits by the CTC should be
pursued as a valuable development in that respect.

The signature, ratification and full
implementation of all relevant United Nations
conventions and protocols relating to terrorism are also
essential components in the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). Resolution 1566 (2004)
reiterates the call on all States to become parties, as a
matter of urgency, to all those legal instruments.
Romania is among those Member States that have gone
all the way through the process. We have already
transposed an important part of their provisions into
our national legislation. In that context, I am very
proud that today my delegation is joined at these
proceedings by a group of legislators from Romania,
representing the national delegation to the Inter-
Parliamentary Union.

Finally, I would like to reiterate our
commendation of the Russian delegation for its timely
initiative embodied in resolution 1566 (2004), a
document of clear added value in the global fight
against terrorism. The clear prioritization of the CTC's
tasks and delivering on the far-reaching goals set out
by the resolution are important steps forward in that
major endeavour.

