Mr. Nesho (Albania): Our delegation welcomes
the presence of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Steiner, at today's
very special meeting.

At the very outset, allow me to express the
support of the Albanian delegation for the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2003/675) on the democratic and
integration processes in Kosovo. Our delegation
commends the significant achievements that have been
made and takes note of the remaining problems in
Kosovo, both of which are well defined in the report.
The problems are related to, among other things, the
functioning of a multi-ethnic society, the strengthening
of the rule of law and the return of the displaced
persons. It is of great importance that we all recognize
the undeniable reality that there have recently been
encouraging developments in Kosovo despite the fact
that the progress achieved is not yet at the same level
in every aspect of life.

In evaluating the progress, we share the opinion
and concerns of both UNMIK and local representatives
that there are still problems and areas that require
serious commitment. Enhancing democratic institutions
and respect for the norms of a multi-ethnic society, the
promotion of a stable and developed market economy,
the return of displaced persons, and the strengthening
of regional cooperation and the processes of European
integration remain the main challenges requiring the
attention of Kosovo's governing authorities.

The progress and achievements in Kosovo reflect
the great contribution made by UNMIK's
administrator, Mr. Steiner, during his tenure. Thanks to
his vision, his abilities as an experienced politician and
his determination to raise the necessary issues at the
right time, he has succeeded in implementing the
policy of the international community and in
accomplishing his important mission in Kosovo. We
thank him for his leadership.

The Albanian Government commends the
considerable achievements of UNMIK and its
administrator, Mr. Steiner, for, among other things,
their efforts to establish and enforce Kosovo's
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, to hold
successful local democratic elections, and to initiate
and carry out the process of transferring powers to
Kosovo's provisional institutions.

Our Government has supported the initiative of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
institutionalize the inclusion and active participation of
Kosovo in democratic and integration processes. We
take this opportunity to commend in particular the
participation of representatives of Kosovo's Institutions
at the European Union Summit held in Thessaloniki,
Greece. We believe that this inclusive and integrated
policy should continue and that it should represent a
trend with regard to international institutions and
organizations, in order to prevent marginalized and
isolated zones in the Balkans. Similarly, the same
willingness should be demonstrated in encouraging
Kosovo's full and speedy integration into common
regional, European and international structures.

The initiation of a dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade is an important and necessary element in
meeting the standards set out by the international
community for Kosovo's European integration. We
believe that both representatives of Kosovo's
Institutions and Belgrade officials will demonstrate the
appropriate understanding, good will and maturity to
discuss and encourage solutions on various practical
issues of mutual interest. We are of the opinion that the
mediation and assistance of international institutions is
still necessary to ensure the success of this crucial
process.

It is important that this process should advance,
as the improvement of the inter-ethnic dialogue will
facilitate the speedy return of displaced persons to
Kosovo. In the meantime, members of minorities
should resist the influence of outside politics and
interference and should consider themselves to be an
integral part of the multi-ethnic political and social
society of Kosovo.

The fulfilment of standards and the definition of
the final status of Kosovo, in respect for the will of the
people for self-determination, are interdependent and
interrelated processes. The involvement of the
international community should guarantee those
processes, with the aim of promoting sustainable
stability, the spirit of peace and security in the Western
Balkans and its integration into Europe.

