Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations and the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan and
South Sudan for their valuable briefings.

Today, I would like to discuss three matters
regarding the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA), namely. the role of the mission, the
renewal of its mandate and the nature of that mandate.

First, on the role of the mission, we take note of
the proposals of the Secretary-General, contained in
his letter dated 20 August (S/2018/778). We recognize
the key role of the peacekeeping operation in achieving
relative stability in Abyei. We commend the major role
played by Ethiopian peacekeepers in bringing about and
maintaining stability. UNISFA has become one of the
best peacekeeping operations, and we thank Ethiopia
for its positive role in that regard. The priority of
political solutions must be the Security Council's focus.
That can be achieved with the support of peacekeeping
operations and in coordination with the host countries.

Secondly, with regard to the renewal of the mission's
mandate, we hope that this renewal would be in line
with the mission's role and achievements, including the
continued work of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism which has led to considerably
improve the mission's performance.

Pertaining to the technical issues, such as the
strength of the mission, the optimal performance of
each of its components and their work sites, these are
matters that can be discussed by the Security Council in
the upcoming weeks in accordance with developments
in Abyei.

Concerning bilateral relations between the Sudan
and South Sudan, there is positive and growing
cooperation, which has been welcomed by the
neighbouring countries, the League of Arab States, the
African Union and the Security Council.

Thirdly, with reference to the nature of the mandate,
having taken note this year of the strategic review of
the mission and following the adoption of resolution
2416 (2018), any amendment to the mission's mandate
must take into account the agreements reached between
the two sides on Abyei. Since the approval of the parties
is one of the three principles of peacekeeping, and
since UNISFA was established on the basis of bilateral
understandings in 2011 and 2012, any further step must
be taken after consultations between the parties and
securing their consent, and not before.

In conclusion, we underscore our determination to
pursue consultations with the Sudan and South Sudan
in this regard.

