Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We understand the motives of many
delegations that supported or co-sponsored draft
resolution S/2014/348, referring the case of Syria to
the International Criminal Court (ICC). We share the
emotions elicited in them by the crisis in Syria, which
has dragged on for far too long. It is hard to witness the
destruction, loss of life and suffering of the people.

It is more difficult to discern the motives that led
France to initiate the draft and put it to a vote, fully
aware in advance of the fate it would meet. There has
been no dearth of complaints about the lack of unity
concerning Syria among the five permanent members
(P5) of the Security Council. Indeed, when that unity is
present, we manage to achieve concrete positive results.
Among such results, undoubtedly, was the adoption of
resolution 2118 (2013) on the destruction of the Syrian
chemical stockpile. That programme is about to be
successfully completed. Another important benchmark
was resolution 2139 (2014), on humanitarian issues.

P5 unity is important. After all, it is the reason
for which France has been pushing for P5 engagement
in the political settlement of the crisis. It has failed,
however, to advance any positive substantive ideas.
Why deal such a blow to P5 unity at this stage? Is it
just to try once again to create a pretext for armed
intervention in the Syrian conflict? We must not
overlook the fact that the head of French diplomacy saw
fit to take advantage of his recent visit to Washington,
D.C., to publicly criticize the United States for refusing
to shower missiles and bombs on Syria last fall.

It should be pointed out that this damage to
P5 unity is being inflicted at a critical point in the
efforts to find a political solution to the Syrian crisis.
The involuntary hiatus created by the resignation of
Lakhdar Brahimi should be used for an in-depth, fair
and collective analysis of the situation and to seek
out any possible resource to break the vicious cycle
of violence. In that respect, there is food for thought
contained in the political testament left behind by
Lakhdar Brahimi for the Security Council on 13 May.
That is exactly what the draft resolution presented by
Russia is aimed at: fostering the process oflocal truces.
That draft resolution is not to the liking of our Western
colleagues. They claim that the settlements already
achieved cannot be used as standards.

One cannot help recalling the Russian saying
that a bad peace is better than a good quarrel. What
are our Western colleagues proposing instead? They
are offering talk, which is good for naive people, and
assering that they will supply new types of weapons
to good opposition groups only. Their list of good
guys now includes the Al-Nusra Front, which has
openly confessed to a series of brutal terrorist attacks,
including the recent one in Aleppo that claimed the
lives of dozens of civilians. I would note that our
Western colleagues are demanding that cross-border
humanitarian deliveries to Syria be conducted through
border crossings controlled by the Front. At the same
time, they have long blocked any condemnation by
the Security Council of the numerous terrorist attacks
committed in Syria.

Pursuing regime change by force in Syria at all
costs will prolong the crisis and undermine the Geneva
negotiations. It is telling that Ahmad Jarba, the leader
of the National Coalition, made no effort to show up
to the Geneva negotiations, and is instead travelling
the world in search of weapons. Moaz al-Khatib, one
of his predecessors, was removed from office just for
attempting to launch talks with Damascus to stop the
bloodshed. In that context, it is striking that there is
not a single word on the political settlement and the
negotiating process among Syrians in the communique
issued on 15 May following the meeting of the so-
called London 11. The Western troika took great pains
to dissuade the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative from calling another round of Geneva
negotiations.

What justice can one talk about when the overriding
policy is aimed at escalating the conflict? The draft
resolution rejected today reveals an attempt to use
the ICC to further inflame political passions and lay
the ultimate groundwork for eventual outside military
intervention. It should be noted that the so-called
Caesar resport (S/2014/244, annex), which was used
to build up tension in the run-up to the introduction
of the draft resolution, was based on unconfirmed
information obtained from unverifiable sources and
therefore cannot serve as a platform for taking such a
serious decision.

One cannot ignore the fact that the last time the
Security Council referred a case to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) - the Libyan dossier, through
resolution 1970 (2011) - it did not help resolve the
crisis, but instead added fuel to the flames of conflict.
After the cessation of hostilities, the ICC did not exactly
rise to the occasion, to put it mildly. It did not contribute
to a return of normalcy or justice in Libya, and instead
evaded the most pressing issues. The deaths of civilians
as a result of NATO bombardments was somehow left
outside its scope. Our colleagues from NATO countries
arrogantly refused to address that issue altogether. They
even refuse to apologize, even as they waxed eloquent
about shame. They advocate fighting impunity but are
themselves practicing a policy of all-permissiveness.

The United States frequently indicates the ICC
option for others, but is reluctant to accede to the Rome
Statute itself. In todays's draft resolution, the United
States insisted on an exemption for itself and its citizens.

Great Britain is a party to the ICC, but for some reason
is unenthusiastic about the exploration in the Court of
crimes committed by British nationals during the Iraq
war. If the United States and the United Kingdom were
to together refer the Iraqi dossier to the ICC, the world
would see that they are truly against impunity.

We proceed from the premise that the Geneva
communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex)
remains at the core of efforts to settle the Syrian
crisis. The communique interprets the principles
of accountability and national reconciliation as
interrelated, leaving the leading role in that process to
the Syrians themselves.

We are convinced that justice in Syria will
eventually prevail. Those guilty of perpetrating grave
crimes will be punished, but ifthat is to happen, peace is
needed first and foremost. Russia will continue to make
every effort to stop the bloodshed as soon as possible.
We call upon our Western colleagues to abandon their
futile, dead-end policy of endlessly escalating the
Syrian crisis. We invite everyone who truly values the
interests of the Syrian people to join us in our efforts
to find a Syrian political settlement. Judging, as France
has today, that the political process is dead is just
irresponsible. Indeed, it is treachery towards the Syrian
people.

