Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, and your friendly country on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
thank you for holding this important meeting.

I would also like to thank Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, for her valuable briefing.
I further thank all the briefers, who have enriched this
debate with their valuable expertise and perspective on
this sensitive humanitarian issue.

We associate ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.

Preventing violence against children in armed
conflict is extremely important for the international
community. It is the central pillar of building and
maintaining peace, as well as respecting human rights
and international law. We must therefore protect and
guarantee the rights of children and provide them
with what they need for their upbringing so that they
can contribute to building stable and prosperous
communities in the future.

However, the picture painted by the Secretary-
General's report (S/2019/509) on the situation ofchildren
and armed conflict is cause for concern and regret. It is
a serious humanitarian challenge. We must address this
matter in the light of the gravity of the situation and its
implications for international peace and security. The
report highlights the severity and frequency of harm
inflicted through grave abuses perpetrated against
children as fighting continues among conflicting
parties all over the world. This constitutes a blatant
violation of international law.

We commend all efforts to report those violations
and to hold the perpetrators accountable. The responsible
parties should be identified in the Secretary-General's
annual reports. We believe that accountability is
critical to ensuring justice for the victims, enforcing
international law and putting an end to the commission
of such crimes, which humankind has rejected. In
that respect, we join other countries in calling for an
accurate list of perpetrators of violations to be included
in future annual reports, which in turn must be based
on impartial, factual and evidence-based information.

We believe in the importance of protecting the
right to education. This is no less a right during armed
conflict. We therefore make great efforts to guarantee
education for children in emergencies, especially
those in situations of armed conflict, as demonstrated
by the initiatives and programmes backed by the
Qatar Foundation, first and foremost, in cooperation
with international organizations. The Foundation has
provided quality education to millions of children around
the world. Given the gravity of risks and challenges
children face in armed conflict and the fact that they
are deprived of the most basic means of subsistence,
including the right to education 4 as reaffirmed in
reports issued by the United Nations, international
organizations and right-based organizations 4 we call
on States parties to conflicts to refrain from targeting
schools and universities and to avoid using educational
institutions for military purposes. We also take this
opportunity to urge Member States to join the Safe
Schools Declaration, to which the State of Qatar has
acceded, alongside 94 other Member States.

We reaffirm the need to consider children linked to
armed groups first and foremost as victims. Countries
must provide them with programmes for their long-
term integration. In that regard, we commend the
important role played by the Global Coalition for the
Reintegration of Former Child Soldiers, established
and co-chaired by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and UNICEF. The Coalition is helping to return
children to their families and to make sure that they are
given back their childhood and provided with a suitable
environment for their upbringing.

The Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict is
carrying out the important role of protecting children
and reintegrating them into their communities. In that
connection, we commend the proactive efforts of the
Special Representative in working with national and
regional actors to create initiatives to prevent grave
violations from being committed against children
affected by armed conflict.

The State of Qatar believes in the importance of
strengthening human rights and protecting children.
We will therefore spare no effort in supporting the
Office of the Special Representative and enabling it to
fully implement its mandate. I am pleased to inform
the Council that in September 2018, the State of Qatar
signed a partnership agreement with the Office of the
Special Representative, which includes funding the
New York Office and the establishment of a centre for
children and armed conflict in Doha. The centre will be
active in preparing research, analysis and evaluation,
and will hold workshops, spread awareness and build
capacities on issues related to the protection of children
in armed conflict. We look forward to the launch of the
centre before the end of the year so that it can begin its
humanitarian work.

In conclusion, I reiterate the commitment of the
State of Qatar to protecting human rights. We will
continue to support international efforts to protect
children in armed conflict, to ensure respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law and to
prevent the commission of violations against children.

