Mr. Annabi: This briefing will cover, as the
Council requested, the developments in East Timor
since this item was last discussed in the same format on
27 April. I will mention briefly the main political
developments, the security situation, economic matters,
governance and public administration and the situation
of the refugees.

As regards the main political developments, the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) has continued its efforts to
normalize relations between Indonesia and East Timor.
A new round of talks in Jogjakarta, Indonesia, began
last Monday and was completed today. The agenda of
those discussions included mechanisms to resolve
claims regarding assets and liabilities, the transfer of
civil and administrative archives back to East Timor,
the settlement of pension obligations to former East
Timorese civil servants, the establishment of a joint
border commission and, of particular importance, the
implementation of the commitment to allow unimpeded
access between the Oecussi enclave and the rest of East
Timor. The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, is scheduled to
visit Jakarta on 29 May for further high-level
discussions with the Government of Indonesia. I should
also mention that Mr. Xanana Gusmao paid a very
successful visit to Jakarta on 28 April.

In East Timor itself, there has been an increase in
political activity. Political parties have opened offices
and held meetings in the districts. Freitlin, the
longstanding pro-independence party, has held a series
of regional conferences culminating in a national party
conference held from 15-20 May, attended by some
1,250 delegates. The main theme of the congress was
the need to replace the political in-fighting of the past
with democratic practices and pluralism.

UNTAET has intensified its consultations with
the East Timorese on all important policy issues
affecting the conduct of the interim administration. The
National Consultative Council has met five times. In
addition to approving a regulation banning illegal
logging and an amendment of the existing regulation
on the judiciary, the National Consultative Council has
collaborated closely with UNTAET in preparing for the
Lisbon donor conference, both in its formal sessions
and during three joint UNTAET/World Bank
workshops. At the heart of this effort is, of course, the
preparation of East Timor's budget for the period July
2000 to June 2001. As members of the Council are
aware, the Lisbon conference is scheduled to be held
from 21 to 23 June.

In order to promote public debate on key policy
questions, public hearings have also been instituted
under the aegis of the National Consultative Council.
The first hearing, which was devoted to taxation issues,
was held on 17 May and included members of the
business community, non-governmental organizations
and UNTAET officials.

The overall security situation has remained stable
over the past month. Militia activity on the border with
West Timor has declined. The deployment of an
additional Indonesian battalion to the border, and the
implementation of the 11 April Memorandum of
Understanding for Tactical Coordination between the
Indonesian armed forces (TNI) and UNTAET has had a
beneficial and positive impact.

I mentioned last month that UNTAET was
reviewing the strength of its military component. It has
now initiated a reduction by some 500 troops, which
will be pulled out of the eastern sector. The situation in
that sector has been calm and stable from the outset.
This will be achieved by October through scheduled
troop rotations as well as through the reduction of the
Force Logistic Group, which will be reduced to a
squadron. Some of its tasks will be performed by
contractors. The current level of UNTAET troops
deployed in East Timor stands at 8,396; it will as a
result of these reductions come down to 7,896 by
October.

The Armed Forces for the National Liberation of
East Timor (FALINTIL) has remained cantoned at
Aileu. A number of FALINTIL personnel were
attached to UNTAET's military sector headquarters,
where they are assisting in liaison with the East
Timorese population. Others have begun to leave
cantonment at Aileu to find employment. In order to
improve the living conditions in Aileu, relief assistance
has been provided to vulnerable groups there.

The law and order situation in East Timor has
remained a concern. Crime is still high, and
considerable effort is required to contain the readiness
of some East Timorese to resort to violence. During the
past month there was, fortunately, only one significant
incident. On 30 April, a fight between youth groups at
a Dili sports demonstration spilled over to the nearby
central market and continued sporadically for several
hours, resulting in four injuries and 18 arrests.
Following that incident, UNTAET's police were
authorized to carry side arms.

Two prisons were opened, in Becora and in
Gleno. This has greatly facilitated the work of the
police and the judiciary. Plans are under way to
rehabilitate two more prisons, in Baucau and in
Manatuto. The judicial system has begun to function,
and the first pre-trial public hearing was held from 11
to 15 May.

Pursuant to the 7 April Memorandum of
Understanding on judicial and legal and human rights
cooperation, the Attorney-General of Indonesia
requested documentation compiled by UNTAET on
five criminal cases associated with last year's violence.
UNTAET is in contact with Indonesian officials to
work out the necessary arrangements for making the
requested information available.

UNTAET's investigation into the 1999 violence
has continued. In Oecussi, 20 bodies were exhumed of
persons killed in a massacre on 8 September 1999 in a
location known as Passabe. UNTAET has also
continued to monitor the current human rights situation
in East Timor with particular emphasis on episodes of
intimidation and harassment against ethnic and
religious minorities.
Turning to economic matters, the number of
private businesses registered in East Timor, both
foreign and Timorese, has risen from 1,200 last month
to over 2,000 today, creating new employment
opportunities in the private sector. Private sector loans
are also being made to prospective small businesses
through a project funded by the World Bank.

The implementation of UNTAET'S Quick Impact
Projects has continued. A total of 4,473 persons have
been employed as a result of those projects, which are
being conducted in various parts of East Timor. An
additional 14,606 persons have been employed under
the Temporary Employment Project of the United
States Agency for International Development, which
has injected some $3.3 million into the local economy.
The Japanese Agency for International Cooperation has
also employed more than 11,000 persons on a
temporary basis through several reconstruction
projects, mainly road rehabilitation, for an estimated
cost of $9.8 million.

East Timor's road network, which was already
impaired by years of neglect and heavy use, has
deteriorated dangerously as a result of an unusually
long wet season. Recent flooding has resulted in a
number of major roads being cut, temporarily isolating
some district centres and impeding UNTAET's work in
all sectors. Los Palos, Viqueque and Suai were hardest
hit. Considerable resources will be required to
rehabilitate the road system once the dry season sets in.

As regards governance and public administration,
the central fiscal authority has became fully operational
with the appointment of the head and deputy head of
the authority on 17 May. Customs and immigrations
operations have begun on the western border with the
opening of a border post at Batugade. To date,
$1,059,000 has been collected in customs and sales tax.
This is a modest beginning, but it is a beginning
nonetheless.

The civil service campus was inaugurated on 8
May, and will serve as the headquarters of the civil
service academy in East Timor. The academy will be
the umbrella organization for all efforts to provide
public service training, including courses for the
unemployed. The number of civil servants has
continued to rise, and now stands at more than 4,500,
including some 2,050 teachers.

The number of students enrolled in schools has
also risen, by more than 23,000, to a total of over
163,000.
An Interim Health Authority has been fully
established and is presently staffed with 29 East
Timorese health professionals, 13 district health
officers and 7 international staff. The first office of the
East Timor Postal Service was opened in Dili on 29
April, followed by a Baucau branch on the next day.

Regarding the East Timorese refugees, only some
1,000 additional refugees have returned to East Timor
over the past month. This brings the total number of
returnees to a little more than 161,000.

The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) estimates that
some 90,000 remain, principally in West Timor. It
should be noted in this context that the Indonesian
authorities estimate that there around 125,000 refugees
remaining in West Timor. The census, which I
mentioned last month and which was to be conducted
by UNHCR was somewhat delayed, but it has now
begun. We will bring the results to the attention of the
Council in due course.

The militias active in the camps have continued
their campaign of disinformation about the conditions
in East Timor.

As mentioned earlier, East Timor suffered severe
flooding, particularly in Suai, Viqueque and Los Palos.
However, as members of the Council are aware, the
situation in West Timor, as a result of the floods there,
is much worse. Tens of thousands of people have been
displaced, 126 persons are confirmed dead, most of
them women and children. About half of the casualties
of these floods in West Timor were East Timorese who
were living in low-lying refugee camps.

In conclusion, as I have tried to show in the
course of this briefing, UNTAET has continued during
the past month to make progress in the implementation
of its mandate, in particular in the areas of institution-
and capacity-building and in the delivery of
government services. This progress may not be as
quick as we or the Timorese would like it to be, but it
is steady progress, and we believe that its pace will
increase in the weeks and months to come.

UNTAET has also continued to expand its
consultative mechanisms with the East Timorese in
order to enable them to gain a better understanding of
the challenges at hand and to involve them as much as
possible in the decision-making process so that they
can prepare for independence, which is, of course, the
ultimate goal of UNTAET.

