Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for his
statement and, through him, all the members of the
Senior Advisory Group who contributed to the report
on the civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict (see S/2011/85). We also thank Ms. Susanna Malcorra,
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support,
Ambassador Gasana, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their comprehensive statements.

In recent months, the Security Council has held a
series of debates in which a clear need has been
recognized to analyse and develop strategies to allow
us better to respond to the major challenges facing our
Organization, to effectively and efficiently address the
needs of post-conflict societies, and to prevent the
resurgence of conflict. The establishment and
improvement of civilian capacities are crucial to the
support that the international community must provide
to countries emerging from conflict so as to ensure
that, in the medium and long terms, the State and
society in question are able independently to deliver
the services and public assets that make it possible not
only to stabilize and build peace, but also to strengthen
processes towards national unity and the well-being
and development of their people.

It is well known that there is no one-size-fits-all
solution and that strategies to respond to the challenges
of a post-conflict situation must be based on a very
specific analysis of conditions in the field. The Senior
Advisory Group's approach is therefore of particular
relevance, given that the four core principles on which
its report focuses reflect the general framework within
which the United Nations can take nimble, timely and
coordinated action with respect to civilian capacity-
building, in full compliance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter.

National ownership is undoubtedly a guiding
principle in enhancing civilian capacity-building in all
its aspects. In that respect, ongoing cooperation and
consultations with States emerging from conflict are
sine qua non to identifying key Government functions
to be prioritized as the need to resort to international
capacity in essential areas is assessed. It is also of the
greatest importance to give pride of place to national
markets for the provision of goods and services as a
way of stimulating local economies and identifying
local needs. Partnership with other interested parties is
another factor that must be the focus of special
attention.

While nimble and flexible instruments are needed
to provide specialized capacities that the Organization
is not always in a position to furnish, the quality and
legal framework of its performance and the
accountability of its partners must meet the standards
required by the United Nations. There is also a need for
the Organization to provide clear leadership in the
execution of the tasks included in mandates.

In addressing the issue of technical competencies,
the report once again shows the need to ensure that the
entire United Nations system works in a coordinated
and coherent manner, with a view to avoiding
duplication and ensuring efficient use of available
resources. In that context, human resource management
must address the need to quickly and efficiently deploy
specialized personnel in large-scale field operations,
without creating unnecessary disparities and while
preserving geographical diversity and promoting merit.

There is a clear need to establish more flexible,
timely and cost-efficient systems, providing flexibility
with regard to the responses required by the changing
environment on the ground. In that regard, it is
essential to give the necessary consideration to
budgetary implications and contributions from States,
as well as the need to fulfil the mandates established by
the competent bodies of the Organization.

Conflict-affected countries need effective
national political processes, strong institutions and
economic development to build lasting peace.
Supporting those processes with civilian capacities that
respond to local needs and priorities while also
building national capacities to that end is a shared
responsibility of affected societies and the international
community. We encourage the Steering Group to
continue the process of broad consultations already
begun, paying the necessary attention to the views of
all States.

