Mr. Holliday (United States of America): I
would like to welcome you, Mr. Minister, and to
congratulate Algeria on its presidency. I would like
also to thank Under-Secretary-General Egeland for his
presentation.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2004/431) of
28 May, concerning the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, paints a disturbing picture but also highlights
ongoing work towards safeguarding civilians from the
devastating effects of armed conflict. The Secretary-
General and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs have provided us with a useful
status report on the current situation and with good
direction for the way ahead. Much depends, however,
not on what we say or do here, but on what
Governments do to protect their own people or to allow
others to help.

Support for the protection of fundamental human
rights is one of the foundations of United States foreign
policy, as Secretary Powell outlined this week on the
occasion of Human Rights Day. The lessons of the past
are clear: the enjoyment of human rights helps to
secure the peace, deter aggression, promote the rule of
law, combat crime and corruption, strengthen
democracies and prevent humanitarian crises. Regimes
that violate the human rights of their own citizens are
more likely to disrupt the peace and security of
countries in their regions. The best guarantor of
security and prosperity at home and abroad is respect
for individual liberty and the protection of human
rights through good governance and the rule of law.

Let me now turn briefly to some specific cases of
concern to us in the international community. We
continue to be gravely concerned about the ongoing
crisis in Darfur, and especially the impact of the
conflict on civilians in that region. Up to 70,000 have
died, and another 1.8 million have been displaced. The
situation in Darfur illustrates the urgent role that States
must play to safeguard civilians, including those who
are internally displaced. When States fail to do so, the
United Nations, together with humanitarian agencies
and organizations, must speak out and help address
those crises. Several other countries, including
Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Liberia, have emerged from long-standing armed
conflicts into delicate situations of transition where
many protection challenges have increased. United
Nations peacekeeping and assistance missions, together
with support from non-governmental organizations and
United Nations agencies, help to ensure that civilians
in those regions are not denied the dividends of peace.

We are encouraged that the Security Council has
been addressing the regional dimensions of civilian
protection more consistently. Furthermore, Security
Council resolutions and peacekeeping mandates
regularly identify key protection issues, including the
deliberate targeting of civilians, the use of sexual and
other forms of gender-based violence, the recruitment
and use of child soldiers and the need to ensure
humanitarian access to facilitate the delivery of
assistance and ensure the safety of United Nations and
associated personnel.

On a related note, several of our Council
colleagues have spoken of the need to deal
aggressively with the question of impunity. As we have
said on numerous occasions, the United States is
committed to international accountability for war
crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity. The
impunity issue is a very important one and must be
addressed. As my Council colleagues will appreciate,
the United States position with regard to its own
participation in United Nations missions and the
International Criminal Court (ICC) is well known. It is
our understanding that this particular presidential
statement that we will adopt today does not deal with
questions of the jurisdiction of the ICC. We are
grateful to the Government of Algeria for leading us in
formulating an excellent presidential statement, which
we are very pleased to support.

In closing, the United States reiterates its support
for United Nations efforts to promote universal respect
for human rights and to help protect civilians from
dangers arising from armed conflicts in many places
around the globe. We encourage the Secretary-General,
Under-Secretary-General Egeland and other key actors
in the United Nations system to continue the dialogue
on how United Nations bodies can better work together
with States to promote protection and to present
country-specific recommendations for the Council's
consideration.

