Mr. Leffler: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; the
European Free Trade Association country Liechtenstein,
member of the European Economic Area; as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.

I would like to start by extending a special thanks
to the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth and to
the lead author of the independent progress study on
youth and peace and security (see S/2018/86), as well
as to the representatives of youth and civil society,
for their statements. Allow me to express the EU's
appreciation for the progress study and its support
for the recommendations therein. The EU contributed
to this landmark process through hosting a European
regional consultation on youth, peace and security, and
we welcomed that opportunity to channel the voices of
young Europeans into this process.

We applaud this open debate, with appreciation
for Peru's leadership and the envisaged adoption
of a new Security Council resolution on youth and
peace and security. We anticipate a forward-looking,
strategic outcome to accelerate the implementation
of this important agenda. We also support annual
implementation reports by the Secretary-General as
well as yearly open debates in the Council, including
briefings by young peacebuilders.

The youth, peace and security agenda reminds
us that young people want to be heard; they want to
take action and they want to lead. Recognizing and
empowering those aspirations is the promise of the
youth and peace and security agenda. Allow me to lay
out the perspective of the EU on this topic.

To begin with, we need to challenge the
generalizations which identify young people with the
risk of radicalization and violent action. That mistakes
young men for potential perpetrators and young women
for potential victims. On the contrary, we know that
the overwhelming majority of young people - like
all of us - seek a peaceful future for themselves,
for their neighbours and for the broader national and
international community. We see that too little is done
to harness their potential to prevent conflict and to
contribute to sustaining peace.
The progress study and this open debate provide
an excellent opportunity to shift this narrative. In this
context, the EU fully shares the view that preventing
violence and sustaining peace is best served by
addressing young people's experiences of exclusion
and marginalization. The EU also heeds the call of
young people, amplified by the progress study, to
prioritize and invest in youth-based and youth-led
peacebuilding activities.

I would like to offer three messages regarding
inclusion, resilience and leadership.

First, the EU has always striven to promote broad-
based, people-centred peacebuilding coalitions, which
meaningfully include youth, women, civil society
organizations and other partners. We continue to
accelerate the implementation of the youth and peace
and security agenda and the women and peace and
security agenda, which are closely interlinked and
mutually reinforcing.

For the EU, youth inclusion starts with two-way
dialogue with young people. We want to understand
their vision for peacebuilding and find opportunities
to support and scale up their initiatives. Exactly a
month from now, the EU will host an innovative and
inclusive conference on youth, peace and security
in Brussels, in partnership with the United Nations
and civil society organizations. We hope that the
conference will create a new area and a new framework
for young peacebuilders from within and outside the
EU to engage in an interactive dialogue with leaders
and stakeholders from the EU and with multilateral
and non-governmental partners. The conference will
further reinforce the momentum behind the European
Union's focus on the youth and peace and security
agenda and our cooperation with the United Nations on
youth in peacebuilding.

Secondly, the EU's investment in youth is currently
the focus of multiple programmes on four continents.
As an example, we have recently launched a project
with UNICEF to strengthen the resilience and civic
engagement of adolescents and youth in conflict-
affected areas in eastern Ukraine. A global project
with UNESCO works to strengthen education sector
planning capacities for conflict prevention and crisis
preparedness. Another EU project in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo reinforces youth involvement
in conflict prevention in areas affected by the Lord's
Resistance Army.

Thirdly, the EU fully shares the call of the progress
study to maximize youth ownership and agency on peace
and security. One illustration of how we empower young
people's leadership is the Africa-EU partnership. At the
fifth African Union-European Union Summit, which
took place in Abidjan last November, young people
provided political recommendations on priority topics
for the African Union (AU) and the EU. Moreover, a
number of the young people present spent five weeks
working intensely with AU and EU structures to
develop those recommendations into a youth agenda
with concrete initiatives and proposals. That agenda was
presented to African and European Heads of State at the
Summit, and we are currently working on a follow-up
mechanism to ensure the continuous inclusion of young
people in the Africa-EU partnership.

As the progress study underlines, young people's
work is a connector across peace and security, human
rights, sustainable development and humanitarian
affairs. In the same vein, the European Union's work
for and with young people connects all actors, policies
and instruments of the EU and represents a key aspect
of the coherence of our action within and outside
the Union.

Many people, across all ages and generations, are
ready to make a difference to build peace. Mobilizing
the potential of young people as peacebuilders is one
of the big challenges and opportunities of our time.
The youth, peace and security agenda charts the way
forward for all of us working together.

