Archbishop Auza (Holy See): The Holy See
thanks the presidency of the Russian Federation for
having convened this debate on the situation in the
Middle East and North Africa, which are witnessing an
unprecedented series of conflicts and crises, bringing
death to thousands and inflicting untold suffering on
millions of civilians, as well as provoking a cascade of
challenges and crises beyond the region.

The Holy See wishes to avail itself of this occasion
above all to urge the Security Council to throw the
full weight of the authority and powers that the United
Nations Charter has vested in it to find and agree
on enduring political solutions to the conflicts in
the region.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a prime example
in which decisive action by the Security Council and the
international community is needed to prevent further
degeneration of the situation. The Holy See continues
to support a two-State solution that would achieve
peaceful coexistence between a viable Palestinian State
and Israel, with secure and recognized borders. The
two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
the only viable peace plan that would allow both nations
to live side by side in peace. Yet the facts on the ground
seem to indicate that there is more determination to
tear apart peace plans than to foster them. Leaders on
both sides bear the heaviest responsibility in guiding
their people in the direction of peace and not of
deeper conflict.

The Council must act to protect the two-State
solution, thereby decisively supporting the birth of an
independent Palestinian State and assuring the State of
Israel of its full right to peace and security. The Holy
See calls on both Israel and Palestine to demonstrate
wisdom, responsibility and the political will needed to
reach a historic peace agreement that would meet the
legitimate aspirations of both peoples.

With regard to the Holy City of Jerusalem, which
unquestionably holds a very special place not only in
the hearts of its inhabitants but also in those of the
followers of the three monotheistic religions all over
the world, my delegation wishes to recall the obligation
of all nations to respect the historical status quo of
the Holy City in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions. The Holy See also reiterates
its belief that the safeguarding of the identity and
significance of the Holy City can be ensured by way of
an internationally guaranteed statute aimed at a future
of peace and reconciliation for the entire region.

We are witnessing a deteriorating humanitarian
crisis in the Middle East and North Africa and a failure
to achieve any political progress. Similarly, the exodus
of refugees from Syria, Libya and other troubled areas in
the region has brought political problems and provoked
populist sentiments and outbursts of xenophobia in
many host countries around the world. The rule of law is
fundamental to any political solution of these conflicts
and to the achievement and maintenance of harmonious
coexistence among individuals, communities and
nations in the region. It necessarily includes respect for

religious freedom and equality before the law based on
the principle of citizenship, regardless of race, ethnic
origin or religion. The countries concerned must play
their part in fostering a culture of the rule of law in
the region.
The Holy See believes that there is an evident and
inherent link between respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law, on the one hand, and
the maintenance of international peace and security,
on the other. Respecting and protecting human rights,
especially those of minority populations, contributes
to our efforts to address the root causes and drivers
of instability, thereby helping to prevent and resolve
conflicts and sustain peace and favour development.
An early response to violations of international
humanitarian law, as well as to violations and abuses of
human rights, can effectively prevent conflicts before
they become a threat to regional and international
peace and security. When conflicts do occur,
accountability for such violations is vital for both
justice and reconciliation.

In the past, the Council has shown unity in the face
of threats to international peace and security. It needs
to show once again that same determination and unity
in the face of today's very grave threats. The world
awaits its leadership and wants it to succeed in putting
an end to the conflicts in the Middle East, North Africa
and beyond.

