Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, we are very pleased that it is under the
presidency of Namibia that the Security Council has been

 

able to approve peacekeeping operations in Africa. On 6
August 1999, under your presidency and that of your
country, we approved the peacekeeping operation for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Today we will adopt a
draft resolution on Sierra Leone, and we hope that, still
under your presidency, between now and the end of the
month, there will be hope for another part of Africa, the
Horn of Africa.

The draft resolution submitted to the Council
authorizes the deployment of new United Nations observers
to Sierra Leone within the framework of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL). This draft
resolution follows up the adoption of the Lorne Agreement,
on 7 July 1999, between the Government of Sierra Leone
and the rebels of the Revolutionary United Front. This
Agreement gives the people of Sierra Leone a long-awaited
opportunity to put an end to a conflict that has afflicted the
country for eight years. The representative of Sierra Leone
has recalled for all of us the atrocities that have been
committed against the civilian population throughout this
long conflict. In particular, he has cited the mutilation of
many victims: women, children and men.

My delegation welcomes the role of all those who
have worked to achieve this Agreement, particularly the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
President of Togo in his capacity as Chairman of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
whose country hosted the talks, and the Presidents of
Nigeria, Burkina Faso and Liberia. We also pay tribute to
the role played by the ECOWAS Monitoring Group.
France expresses its satisfaction with this decisive step
taken to promote peace and calls upon the Government of
Sierra Leone and the leaders of the Revolutionary United
Front to work together to ensure the full implementation of
the provisions of the Agreement. We are fully aware of the
difficulties that the parties to the Agreement will face in
their efforts for reconciliation.

Africans themselves, through their regional
organizations, have been able to put an end to an atrocious
war and to restore peace. They have asked for the support
of the United Nations and the Security Council. The United
Nations must respond to that request in keeping with its
peacekeeping responsibilities. That is the purpose of the
draft resolution that we are called upon to adopt.

For us, there should be no double standards with
regard to United Nations peacekeeping in the world.
Accordingly, our delegation will vote in favour of this
initial draft resolution, which will be followed by others.
France intends to make a contribution to increasing the
size of UNOMSIL and stands ready to make a number of
military observers available to that force.

