Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria. I am going to
be brief, but I do not want my brevity to be construed
as a lack of interest. Simply, I think that many of the
previous speakers have spoken very eloquently. Our
colleague from the United States, for example, spoke
about the political process. Therefore, ifI may, I will
start with some points about the security situation.

What the Special Envoy said about the troubling
resurgence of violence worries us. There have been
reports this morning that the Syrian authorities have
deployed multiple barrel bombs in attacks in northern
Hama, which I think is the first time such weapons
have been used in over seven months. Such use of
indiscriminate weaponry is unacceptable, but what is
particularly worrisome is that it seems to be a signal that
the Syrian regime is not serious about the protection of
the Syrian people. It would therefore be good to hear
from the Special Envoy whether he thinks that calls into
question the commitment to the political settlement.

We have also seen some recent correspondence from
the Syrians to the Security Council alleging activity
by armed terrorist groups with the support of "foreign
intelligence agencies". This is about chemical-weapon
attacks, and there are more allegations that the White
Helmets are involved. I have been very categorical in this
Chamber - and I regret the need to be so again - but
the White Helmets are a humanitarian organization.
They are purely a humanitarian organization. They
are very brave people. They are Syrians. And to date
they have saved 115,000 lives. We therefore look to
the Syrian authorities to abide by their international
obligations in relation to chemical weapons and to
refrain from using them.

I would like to say something briefly about Idlib.
Like others, we are very concerned by the frequent
reports of the regime shelling areas in the demilitarized
zone, and we understand that over 120,000 people have
been displaced since February as a result. We look to
Russia and Iran, which - along with Turkey - are the
Astana guarantors, to ensure that the ceasefire agreed
at Sochi is fully respected and that the current actions
cease immediately. Let me be clear: not only do we
want to see the ceasefire respected, we want to see
those Member States with influence use that influence
to ensure that the ceasefire is respected.

Turning to the political process, I think the Special
Envoy has made very good efforts, and I thank him for
those efforts. We support him as he continues onward,
and I think he was right to say that he should work on
the full range of issues under resolution 2254 (2015). I
wish to recall that resolution 2254 (2015) was adopted
in December 2015, which was 40 months ago. Forty
months ago, the resolution set a deadline of six months.

That is, 34 months ago, a schedule and process for
drafting a new constitution was to have been set up. We
really cannot allow the Syrian authorities to drag that
process out indefinitely. We therefore definitely and
strongly support the Special Envoy's drive to get that
matter sorted out in the coming months. Paragraph 4 of
that resolution calls for the establishment of a credible,
inclusive and non-sectarian governance. If I could ask,
what is the Special Envoy's assessment of the Syrian
authorities' progress in responding to the Council's
request contained in that resolution?

What has been done on the constitutional committee
is a good step forward. Anything that can convene the
international players in Geneva is to be welcomed. I can
promise the Special Envoy that we will be supportive
and pragmatic about that. But, again, we would call
on those with influence over the Syrian regime to
encourage it to engage seriously and constructively in
the political process, including by creating conditions
for humanitarian access.

I would like to look ahead to a point when the current
Syrian authorities will want to be reintegrated into the
international community. Without such reintegration,
Syria will never be stable or fully prosperous, which
is all the more reason that there needs to be a credible
political process. But I would remind the Council that
the United Kingdom has been clear, and is still clear,
that we will not consider providing reconstruction
assistance absent that credible political settlement.

