This is probably the last time that Belgium will be making a statement on behalf of Germany and Belgium, the humanitarian co-penholders. We would like to thank Acting Assistant-Secretary-General and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator Rajasingham for his briefing. We also extend our gratitude to all humanitarian and medical workers in Syria. They deserve our respect, assistance and protection. I will make four points. First, some claim that the security situation in Syria has stabilized. Indeed, the situation on the ground remains relatively calm compared to the deathly offensives we witnessed in 2019 and early 2020, which were characterized by deliberate attacks on hospitals and schools, and led to the displacement of more than a million civilians. However, serious protection concerns remain. In the north-west alone, 22 civilians, including six children, have been killed as a result of shelling and air strikes since we last met, and those numbers do not include yesterday's attack in Bab and Afrin; during the past two months six humanitarian workers have lost their lives for the same reason. We therefore reiterate the importance of the effective implementation by all actors of the March ceasefire agreement. We also call for a national ceasefire monitored by the United Nations. As humanitarian co-penholders, we have recalled time and again, throughout our membership in the Council, that counter-terrorism actions have to be in line with international humanitarian law and should not harm civilians or humanitarian workers or compromise the delivery of principled humanitarian aid. Secondly, 11 million Syrians remain in need of humanitarian assistance and protection. The economic and health crises have added an additional burden to an already dire situation. War, mismanagement and corruption have resulted in an economic and currency crisis without precedent, continuously diminishing the purchasing power of Syrians across the country. Currently 9.3 million people are food-insecure. This food crisis has very tangible consequences for ordinary citizens and even more so for the most vulnerable: children, persons with disabilities, and women and girls. In addition, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues to claim victims across the country. Testing capacity remains low, although since March it has increased in some parts in the country, including in the north-west. Capacity remains woefully inadequate in other parts of the country, however, and health-care workers are paying a heavy price, as they are on the front line in the fight against COVID-19. We know the reason why the Syrian health-care system is in such a precarious state: health facilities were deliberately targeted and destroyed during the years of war, in direct contravention of humanitarian law. We also listened carefully to what the Under-Secretary-General said about water supply. The parties to the conflict are playing with the lives of innocent civilians. The ongoing problems, in both the north-west and in the north-east, are unacceptable in any given situation and even more so in times of a pandemic, when sanitation is crucial to fighting the transmission of the virus. All parties should consider it a priority to durably restore access to water for all civilians. Thirdly, I want to draw attention once again to humanitarian access. This is at the core of the humanitarian file. This humanitarian co-penholdership, as the Council knows, has made every effort to maximize humanitarian access for all civilians in need across the country, fully in line with the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence. Despite our indefatigable efforts, humanitarian access has been severely restricted during the last two years owing solely to political and military considerations, in contravention of humanitarian principles and in defiance of the calls made by the Secretary-General and the Under-Secretary-General for more cross-border and cross-line access. After the closure of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing point, many health facilities are suffer shortages of supplies. Although cross-line access to those facilities has improved slightly, significant deficiencies remain. This is indefensible and immoral, and, absent adequate cross-line aid deliveries, the closure of Al-Yarubiyah should be reversed without further ado. Similarly, during the discussions leading to the closure of the Bab Al-Salam crossing point, the claim was made that the regions it serviced in the north-west would be, from then on, supported through cross-line humanitarian aid via Bab Al-Hawa. The sad reality, here too, is that the closure of Bab Al-Salam has thus far rendered humanitarian operations in the north-west more costly and more risky. It is fair to say that, here too, promises of adequate cross-line assistance to compensate for the forced decrease in cross-border assistance were incorrect, jeopardizing the delivery of sufficient humanitarian aid to all civilians for the cold and dark months ahead. It is the task of the Council to act as a guarantor of international peace and security. It defies logic how some States members of the Council have chosen to limit humanitarian access in times of tremendous need, rather than guaranteeing it, prioritizing their own narrative over the well-being of Syrian civilians, be they men, women or children. Fourthly, I would be remiss not to reiterate that only a genuine political process in line with resolution 2254 (2015) can break the cycle of violence. Only accountability can begin to address the suffering that so many Syrian children, women and men are still subject to on a daily basis. The humanitarian co-penholders fully support the conclusions of the Board of Inquiry; the work of the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011; the work of the Commission of Inquiry; and justice initiatives at the national and international levels. Refugees will be able to return to live in their country of origin only on a voluntary basis, and they will do so only if they feel they can do it safely, securely and with dignity. Finally, some deliberately misconstrue Western sanctions as the cause of the medical crisis in Syria and see fit to exploit the COVID-19 crisis to call for the easing of sanctions, in a vain effort to deflect from both the detrimental restrictions on cross-border humanitarian aid and the nefarious and well-documented targeting of health facilities by the Syrian authorities. So for the sake of fact-based debate, allow me to reiterate clearly that European Union (EU) sanctions impede neither humanitarian assistance nor medical supplies. Quite the contrary: the EU is the foremost humanitarian donor to Syria.
