Mr. Nambiar (India): We extend our warmest
congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We wish you success in dealing with
the complicated issues engaging the attention of this
body. We would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Bulgaria on the work achieved during the
month of its presidency, coinciding as it did with the
anniversary of the attacks of 11 September and the
general debate in the General Assembly. I also take this
opportunity to congratulate Angola, Chile, Germany,
Pakistan and Spain on their election by the General
Assembly to the Council beginning next year.

We commend your initiative, Mr. President, to
convene this open meeting of the Council on the
subject of counter-terrorism, which is the overriding
concern of the international community today. One
year after the catastrophe of 11 September, such a
meeting is opportune to review the progress achieved
in our common endeavour to extirpate this
phenomenon from our midst and to assess what more
needs to be done in this regard.

For some decades, global terrorism has fixed its
malign attention upon many countries across the world,
bringing in its wake the pain and waste of human
tragedy through wanton murders, mindless mayhem
and indiscriminate destruction. In recent years this
phenomenon has become more pervasive, organized
and networked, arising as it has from the debris of the
polarizations, divisions and conflicts that characterized
the cold war era.

The response of the international community to
this challenge had, until recently, been generally
episodic, sometimes apathetic, and characterized often
by tokenism. Perhaps this was due to a sense of
immunity felt by some societies from the worst
manifestations of this phenomenon. Without their
conscious engagement, political will and
determination, no struggle against terrorism could
become a global reality. States that were victims of
terrorism, which had hitherto faced this challenge on
their own, now find support and sympathy. Indeed,
they have now been asked to join the coalition to
combat this global evil.

We in India believe that terrorism is a common
enemy of all peoples, of all beliefs and of all religions.
It is a disorder that seeks to undermine the peaceful,
democratic and cooperative order that most civil
societies aspire to attain. The act of terror is intended
to cause physical, psychological, social and political
damage on a scale that is meant to destabilize
communities and to disrupt and retard peace, economic
progress and development, social harmony and
political institution-building. We know from experience
that open, liberal and democratic societies are
particularly vulnerable.

India has been a victim of State-sponsored, cross-
border terrorism for two decades now, with a
horrendous toll of tens of thousands of persons killed.
The recent terrorist attack in a place of worship in
Gandhinagar, Gujarat, left over 30 innocent men,
women and children dead and hundreds of others
wounded. The determination of the people of the state
of Jammu and Kashmir to exercise their electoral right
to choose their representatives has been marred by a
campaign of intimidation and terror inspired from
across the border. That campaign has been designed
specifically to foster a climate of fear and instability.
But, as is abundantly clear in all democratic societies
and as has been expressly confirmed in this case as
well, the preferred option invariably is that of the ballot
over the bullet. Our commitment to the preservation of
the rule of law also remains undiminished.

The international community has responded to the
collective challenge created by terrorism and its
backers through resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council. The global war against
terrorism has so far been successfully conducted
against Al Qaeda and has resulted in the removal of the
regressive and obscurantist Taliban regime in
Afghanistan. Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)
has sent a clear and unambiguous message that the
world community will no longer tolerate terrorists or
their sponsors; that the international community is
determined to hold the perpetrators and instigators of
terror to account; and that the civilized world will no
longer permit such acts to be conducted with impunity.
India unreservedly supports resolution 1373 (2001).

The anguish and suffering caused by terrorism is
well known to us. We have fought this terror and will
continue to do so with unflinching determination and
resolve. We have also gained valuable lessons from this
tragic period. It is against that background that we
would like to share with the Security Council some
suggestions that we hope will be beneficial to the
implementation of the counter-terrorism resolution and
a more effective response from the Council and the
Committee to this grave threat to international peace
and security.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) has
worked with unceasing effort to coordinate an
international approach to tackling international
terrorism. We commend Ambassador Greenstock and
his colleagues on the Committee, as well as the experts
who have helped in furthering the Committee's work,
for their untiring labour and productive results. We
appreciate the fact that the Chairman of the Committee
has held regular briefing sessions for Member States on
the progress made by the Committee in implementing
the resolution.

Member States have responded promptly to the
resolution, judging by the fact that over 170 national
reports have been received by the CTC in the first
round of reporting, while 83 countries have submitted a
second round of reports. This reflects the importance
the membership attaches to the work of the Committee
and the support it enjoys across the board. I would like
to reiterate here that India is fully committed to
implementing its obligations under resolution 1373
(2001). We have submitted two reports so far.
The CTC has been doing commendable work in
persuading Member States to take legislative and other
measures that comply with resolution 1373 (2001). But
there is a long way to go before we can say we have
been able to make resolution 1373 (2001) really
effective and operational. It is not beyond the
knowledge of the Council that even when Member
States have ratified other anti-terrorism conventions
there has been more than one instance of blatant non-
compliance. Neither the United Nations nor the
Member States affected has been able to do much about
it. Therefore, enforceability of violations assumes
significance.

I would like draw the particular attention of the
Council to sub-paragraphs 2(b), (d) and (e) and 3(a) of
resolution 1373 (2001). They deal with what I would
call cross-border or transnational terrorism. These sub-
paragraphs mandate Members to take actions to
prevent the financial planning and facilitation of
terrorism against other States. Sub-paragraph 2(e) calls
upon States to bring perpetrators of such offences to
justice. Member States may say they have complied
with these provisions in letter, but how is the CTC or
Security Council going to account for the complaint of
a Member State which is a victim of such cross-border
terrorist acts? What is the action that can be taken
against errant Member States?

There is a growing momentum towards
ratification of all twelve sectoral conventions on
terrorism. Countries have also either strengthened
existing legislation to tackle terrorism and strengthened
institutions, procedures and mechanisms to combat the
financing of terrorism, or, where these are absent, have
begun them. These achievements should not be
underestimated. The approach adopted so far by the
CTC to elicit information and then to probe countries
in a manner which encourages them to consider the
deficiencies in their legal system has served a useful
purpose.

However, some work still remains. There are
countries which have not submitted any report, because
of lack of capacity or other reasons. An approach by
the CTC to provide technical assistance, where
required, may be useful in such a context. There have
also been references to a possible regional approach.
This may not be relevant in regions where terrorism
emanates from within the region.

I have earlier reiterated that resolution 1373
(2001) marks a watershed in our common combat
against terrorism. In our view, it is a timely and
ambitious undertaking of the Security Council in
fulfilment of its responsibility to maintain international
peace and security. The Council must act swiftly and
resolutely to implement the counter-terrorism
resolution with neither fear nor favour. I compliment
the Council on the purposeful start it has made and
would like to assure you that the Council and its
Committee will have my delegation's full support in the
fulfilment of their mandate.

