Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Pacific small island
developing States (SIDS) represented at the United
Nations: Fiji, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Nauru,
Palau, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Vanuatu and my own country, Papua New Guinea.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
presiding over today's meeting on this important issue.
I also acknowledge the welcome presence in the
Council today of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Timor-Leste, Mr. Albano da Costa, and to thank him
for his briefing. The Minister's words underline his
strong commitment to consolidating a peaceful
transition in his country. In the same vein I would like
to acknowledge the presence with us today of the Vice-
Minister for Political Affairs of the Ministry of
External Relations of Brazil.

Let me also commend the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Ameerah Haq, in leading the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). We take special note
of the report of the Secretary General on the United

Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste for the
period from 8 January 2011 to 20 September 2011
(S/2011/641).

We, the Pacific SIDS, are pleased to note from
the Secretary-General's report that since 7 January
2011 "The overall situation in Timor-Leste remained
generally calm, with continued progress towards the
consolidation of peace, stability and development."
(ibid., para. 2) We further note that both individual
actors, such as the party leaders of the Congresso
Nacional da Reconstrucao de Timor-Leste and the
Frente Revolucionaria do Timor-Leste Independente,
and institutional bodies such as the Parliament, in
preparation for the 2012 presidential and parliamentary
elections, have all underscored the need to sustain
national unity and to concentrate on longer-term
socio-economic and development strategies.

We note in particular the various initiatives and
events led by His Excellency President Jose Ramos-
Horta to support his call for "solidarity to build a
society living in peace, stability, and harmony, in
which women and men may have a confident outlook
and hopeful future." (see S/2011/64], para. 6) Those
initiatives reveal the President's strong political will
towards national unity and stability.

We are also pleased to note that one of the most
important issues under discussion at this time is the
participation of women in the political process. We
therefore note the important meeting convened on
14 July 2011 under the aegis of the Secretariat of State
for the Promotion of Equality.

The role of UNMIT continues to be crucial in the
transition, ensuring dialogue and reconciliation among
the diverse political actors and civil society. Continued
institutional capacity-building remains essential for
Timor-Leste, especially in the context of the coming
presidential and parliamentary elections in March and
June 2012. The elections will represent a cornerstone
for the people of Timor-Leste and will constitute a
unique opportunity for the nation to secure democracy
and confirm its will to develop a respectful and
peaceful society.

In order for the elections to be a success, with a
sustainable outcome, domestic public security remains
crucial. The resumption of the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) in March 2011 proved to be an
important step relating to public safety. The Pacific
small island developing States appreciate the work of
the UNMIT police in providing operational support to
the PNTL in issues such as close protection, joint
patrols and border policing. We further embrace the
reported progress in the implementation of the joint
development plan, which sets out the priority areas for
UNMIT police capacity-building support.

Several Pacific SIDS members have contributed
actively to the progress of UNMIT by past and current
deployment of police personnel. In the past, a
considerable Pacific contingent served in the country,
coming from Palau, Fiji, Samoa and Vanuatu. At
present, Samoa contributes with five policemen and
policewomen and Fiji with one expert on mission. The
Pacific small island developing States express their
continued dedication and commitment to their active
involvement in Timor-Leste.

We note with appreciation the progress of the
Government of Timor-Leste in developing legislation
to reinforce the security sector, for example in civil
protection and border management. The Government
has made notable progress towards meeting the
objectives and benchmarks of the medium-term
strategy in the area of the rule of law, justice and
human rights. We are therefore glad to observe that
Timor-Leste is showing solid progress on security and
judiciary reforms.

Currently, Timor-Leste is experiencing a steady
rate of economic development. We welcome the
Strategic Development Plan for 2011-2030, which
reveals the Government's commitment to achieving the
Millennium Development Goals. UNMIT is making
invaluable efforts in supporting that main national
development policy by assisting the Government in
planning, monitoring and coordinating donor
assistance.

The Pacific small island developing States stand
with Timor-Leste, which is also, we are very proud to
say, a valued observer member of both the Pacific
Islands Forum and the Melanesian Spearhead Group.
Not only do we all share the same vulnerabilities and
challenges, but we also share common values and
opportunities. The Government of Timor-Leste is
putting remarkable efforts into ensuring a stable,
peaceful and democratic transition. Still, the quest for
prosperity is a long-term journey with significant
challenges ahead. The Pacific SIDS are committed to
working closely with the Government of Timor-Leste
in achieving its mission and reiterate their full support.
