The President (spoke in French): Pursuant to the
invitation extended to the representative of Timor-
Leste at the 5958th meeting of the Security Council
under rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Security Council, I invite the representative of
Timor-Leste to take a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Miranda
Branco (Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council
table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will continue its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

(spoke in English)

"The Security Council welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
(S/ZOOS/SOl), as well as the briefing by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Timor-Leste, Mr. Atul Khare, on 19 August
2008.

"The Security Council commends the
political leadership and State institutions of
Timor-Leste for the rapid, firm and responsible
manner that respected constitutional procedures
of the country, in which they responded to the
deplorable events of 11 February 2008. The
Council acknowledges that while progress has
been made in the overall security situation in
Timor-Leste since the events of May-June 2006,
the political, security, social and humanitarian
situation in the country remains fragile.
"The Security Council welcomes the
continued efforts to foster dialogue and national
reconciliation in Timor-Leste through various
mechanisms, in particular the expanded High-
level Coordination meetings, the Trilateral
Coordination Forum, as well as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General's
continued good offices. The Council also
welcomes recent progress in addressing the
situation of the internally displaced persons.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
continued importance of the review and reform of
the security sector in Timor-Leste, in particular
the need to ensure clear separation of internal and
external security roles and responsibilities
between the National Police (PNTL) and the
military, to strengthen legal frameworks and to
enhance civilian oversight and accountability
mechanisms. The Security Council recognizes
efforts made by the national authorities and
UNMIT for the reconstitution of the National
Police of Timor-Leste and welcomes the report of
the expert mission to Timor-Leste on policing of
16 May 2008 (8/2008/329) and the necessary
steps taken to implement the recommendations of
the report. The Council underlines that the
building of an independent, professional and
impartial national police service in Timor-Leste is
a long-term process, that national ownership is a
central element in this regard, and that UNMIT
has a key role to play in helping to ensure that the
PNTL is ready and able to resume its policing
responsibilities.

"The Security Council recalls the need for
the sustained support of the international
community to Timor-Leste to develop and
strengthen its institutions and to further build
capacities in the justice sector.

"The Security Council further reaffirms the
importance of ongoing efforts to reach
accountability and justice, and underlines the
importance of the implementation of the
recommendations of the Independent Special
Commission of Inquiry report of 2006 by the
Government of Timor-Leste. It welcomes the
conviction of the leaders of Timor-Leste on the
need for justice and their determination to act
against impunity. The Council underscores the
08-46530
importance of the promotion and protection of
human rights.

"The Security Council recognizes the need
to address socio-economic challenges in Timor-
Leste. In this regard, the Council welcomes the
launching of the national priorities for 2008 by
the Government of Timor-Leste, including public
safety and security, social protection and
solidarity, addressing the needs of youths,
employment and income generation, improving
social service delivery, and greater transparency
and effective Government. It also welcomes the
signing between Timor-Leste and the United
Nations of the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework 2009-2013, which can
provide the country with an important instrument
on its path to development.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for UNMIT in its work and appreciates
the continued efforts of the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative to ensure the full
08-46530
implementation of the mandate of UNMIT. It
encourages UNMIT, in accordance with its
mandate, to continue to cooperate with the United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes as well
as all relevant partners to support the Government
of Timor-Leste. The Council recalls its requests
to the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
Government of Timor-Leste, to develop a
medium-term strategy with appropriate
benchmarks to measure and track progress and to
submit further reports as and when he considers
appropriate."

(spoke in French)

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2008/29.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.55 p.m.

