Mr. Oshima (Japan): I would like to thank the
Chairpersons of the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions
Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
and the 1540 Committee for their briefings today, as
well as to express our appreciation for their hard work
and achievements in their respective Committees. I
also wish to congratulate Ambassador Peter Burian of
the Slovak Republic on his assumption of the
chairmanship of the 1540 Committee and to thank his
predecessor, Ambassador Mihnea Motoc of Romania,
for his remarkable contributions during his tenure.

My Government firmly upholds its position on
the fight against terrorism. Whatever the purposes of
terrorists may be, terrorism must never be condoned.
We strongly condemn terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.

One of the key issues in the follow-up of the
2005 World Summit Outcome as regards counter-
terrorism is to reach agreement on the pending
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
We have come fairly close to reaching agreement on
the convention. We very much hope that, at next
week's resumed session of the General Assembly's Ad
Hoc Committee on International Terrorism, all Member
States will strive to achieve agreement at an early date.
At the same time, we must act in parallel in the
Security Council by promoting greater cooperation
among the Committees charged with fighting terrorism,
so as to enhance the Organization's overall counter-
terrorism policy.

Another point I wish to stress is that States not
members of the Security Council follow the activities
of the Council's subsidiary organs with great interest,
including those of the three counter-terrorism-related
Committees. They do so because the activities of those
Committees affect the concerns and interests of non-
members in important ways. Transparency and
inclusiveness are therefore critical. I welcome the fact
that the briefings of the Chairs of the three Committees
are taking place in a public meeting. I also welcome
the efforts being made to improve the websites related
to the activities of those Committees. They serve as an
effective means to enhance transparency and to
respond to the interests and concerns of Member
States.

In that connection, let me say that I have recently
been appointed Chair of the Informal Working Group
of the Security Council concerning the Council's
documentation and other procedural questions. In that
capacity I intend to work closely with members of the
Council and to listen to non-members' views in order
to help improve the working methods of this body in
all its aspects - including subsidiary organs such as
those under discussion - to bring about greater
transparency and inclusiveness in the work of the
Council in general, as required by our leaders in the
outcome document. To that end, we hope to be able to
draw upon the opinions and views expressed in today's
discussion.

We are pleased that the three Committees are
further broadening the range of their activities, and are
doing so with resolve and consistency.

First, with regard to the Al-Qaida and Taliban
Sanctions Committee, it is necessary to continue to
search for ways to make Council-imposed sanctions
more effective, as they are unquestionably an
indispensable part of the terrorism-prevention
measures being undertaken. My Government is
therefore grateful for the recent visit to East Asia -
which included Japan - by the Committee's
Chairman, Ambassador Mayoral of Argentina. That
visit was of benefit to my country and, I believe, the
region as a whole, in its efforts to improve effective
implementation of sanctions measures.

Among the measures for which the Committee
has been responsible recently was the issuance last
December of the first set of Interpol-Security Council
special notices. That was the result of cooperation
between the Committee and Interpol. It was a
significant development, given that linking the
Committee's Consolidated List with related Interpol
resources gives Member States access to a broader
range of information and enables them to implement
travel restrictions more effectively.

As discussed during the Chairman's visit to Asia, it
is essential to increase the precision of the Consolidated
List by inviting Member States to submit any additional
related information they may have. For its part, Japan is
taking preventive measures that include the full
implementation of the recommendations of the Financial
Action Task Force, as stipulated in Council resolution
1617 (2005). We are also strengthening our travel-ban
measures.

The fourth report of the Monitoring Team, which
was submitted to the Committee recently, includes
recommendations to improve sanctions. My
Government looks forward to the discussion of that
report in the Committee in the near future.

Secondly, the role of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) remains crucial in enhancing the
capacity-building of Member States in the area of
counter-terrorism. We welcome the fact that the
technical-assistance policy guidelines approved by the
CTC in December last year are now being
implemented. As Ambassador Loj, the CTC's
Chairperson, has mentioned, the conditions and
requirements are different in each individual State,
making it inevitable that the process involves some
degree of trial and error. We hope, however, that the
CTC will accelerate its work, so that requests from
Member States for technical assistance will be acted
upon as quickly as possible.

In that connection, we are pleased that, as a result
of the comprehensive review conducted in December
last year, we now have a system to enable the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) to
engage vigorously in activities on the basis of the
policy guidelines approved by the CTC. We hope that,
under the leadership of Executive Director Ruperez,
the CTED will facilitate work between States
requesting assistance and the donor community,
thereby making tangible progress in building the
counter-terrorism capacities of Member States. We also
hope that the best possible use will be made of the
limited resources for State visits. Furthermore, we look
to the CTC to pursue closer cooperation with the
Counter-Terrorism Action Group and with relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations in
carrying out its mandate.

Thirdly, we welcome the fact that the 1540
Committee has approved its first programme of work
under the new Chair. We look forward to examining the
second set of reports submitted by Member States and
to intensifying our discussions on effective ways by
which technical assistance can be provided before the
Committee's current mandate expires at the end of
April. The role the Committee is expected to play
under its extended mandate needs to be determined in
the light of its work record over the last two years. We
intend to participate actively in that discussion.

Finally, it is clear that all the critical tasks
entrusted to the three Committees cannot be fully
addressed without the expertise and dedication of the
experts who serve in each body. My delegation would
like to express its appreciation to the experts on the
Monitoring Team of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
Sanctions Committee, including Mr. Richard Barrett,
the Coordinator, the members of the CTED and the
experts on the 1540 Committee for their unstinting
efforts and excellent work. We would also like to take
this opportunity to thank Mr. Guillermo Kendall of the
Permanent Mission of Argentina, who has contributed
immensely to the work of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
Sanctions Committee in assisting the Chairperson, as
he has recently assumed another important post.

My Government will spare no effort in
cooperating with other Member States in advancing the
work of the three Committees so that the Security
Council's crucial work on counter-terrorism will be
further enhanced.

