Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank Ambassador Kumalo of South
Africa for his efficient management of the Security
Council's mission in Timor-Leste in the last week of
November, and we would like to thank the delegation
of South Africa for presenting the report (S/2007/711).

Peru would like to reiterate its firm support for
the people and Government of Timor-Leste in the
search for a State that is peaceful and sustainable in the
long term. We believe that it is important for the
Government and all the parties to continue to work
together, on the basis of dialogue and reconciliation, in
order to strengthen the progress that has been achieved
and to overcome the current situation of fragility and
instability in the security, political and humanitarian
aspects.
We agree with and share the observations
presented in the mission's report, in particular where
its says that in the light of the enormous challenges
faced by the country, Timor-Leste will continue to

require assistance from the United Nations in different
areas for the foreseeable future. From our point of
view, it is crucial that the Security Council continue to
be committed to assisting Timor-Leste, since we all
know that reconciliation and development are complex
processes that require time.

In that context, we believe that the Security
Council must renew the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) when its
mandate expires in February 2008, with a view to
supporting the people and the leaders in taking on the
great challenges that remain to be resolved, especially
in the aspects of strengthening democratic institutions,
building the rule of law and developing the country.

The future of Timor-Leste is in its own hands. Its
leaders and the population in general must assume that
responsibility and continue to promote economic
development and to ensure that the distribution of
income reaches those who are most in need.

In support of those efforts, UNMIT must continue
to cooperate and coordinate with the United Nations
system and the international community in order to
support the Government with the implementation of the
national development plan, as well as attention to other
outstanding matters. Some of those are security sector
reform, strengthening the justice sector and promoting
democracy, human rights and humanitarian assistance,
in particular the resolution of the problem of the
internally displaced persons. We do agree with the
proposal of the Special Representative, Mr. Atul Khare,
that the Secretary-General should deploy a mission of
experts to examine the relationship between UNMIT
police and the armed forces and the Ministry of the
Interior, in accordance with the supplementary
agreement on the functions of the police.

Lastly, I would like to draw the attention of the
international community of donors and entities of the
United Nations to the need to continue to cooperate
and to invest in Timor-Leste.

