Ms. Sornarajah (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by thanking Prosecutor Bensouda for her twenty-third
report and for briefing us today on the activities of her
Office concerning the situation in Darfur.

Like others here, the United Kingdom is deeply
concerned about the increased Violence in Darfur this
year, in particular in Jebel Marra, as the Prosecutor
set out, where as many as 130,000 people have just
been displaced. We continue to hear reports of forced
displacement, restrictions on humanitarian aid, and
attacks on civilians by the Rapid Support Forces and
other militias. That cannot continue. It is clear that a
lasting peace agreement is long overdue. We urge all
parties to engage with the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel road map as a viable way forward.
We are especially concerned to hear of widespread
allegations of intercommunal clashes and serious
sexual violence and gender-based crimes plaguing
large parts of Darfur. Our concern is only heightened
by the culture of impunity that prevails in the region.
All forms of sexual and gender-based violence are
utterly unacceptable. Crimes such as those are one of
the many reasons that the United Kingdom continues
to support the Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict
Initiative. Justice must be delivered to survivors, and the
International Criminal Court (ICC) has an important
role to play in doing so. We call on all parties to end the
violence against civilians and the abuses and violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law.

The United Kingdom is frustrated that fugitives
from the Court continue to travel with impunity. This
reporting period has actually seen an increase in
travel. We are particularly disappointed that President
Al-Bashir was able to travel to, and be hosted by, State
parties. Together with our international partners, we
have raised our concerns with the relevant Governments.
I hope that other members of the Security Council
will do so too. As the Prosecutor is aware, the United
Kingdom is a strong supporter of the International
Criminal Court. We continue to make clear that we
expect compliance with its arrest warrants for all those
indicted, including President Al-Bashir, and we remind
the relevant countries of their legal obligations as well.

The Government of the Sudan has persistently failed
to meet its obligations under resolution 1593 (2005).
In doing so, it weakens the rules-based international
system. We call upon the Government of the Sudan,
as we all countries, to cooperate fully with the ICC so
thatjustice can be delivered, perpetrators can be held to
account and impunity can be ended.

In the light of all of these obstructions and
difficulties, the Prosecutor should be congratulated
on the progress her Office has made to advance its
investigations, including by gathering new documentary
evidence and interviewing witnesses. We understand
the resource constraints that the Court is under but
nevertheless urge her to continue in its essential work.

We call on all ICC States parties to meet their
obligations under the Rome Statute, all States to respect
resolution 1593 (2005), and the Government of the
Sudan to cooperate fully with the ICC. Having referred
the situation in Darfur to the Court, the Council must
support the Court in fulfilling that mandate and take
effective follow-up action in relation to non-cooperation
with the Court.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom believes that
achieving justice for victims should be at the heart of
the international community's response to mass atrocity
Violence. It is vital that fugitives from international
justice not enjoy impunity. Only yesterday, many here
noted the fact that the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia had brought accountability to the
victims of Radovan Karadzic' more than 20 years after
the end of that conflict. In doing so, they have shown
that justice has no expiration date and that justice can
be achieved when an international tribunal is supported
in fulfilling its mandate.

Let me close by reiterating the United Kingdom's
commitment to the ICC. I call on others to do the same.

