Mr. Navarrete (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Mexico is very gratified to have the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia presiding
over this meeting of the Security Council. Allow me to
convey to you, Sir, my country's great appreciation for
your Government's firm support for the consideration
of the issue of small arms in international forums.

After the statements that we heard this morning,
my delegation does not wish to be repetitive or
overwhelm the Council with a lengthy and
cumbersome speech on small arms and light weapons,
but we would like to respond to the invitation extended
by the Government of Colombia to consider this issue
in the context of the activities and mandates of the
Security Council.

In a broader context, that of the whole
international community, the recently concluded United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects - which has
already been referred to many times - demonstrated a
broad interest in taking a multilateral approach to this
issue.

The problem became of particular concern in the
mid-19905. The estimated figures for 1995 indicated
that approximately 500 million small arms were
circulating worldwide, as you noted in your statement,
Mr. President. Recent estimates speak of about
600 million small arms, which originate from
600 manufacturers in 95 countries. When the Council
discussed this issue two years ago, in September 1999,
concern was expressed about the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons and the destabilizing effects of
their excessive accumulation and circulation, especially
in regions of conflict. Moreover, the Secretary-General
was requested to include in the studies of the problem
the humanitarian and socio-economic consequences of
the excessive and destabilizing accumulation of small
arms and light weapons, of transfers of these weapons
and of their illicit production and sale.

In the two years that have elapsed,
notwithstanding the arms embargoes imposed by the
Security Council, the excessive availability of small
arms and light weapons has not been reduced in
countries in conflict.

We believe it necessary to once again appeal to
the exporting countries to exercise a greater level of
responsibility in their international transfers of such
weapons. This was eloquently underscored by the
representative of Mauritius during this morning's
debate. We would like to note that we should continue
the practice established by the report of the Chairman
of the Security Council Committee on the situation in
Angola, which raised the question of the use of arms
traffickers and the provenance of arms obtained by
illicit means, and made recommendations on how to
tackle these problems. As the Security Council
investigates the activities of intermediaries in the small
arms trade, and the trail of financial transactions
involved in this field, it will have at its disposal more
information on which to formulate recommendations
and take decisions.

The question of small arms is multidimensional.
Mexico believes that the Member States of this
Organization should make a commitment to provide
weapons only to those Governments that are acting in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. As was stated this morning by the
Ambassador of Bangladesh, the Member States should
also undertake to establish a worldwide zone free of
child soldiers. The Security Council should have at its
disposal specific information on small arms in those
cases where there is a threat to international peace and
security. To this end, the coordination mechanisms
within the United Nations system could be improved,
and communications with subregional and regional
organizations could be strengthened, as well as with
non-governmental organizations.

The Security Council should study in depth the
lessons learned in the area of small arms. The Lessons
Learned Unit of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, in conjunction with the Department for
Disarmament Affairs, could present a report on the
excessive availability of small arms and light weapons
in conflict situations and the repercussions of such
weapons on peace-building.

Mexico believes that advisory missions to
consider the question of small arms in regions of
interest to the Security Council should have the consent
of the State or States involved. In a broader context,
such missions might help to define the specific
assistance needs of States suffering from excessive
accumulations of this kind of weaponry.

In conclusion, I reaffirm my country's firm
commitment to the full implementation of the measures
proposed in the Programme of Action of the previously
mentioned United Nations Conference.

We are confident that the Security Council and
the General Assembly will continue to consider the
issue of small arms within their respective mandates.
The outcome of that consideration will be examined in
the review conference in 2006.

