Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) (interpretation from Arabic): I am pleased to convey to you, Sir, on behalf
of the delegation of the United Arab Emirates, our heartfelt
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We would like also to
express our sincere thanks to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Kenya, for the exemplary way
in which he conducted the business of the Council last
month.

The Security Council is meeting today to consider the
decision of the Israeli Government to establish a new
Jewish settlement comprising 6,500 housing units in the
southern part of occupied East Jerusalem - specifically in
the area of Jabal Abu Ghneim - only days before the
beginning of the final status negotiations. The Council's
consideration of this subject is an expression of the deep
concern of its members regarding the grave consequences
to the peace process of the Israeli decision. In particular,
that decision runs counter to the clear political and legal
principles reaffirmed in Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and to the principle that tenitory
may not be acquired by force. All this makes it clear that
such measures are both illegal and null and void.

This Israeli scheme, aimed at the Judaization of East
Jerusalem and the consolidation of the occupation is a
sequel to previous settlement schemes, including the
opening of the tunnel under the Haram al-Sharif by Israeli
forces in defiance of Security Council resolution 1073
(1996); the demolition of the building belonging to the Butj
al~Laqlaq association within the walls of the Old City; the
denial of the right of residence to Palestinians; the
expropiiation of their land, in particular in East Jerusalem
in preparation for an illegal campaign for the absorption of
thousands of new Jewish immigrants at the expense of the
Palestinian people. In addition, Israeli authorities continue
to isolate the city of East Jerusalem from the other cities
of the West Bank and to deny Palestinians access to the
Holy City. Recently, the Israeli authorities closed the
offices of Palestinian national institutions.

All these measures are null and void. They have also
been rejected not only by the Palestinian and Arab
peoples of the occupied territories, but also by all peace-
loving countries and peoples of the world. Given the
spiritual and cultural importance of this Holy City for the
three divine religions, it should be a city of peace,
tolerance and coexistence for the peoples of the region
instead of a cause for war and conflict.

The United Arab Emirates condemns all these Israeli
infractions. We consider them to be flagrant violations of
Security Council resolutions, international law, the Madrid
framework and the agreements concluded by the Palestine
Liberation Organization and Israel. Indeed, these measures
strip the peace process of all content. They are
provocations aimed at the Palestinian and Arab peoples
and can only result in an escalation of violence and
tension in the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories.
They also threaten international and regional peace and
security. They run counter not only to the agreements
reached between the Palestinians and the Israelis, but also
to internationally recognized human rights norms, the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons In Time of War, and the
Hague Convention of 1907.

The United Arab Emirates reiterates its full support
for the demands of the Palestinian people, who reject all
these unjust settlement activities in their territories, and in
particular in Jerusalem, The United Arab Emirates looks
forward to the full assumption by the international
community and the sponsors of the peace process of their
responsibilities with regard to the question of Palestine
and its many facets in order to ensure Israel's compliance
with its obligations under the peace agreements and the
relevant resolutions of international law providing for the
immediate Cessation of the establishment and expansion
of Israeli settlements and the dismantling of those that
exist within the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories.

The Israeli Govemment's continued defiance of the
resolutions of the Security Council and the relevant
agreements -- in total disregard of all moral norms and
values, as well as the principles of the United Nations
Charter and of international law -- is indeed a dangerous
phenomenon. It not only undermines the peace process,
but creates an abnormal environment in international
. . meenn uesum non A
Security Council 374m." 3 k 6 Mtu'tlzyh 1997)
Fifty-second year "fin-..h

 

relations. The Security Council is therefore urgently
required to adopt the measures necessary to persuade Israel
to abrogate its recent decision concerning East Jerusalem
and immediately to stop all its other settlement practices
and legislation, including the expulsion of the inhabitants,
the closure of their national institutions, the expropriation
of Arab and Palestinian land and property and all the other
forms of daily harassment of the Palestinian people by the
occupation authorities.

The United Arab Emirates reaffirms the importance of
the resumption of negotiations on all tracks, including the
Syrian and Lebanese tracks, in order to achieve a just,
lasting and peaceful settlement based on the Madrid
Conference framework, the principle of land for peace, the
agreements concluded and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 425 (1978). The just and lasting peace sought by the
Arab countries is a strategic objective that requires a
corresponding commitment from the Israeli Government.
That Government should ensure the restoration of the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, the complete
Israeli withdrawal from all occupied Arab and Palestinian
territories, including Al-Quds, the Syrian Golan and
southern Lebanon. This would fulfil the aspirations of the
countries of the region for stability, peace, and social and
economic development.

