Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): The Indonesian
delegation has made its positions very clear concerning the
issue of settlements in the Arab territories occupied by
Israel since 1967, the most recent being the position it
expressed during the formal open debate last Friday. That
being the case, my delegation will not take up too much of
the Council's time by expressing its already well-known
positions.

Nevertheless, we would simply like to reiterate that
the recent Israeli expropriation order concerning 53 hectares
of land in East Jerusalem is not only in violation of
relevant United Nations resolutions and of international law,
but also poses a serious threat to the Middle East peace
process as a whole, as it contravenes the Declaration of
Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements,
signed on 13 September 1993 by the Government of Israel
and the Palestine Liberation Organization. It is our
considered View that any expropriations of Arab lands
undertaken by Israel are null and void, and we therefore
call upon Israel to immediately rescind these activities, be
they in East Jerusalem or other occupied territories, which
are in violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.

In our View, there cannot be a successful conclusion
of the Middle East peace process without a resolution of
the question of Jerusalem. We believe that its status must
be discussed in the context of the peace process and of a
comprehensive settlement in the region. Any confidence-
destroying measures, such as the present illegal policy of
the Government of Israel, must immediately be
discontinued.

It is therefore evident that the international
community cannot remain passive vis-a-vis these
measures taken by Israel, which will continue to imperil
the peace process. In this context, it is indispensable for
the Security Council to reverse this situation by taking
appropriate measures without delay. Failure to do so is
bound to send the wrong message to Israel. The
international community must take the necessary and
appropriate steps to ensure that agreements reached in the
Middle East peace process are fully implemented and
ensure the progression of its positive achievements.
Ultimately, only by working together through confidence-
building measures, and not through confidence-destroying
measures, such as the expropriation of Arab lands, is it
possible to achieve a comprehensive and durable
settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and peace in
the Middle East.

In the light of these considerations, my delegation
commends to the Council the draft resolution that we
sponsored together with the other non-aligned countries
that are members of the Council.

