Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council at
this very historic time for my country. We are fully
confident that you will carry out your mission well.

I begin my statement by thanking the Council for
all its efforts to support the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement between the
Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A), which was
reached on 9 January 2005 after a long period of
negotiations in which the Sudan's position - which
has not changed - was that peace will continue to be a
strategic choice and that every possible sacrifice
should be made to achieve it.

Until we implement that historic Agreement
aimed at ending one of Africa's longest conflicts and
opening up the prospect of a unified Sudan in which
peace prevails and in which the north, south, east and
west live together in harmony; and until the Agreement
takes effect throughout the Sudan, providing stability
and peace, particularly in the Darfur province - and
we hope that events will continue to move in the right
direction in that regard - we must redouble our efforts
to achieve a comprehensive peace by bringing about
peace and stability in Darfur, as stated before the
Council by the President of the Sudanese Republic and
the leader of the SPLM/A on 8 February.

Now that the Council has adopted resolution
1590 (2005), which sets out the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS), I should like to
thank in particular the resolution's sponsors for their
rational approach in defining the Mission's mandate in
a separate resolution. We fully appreciate the wisdom
of the members of the Council and their cooperation
aimed at ensuring the unanimous adoption of this
resolution so very important and historic for Sudan.

I should like to remind the Council of the pledges
and commitments undertaken at the historic meeting
held in Nairobi on 19 November 2004, including its
commitment to accelerate the adoption of the
resolution on the mission's mandate and its insistence
that the parties conclude a peace agreement as agreed
at Nairobi. The parties honoured their commitment and
presented the Peace Agreement to the Sudanese people
as a gift at the beginning of the new year, as we
promised. The people of the Sudan expect the United
Nations Mission in Sudan to support the peace. The
beginning of the implementation of this Agreement,
which we have witnessed today, is a very important
first practical step in that regard.

The Government of the Sudan, which has made
every effort to reach peace, is more keen than any other
party to implement the Agreement and translate it into
reality in every province of the Sudan. Here, we should
like to remind the Council that we are a State on the
threshold of development and progress. We have
achieved this peace after having followed a long and
arduous path, and we are now preparing to assume a
number of responsibilities and to work long and hard to
form a government of national unity, to prepare to
implement the Agreement, to undertake efforts in the
areas of repatriation and reconstruction, and to work
intensively to put an end to what has been happening in
Darfur and to enable it to embark on the path of peace
without delay.

I must remind the Council of the importance of
supporting my Government at a time when it is
assuming all of these responsibilities. Needless to say,
one cannot ask the Government to undertake such
important responsibilities while at the same time
weakening it or limiting its capacities. History is our
witness.

At the end of this historic meeting, I must
commend the efforts of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the Troika States
and the IGAD Partners Forum, as well as the very
important position taken by the sisterly State of Kenya.
We also commend the efforts undertaken by the
African Union under the leadership of Nigeria.

I wish to reiterate that the Government of the
Sudan, which has made every sacrifice to reach this
Agreement, is firmly committed to its implementation.
We will continue to work towards that end, and we will
not look back until the benefits of peace are felt
throughout the Sudan.

