Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to echo the strong condemnation
and condolences that others have expressed in this
Chamber in connection with the attack that took place
in Mogadishu.

Mr. President, I wish to congratulate you on having
convened this debate on natural resources and on the
positive contribution that the transparent management
of extractive industries can make to preventing such
conflicts. I thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Eliasson; Ms. Anstey; Ms. Grynspan; and Mr. Kofi
Annan for their briefings.

Belgium associates itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.

The link between natural resources and conflict
is particularly important to Belgium. My country
convened an initial debate (see S/PV.5705) on this issue
in 2007, during its presidency of the Security Council,
which led to the adoption of a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2007/22).

In recent years there have been a growing number
of initiatives aimed at promoting the transparent
management of natural resources, in particular in the
extractive industries. A number of them have already
been mentioned by other speakers. I would just refer
to the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
process, the Kimberley Process, the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development Due
Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of
Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas,
the International Organization of la Francophonie
Resolution on Good Governance in the Extractive and
Forestry Industries, the Guiding Principles on Business
and Human Rights, as well as the Global Compact
initatives. At the regional level, I would stress the
African Mining Vision adopted by the African Union.

When the Security Council considers a situation in
which poor management of the extractive industry is
likely to play a role in conflict, several tools are already
at its disposal to meet that challenge. Mediation efforts
in the natural-resources sector are regularly conducted
by the United Nations and other actors. Sanctions
relating to the extractive industries have been adopted,
for example in the form of embargoes. Expert groups
and panels associated with the sanctions committees are
also working on the issue. Finally, several peacekeeping
missions or special political missions have been given
mandates that include work in the area of natural
resources, in support of national Governments.

In future, the Security Council could consider
stronger action in this area through an integrated,
cross-cutting response based on existing tools. Such a
response should take into account the contribution and
value added of United Nations system organizations in
areas that are key to good governance, including reform
of the security sector, the promotion of the rule of law
and capacity-building.

In that regard, the Peacebuilding Commission could
play an important role by clarifying for the Council the
challenges and issues related to natural resources, by
promoting a coherent and coordinated approach among
the actors involved, and by supporting the efforts of the
countries on its agenda.

Such response should consider all phases and
dimensions of the conflict, such as early warning in
the case of violence, including human rights violations
related to the exploitation of natural resources;
preventing the resumption of violence; and the signing
of peace agreements. It should also be based on the
overall peacebuilding process.

In that context, we must stress, as many speakers
have done, the crucial importance of ownership by and
accountability on the part of States in the governance
of natural resources. Each State has the sovereign right
to control and exploit its resources, in accordance with
the Charter and the principles of international law. It is
therefore up to States to establish solid and transparent
governance at the institutional, legislative and
regulatory levels, in order to reduce any vulnerability
to conflict related to a form of resource management
characterized by a lack of transparency or corruption.
It is also up to them to ensure that they have policies in
place that will make it possible to invest revenue from
the exploitation of natural resources in the country's
future, to the benefit of the entire population.

Moreover, the governance of extractive industries
requires the support of all international partners, in
particular in enhancing capacity. It must be based on
regional and subregional cooperation. It requires the
close involvement and active engagement of the private
sector and civil society, as well as coordination among
the Governments concerned, United Nations entities and
regional organizations. Finally, we must remember that
the prevention and fight against the trafficking, illegal
exploitation and illegal trade in natural resources are
based on cooperation and shared responsibility among
countries of origin, transit and destination.

As we have heard this morning, the management
of natural resources is not related exclusively to
conflicts. This gives me the opportunity to draw
attention to an initiative of Belgium and Gabon that
is soon to be presented to the General Assembly. As
has been mentioned during this debate, many national,
regional and international initiatives relating to the
transparent management of natural resources have
been launched in recent years. The useful lessons for
sustainable development that have emerged should be
shared with all Member States. Our draft resolution to
the General Assembly thus aims to promote sustainable
development through transparency in the management
of natural resources.

