Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): On behalf of
Ambassador Gasana, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, who will be joining us
shortly, I wish to make the following statement.

"In accordance with paragraph 24 (e) of
resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February 2011, I
have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established by the
same resolution. The report covers the period from
16 September to 17 December 2014, during which
time the members of the Committee met once in a
formal meeting.

"At the outset, I would like to observe that the
Committee has been reaching out to Member States
more actively than usual during the past three
months.

"Let me begin by referring to the Committee's
action in follow-up to the interim report of the
Panel of Experts. In my most recent report (see S/PV.7264), I mentioned that the Committee
had agreed to follow-up on 15 of the Panel's
recommendations. Accordingly, the Committee
took the following steps.

"On 25 September, the Committee issued a note
verbale to all Member States drawing attention to
the new approval requirement for arms supply to the
Libyan Government, introduced by resolution 2174
(2014), to the high risk of diversion and misuse of
arms in Libya and to post-delivery requirements as
laid out in the updated implementation assistance
notice number 2.

"On 26 September, the Committee updated
several entries on its sanctions list.

"On 30 September, the Committee sent a letter
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, Mr. Bernardino Leon, requesting
his assistance in facilitating the Panel's access to
Libya.

"On 2 October, the Committee sent a letter
to the Permanent Representative of Libya to the
United Nations bringing to his attention five of the
Panel's recommendations, including procedures
to strengthen communication between the Libyan
authorities, on the one side, and the Panel and the
Committee, on the other.

"Also on 2 October, the Committee sent a
letter to Algeria requesting information on a listed
individual. On 8 October, the Committee sent
a letter to Oman in connection with a travel ban
measure, to which Oman responded on 24 October.

"On 10 October, the Committee issued a note
verbale to all Member States drawing attention to the
additional designation criteria set out in resolution
2174 (2014) and encouraging Member States to
submit information regarding individuals and
entities who met those criteria and information on
individuals currently inscribed on the Committee's
sanctions list.

"On 13 October, the Committee issued a press
release providing guidance on arms-embargo-
related matters, including to end-users of exempted
material in Libya and to Member States regarding
the regulation of supplies of arms and related
material to Libya that are sold by private entities.

"On 24 November, the Committee updated
its implementation assistance notice number 3,
relating to inspections and seizures of arms and
related material undertaken by Member States in
implementation of the arms embargo measure.
"Let me now report on the Committee's activity
in the follow-up to information and requests
received by the Panel or Member States.

"On 16 and 24 September, respectively,
the Committee sent letters to the Permanent
Representatives to the United Nations of Libya
and the Sudan as a follow-up to a public statement
by the Sudanese Ministry for Foreign Affairs
regarding deliveries of ammunition to Libya,
and to a subsequent letter from the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan addressed to the
Committee regarding the delivery of logistical
military supplies to Libya.

"On 23 October, the Committee sent a letter
to a Member State, as a follow-up to a note verbale
dated 20 October from the Permanent Mission of
Libya to the United Nations regarding an arms
embargo matter. The Member State in question
responded to the Committee by a note verbale
dated 5 December, and the information contained
therein will be conveyed to the Permanent Mission
of Libya shortly.

"On 14 November, the Committee held its
second formal meeting, during which it held a
discussion with the representatives to the United
Nations of Libya, Algeria, Egypt, Greece, Italy,
Malta, the Niger, the Sudan, Tunisia and Turkey
on the implementation of the sanctions measures
imposed by the Security Council in relation to Libya.
It was a fruitful discussion, in which the invited
delegations made some important suggestions and
proposals, which I hope the Committee will be able
to consider.

"Also during the reporting period, the
Committee responded to two requests for guidance
in relation to the arms embargo, the first of which
related to a previous request for guidance regarding
deliveries of military materiel to Libya by another
Member State using the requestor's airspace, and
the second of which related to previously exempted
materiel that was moved out of Libya and is now
supposed to eventually be returned to Libya.
The Committee furthermore sent a letter to the
delegation of the European Union, in response
to a request for information regarding a delisting
request, and two letters to Libya, the first of which
was in response to a question by Libya relating to
previously exempted materiel and the second of
which was in follow-up to a request for guidance
regarding the most recent list of Libyan officials
authorized to sign documents related to arms
procurement.

"Lastly, since the most recent periodic report
to the Council, the Committee received one
notification under paragraph 13 (b) of resolution
2009 (2011) that did not meet the necessary
requirements for a notification, as laid out in the
relevant implementation assistance notice of the
Committee. The Committee responded to the
notifying Member State by informing it about
the respective shortcomings in its submission and
suggesting remedy.

"Since this is my last periodic report to the
Council, I would like to conclude by thanking the
members of the Committee for the cooperation they
have always extended to us, and the Secretariat for
its much-appreciated assistance, and by wishing
my successor well in his stewardship of the work
ahead."

