Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): My delegation
are grateful to the Secretary-General for his report and
to his Special Representative, Mr. Jessen-Petersen, for
his briefing today and for his outstanding leadership of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). The continued unflagging energy
and integrity that he brings to his work are admirable.

It is good to welcome President Tadic, and I
thank him for his intervention. The United Kingdom is
also pleased to see Prime Minister Kosumi in the
delegation of the Special Representative.

The United Kingdom associates itself with the
European Union statement to be delivered by
Ambassador Pfanzelter of Austria.

The United Kingdom deeply regrets the sad
passing of President Rugova, who devoted his life to
pursuing Kosovo's interest peacefully. The swift and
smooth election of President Sejdiu is a credit to
Kosovo's institutions and political maturity.

The United Kingdom shares the concern of the
Secretary-General that progress in implementing the
standards for Kosovo has slowed. We urge President
Sejdiu, Prime Minister Kosumi and their Government
to engage with Kosovo's Serb community and with
Belgrade to create a stable, secure and prosperous
Kosovo for all its people, regardless of ethnicity. We
call on the Provisional Institutions and on Belgrade's
political leaders to accelerate work on implementing
standards, especially in the key areas of returns, rule of
law, freedom of movement and the preservation of
cultural and religious heritage.

I wanted to make three points on priorities for the
coming months. The first is immediate: the United
Kingdom joins UNMIK, the World Health
Organization and UNICEF in urging Roma, Ashkali
and Egyptian internally displaced persons to leave
lead-polluted camps and move to the safer environment
offered by UNMIK at Osterode camp. This is a matter
of urgency, especially for the children involved. The
United Kingdom also hopes that both Belgrade and
Pristina will work constructively on the issue of
missing persons, which still affects many families in
Serbia and Kosovo today. We hope that both sides will
treat this humanitarian issue with the respect and
importance it deserves.

Secondly, decentralization is a key measure of
progress and an important element in reassuring
minorities. The United Kingdom welcomes the meeting
in Vienna scheduled for 20 February to discuss
concrete proposals on this issue. We hope that the
parties will engage in serious discussion to find a way
to improve the daily lives of Kosovo's minority
communities.

Thirdly, the authorities in Belgrade should
actively encourage Kosovo's Serbs to take their
rightful place in Kosovo's government institutions. The
only way for Kosovo Serbs' interests to be fully
reflected now and in the future is through their full
engagement in Kosovo's political life. They and other
minority communities in Kosovo should seize the
opportunity afforded by the current future-status
process, led by the Secretary-General's Special Envoy
Martti Ahtisaari, to ensure that their concerns are
addressed and to shape their own future in Kosovo.

Every post-conflict situation is different; each
calls for solutions specific to that situation. To try to
squeeze all such situations into a single mould is to
risk failing to achieve the Council's objectives on re-
establishing international peace and security and
delivering prosperity and stability for the peoples in
the given situation and their region. The particular
situation of Kosovo has been under Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) for an extended period of
international administration since the appalling events
of 1999. Any settlement resulting from the current
future-status process should be concluded, we believe,
during 2006. And it clearly cannot disregard the
aspirations of 90 per cent of the population of Kosovo.

So independence is a realistic option. Indeed,
some might say it is the only option that will bring
lasting stability and security not only in Kosovo, but in
the wider region. But Prime Minister Kosumi and his
Government must understand that they need to
demonstrate to the international community, and
especially to the Security Council, that they are
genuinely committed to the protection of minority
rights and to a multi-ethnic Kosovo. It is a statement of
the obvious that the more they do so, the smoother the
final-status process will be.

We have heard Special Representative Jessen-
Petersen refer to concerns about the pace of progress
on standards. Kosovo's status - whatever it is to be -
must be fair to the interests of all communities in
Kosovo and must promote regional stability and multi-
ethnicity. As Contact Group Foreign Ministers
concluded at their meeting in London on 31 January,
now is the time for leaders in Serbia and Kosovo to
show the political courage and vision necessary to
come forward with realistic and far-sighted proposals
for the futures of both Kosovo and Serbia. A negotiated
settlement would enhance prospects for integration into
Euro-Atlantic structures in the future, but that goal will
depend on clear and realistic decisions being made
today by leaders on all sides.

In conclusion, the United Kingdom will continue
to work in the Contact Group, in the Council, in the
European Union and in the region to build a stable and
sustainable European future for Kosovo and for the
region as a whole, in which Serbia and Montenegro too
assumes its rightful place in the European family.

