Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I also commend your initiative in choosing
the theme of today's debate, namely, "The situation in
Middle East, including the Palestinian question", which
is so important given our support for the cause. We
hope for success for the current efforts as we begin the
new year.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing on recent developments in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question, in
which he highlighted the principled positions that he
has consistently put forward regarding the conflict.

Our debate today coincides with the declaration
adopted two days ago in Marrakesh during the twentieth
session of the Al-Quds Committee, presided over by
the King of Morocco, Mohammed VI, and with the
participation of the President of Palestine, Mahmoud
Abbas. It was an opportunity to highlight the efforts
being made by His Majesty, as President of the Al-Quds
Committee, and to express respect for the identity
and symbolic value of Al-Quds, as well as to address
all practices that are detrimental to it, including the
building of settlements in that city where all inhabitants
coexist. While explaining the objectives of the meeting,
His Majesty stated that he wished to send a message
to the entire world showing that "we are a nation that
supports peace and a coalition between civilizations
and cultures".

The declaration adopted at the session also
reaffirms the key importance of the cause of Jerusalem
for the Islamic nation, given that Jerusalem lies at the
heart ofa political solution and that any attempt against
the Al-Aqsa mosque would lead only to an escalation
of violence and increase the level of despair and could
have harmful consequences for the region, which would
undermine any possibility for peace.

Secondly, the Security Council was invited to
remain abreast of the situation of tension in Jerusalem,
given its responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council.

Thirdly, the Committee reiterated that the
establishment ofa comprehensive,just and lasting peace
in the Middle East was the goal towards which all States
members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
Group are working, consistent with international law
and on the basis of the principle of land for peace, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the road map, with a view
to enabling the people of Palestine to establish their

own independent, fully sovereign and geographically
unified State, with Jerusalem as its capital.

Fourthly, the Committee stated that the negotiations
held between Palestine and Israel since July 2013
represented an important step towards achieving peace
in a manner consistent with resolutions of international
legitimacy and the terms of reference of the peace
process. The Committee reiterated the importance of
addressing any action that is contrary to the objective
of peace and that could strengthen the occupation.

Great hopes have been invested in the negotiations
that are being conducted with great determination
by Secretary of State Kerry to carry the process
forward and bring the people of the region closer to
a comprehensive and just peace, in keeping with the
desire of the international community as expressed in
the context of the Organization since 1948.

However, the possibilities of success for the
negotiations will remain slim as long Israel does not
respect the need to end the occupation, allow the
Palestinian people to establish their independent State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and abandon the
settlement policy, which we have repeatedly denounced,
as it is contrary to the principles underpinning the
negotiations.

Despite the experiences of the Palestinian people
since 1948, including with policies of displacement and
confiscation, they have always worked to pursue their
inalienable rights. Their leader, President Mahmoud
Abbas, has given tangible and consistent proof of their
commitment to dialogue and negotiation as means of
achieving peace.

Israel must shoulder its responsibilities and work
in a positive and serious manner with the American
mediation so that negotiations can be successful, in
keeping with the resolutions adopted on the basis of
the current situation, because any further failures
could lead to greater extremism, violence and reprisals,
which the peoples of the region cannot deal with given
the current crises.

The tragic situation in Syria is deteriorating on
all fronts and is now reaching the end of its third year,
with all that implies in terms of victims and destruction
across the entire spectrum of Syrian society. This has
also affected neighbouring States, which have shown
unprecedented solidarity. To express our own solidarity
with the brotherly Syrian people and to alleviate the
burden on neighbouring countries, the Kingdom of
Morocco has established a hospital in the Zaatari camp
in sisterly Jordan.

In two days, the second Geneva Conference on
Syria will be a true test of the possibility of laying the
foundation for political dialogue in a manner consistent
with the aspirations of the brotherly Syrian people,
in the context of a democracy that includes all of the
Syrian people and that guarantees the sovereignty and
unity of sisterly Syria.

The Kingdom of Morocco stands ready to
contribute, along with the Security Council and the
international community, to launching a dynamic that
will put an end to the bloodshed and revive hopes for a
political solution so as to ensure stability.

Turning to Lebanon, the Kingdom of Morocco
welcomes the policy pursued by that country. My
country reiterates its support for the independence and
unity of Lebanon, thereby reaffirming our belief in the
ability of the Lebanese people to rise above through
the difficult circumstances that they are experiencing
today.

