Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General and all the other speakers
for their briefings. It was important that they had this
opportunity to address us all today in order to provide
the Council with a clear picture of the evolution of the
situation on the ground, covering both the political
and security aspects as well as the humanitarian and
human rights aspects. We believe that the Council is
more than ever playing the role it should by raising and
addressing all ofthose issues together, because they are
all very closely linked to the maintenance of peace and
international security, and therefore all fall under the
purview and responsibility of the Council.

I wish to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Ukraine for his presence here today. I would like
to assure him of France's commitment to respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine. The resolution of the crisis in eastern Ukraine
constitutes a priority for France. The President of the
Republic reiterated that point during his recent trip to
Moscow by recalling how our determination to find a
solution for a political settlement of the crisis remains
unchanged.

Within the Normandy format, France and Germany
are fully committed to the complete and swift
implementation of the Minsk agreements, particularly
the package of measures adopted on 12 February. The
political mobilization of the high-level Contact Group
on Ukraine in recent months has led to significant
progress on several aspects.

First is the fact that there are no longer any large-scale
hostilities, as there were at the beginning of the year,
and a process of political settlement of the crisis is
slowly taking shape. In terms of security, the ceasefire
established in September is generally being respected,
although it has yet to be consolidated. An agreement
on the withdrawal of weapons under the 100 millimetre
to 120 millimetre calibre has been implemented and is
being monitored by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The number of civilian
casualties has been significantly reduced.

On the political front, it is now necessary to
determine the terms of a draft bill for elections in
the Donbas region aimed at granting special status to
the territory, according to the sequence approved at
the recent Normandy format summit held in Paris on
2 October.

Turning to economic and humanitarian issues,
the parties managed to reach agreements on concrete
projects to rebuild infrastructure and on a number of
prisoner exchanges. Progress has also been achieved in
mine clearance.

Furthermore, the European Union has done its
utmost to mobilize support for the implementation of
the Minsk agreements, in particular by enabling the
conclusion of a gas agreement between Russia and
Ukraine and by initiating trilateral consultations on
the impact of the crisis on the implementation of the
detailed and comprehensive free-trade agreement on
the Russian economy. To a certain extent, things are
therefore on the right track. Nevertheless, the situation
on the ground remains extremely volatile, and we are
fully aware of the difficulties that remain.

The trend of increasing ceasefire violations
recorded since the beginning of the month ofNovember
endangers the progress achieved so far. Those
violations must cease. It is important that an agreement
on the withdrawal of heavy weapons be approved and
implemented immediately. The Special Monitoring
Mission of the OSCE in Ukraine must also be permitted
to fully exercise its mandate. In that regard, we reiterate
our call for the monitors to have the benefit ofunhindered
access to areas controlled by the separatists, including
along the entire international border with Russia, in
accordance with the Minsk agreements. It is equally
important that the Special Monitoring Mission be able
to implement without delay the permanent outposts in
accordance with its plans. The withdrawal of foreign
terrorist fighters and equipment must also be carried
out without delay.

The lack of agreement among the parties within
the political working group hinders progress towards a
lasting settlement of the crisis in eastern Ukraine. We
hope that the Ukrainian authorities and the separatists
will constructively participate in the working group
discussions aimed at reaching agreement on a draft of
a special electoral bill for certain zones and regions of
Donetsk and Luhansk that respects international law
and OSCE standards.

The economic and humanitarian situation
also remains particularly troubling in Donbas. It
continues to deteriorate as winter sets in, which is
particularly worrying. It is vital that unhindered
access be guaranteed to humanitarian organizations
throughout the territory controlled by the separatists.
Unfortunately, that is not the case today, and it could
have devastating consequences on the population, as
Mr. Ging pointed out in his briefing today with regard
to the activities of Doctors Without Borders. Those
hindrances cannot in any case justify the measures of
unwarranted administrative control.

It is also important to expand our mine-clearing
operations to cover other priority areas identified by
the OSCE. We urge the international community,
especially the United Nations, to support those actions,
both financially and technically. We also support and
call for the further release of all prisoners held by the
parties, which must take place as quickly as possible.

We are also deeply concerned about the ongoing
serious human rights violations observed in eastern
Ukraine as well as the situation in Crimea, and I would
like to recall that France does not recognize its illegal
annexation. In those territories, the population sees
their fundamental human rights and freedoms regularly
violated by the de facto authorities. The repression of all
dissenting voices as well as the discrimination against
and constant harassment of Tatars in the Crimean
region must cease. In that regard, it is essential that
various human rights monitoring missions have access
to the entire Ukrainian territory, including Crimea.

Finally, our ultimate goal is the return of Ukraine's
control over all its territory within the internationally
recognized borders, in accordance with international
law. In that context, the priorities are to consolidate the
security situation on the ground and to renew efforts to
implement the political aspects ofthe Minsk agreements.
Those two issues are indeed at the foundation of any
long-term and lasting settlement and are inseparable.

At the Paris summit of 2 October, the four Heads of
State and Government of the Normandy format process
agreed to postpone by several months the deadline
initially set for 31 December. The Minsk agreements
constitute the benchmark for a peaceful political
solution to the conflict. We thereby have an appropriate
framework for the solution adopted by the Council
in resolution 2202 (2015). I wish to reiterate that the
solution to the crisis requires the full and complete
implementation, as quickly as possible, of the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements. Each party, but also every member of the
Council, must meet its responsibilities in supporting the
process. We will continue, together with our German
partners, to mobilize in that direction, in the context of
the Normandy format. A new follow-up meeting at the
level of Foreign Ministers for that purpose will be held
shortly.

