I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing. I wish to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the more than 80,000 United Nations peacekeepers deployed in 13 mission areas, and commend them for their courage, sacrifice and contribution. United Nations peacekeeping operations are an important creation for the maintenance of international peace and security. It has been two years since Secretary- General Guterres first proposed the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative, and it is now at acritical stage of full implementation. The sudden outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), however, has brought huge uncertainty to conflict-affected countries and had a serious impact on United Nations peacekeeping operations. At this very moment, United Nations peacekeepers are working alongside the people in their mission areas to fight the pandemic. Many peacekeepers have extended their mission periods and suspended their rotations. In mission areas such as Mali and South Sudan, some peacekeeping soldiers have been infected with COVID-19 and some have even lost their lives. We extend our deepest condolences to their families. This is a very difficult time for every peacekeeper. United Nations Member States stand in solidarity and support with the Secretariat in its efforts to organize a proper response to the negative impact of COVID-19 on peacekeeping operations so that the implementation of the A4P initiative will continue. The briefing by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix is extremely important. In this connection, I wish to make four observations on how to maintain the positive momentum for peacekeeping operation reforms and facilitate further implementation of the A4P initiative. First, we must prioritize the mandate of peacekeeping operations. It is important to adhere to political means for peaceful resolution of disputes as one of the most essential principles of the United Nations Charter. Peacekeeping operations must always be carried out bearing in mind the fundamental goal of political settlement and the scope of mandate and key tasks of peacekeeping operations must be adjusted based on the developments on the ground. The mandate, whether it is comprehensive, limited or targeted, should take into consideration the need to advance the peace process and the expectations of the Governments and the people of the countries concerned, rather than the will of external forces. Legal reform, the protection of civilians and the promotion of human rights are all tools that serve the political process. They should not replace the political process itself. Peacekeeping operations should strive to lay a foundation for the long- lasting peace and stability of the countries involved so that they can achieve self- reliance and continued development as soon as possible. A clear and feasible exit strategy is also an integral part of the entire plan of peacekeeping. The Security Council has already laid out exit arrangements and timetables for the African Union- United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, according to which withdrawal should be undertaken in an orderly manner, as planned, in order to create conditions for the Sudan's peacekeeping and transition. Secondly, we need to improve the performance of peacekeeping operations. It is our common goal and the joint responsibility of the Secretariat, the mission, financial contributors, police-contributing countries (PCCs) and troop-contributing countries (TCCs). We believe that the performance evaluation system must be developed based on the specific situations on the ground, and evaluation of the performance of each mission, peacekeeping operation and peacekeeper must be done accordingly and appropriately. It is necessary to take into consideration situations in different mission areas and the actual circumstances of each TCC and PCC. It is also important to know that it is unrealistic to evaluate performance without considering the level of resources available to troops. It is also unfair to the peacekeepers who have made tremendous contributions. Providing sufficient resources for peacekeeping operations and ensuring their efficient use are critical to success in peacekeeping. Cutting resources for peacekeeping operations purely for financial reasons will hinder their performance, weaken their effectiveness and even pose new risks. That is why, at the recent Security Council meeting to extend the mandate of UNIFIL, China stressed that the resources should not be cut without careful considerations. Thirdly, we have to ensure the safety of personnel in peacekeeping operations. Peacekeeping operations rely on people for their execution. The current operations are facing increasingly complex and dangerous environments, especially in regions such as Mali and Central Africa, where peacekeepers are confronted with acute security challenges. While peacekeeping operations are by no means zero-risk, we have a responsibility to minimize the safety risk and avoid any casualties and sacrifices that could have been prevented. To this end, Member States and the Secretariat should actively implement resolution 2518 (2020) to help missions strengthen their capabilities for early-warning and provide better equipment and medical conditions for peacekeepers by establishing an expressway for medical evacuations of peacekeepers. China suggests that the Secretariat appoint a full-time consultant to coordinate and implement safety issues for peacekeepers, which will help achieve tangible progress in a relatively short period of time. As one of the leading countries for the subject of personnel safety in the A4P initiative, China has helped other TCCs and PCCs with training and worked with other countries to explore feasible ways to improve the safety of peacekeepers. Fourthly, it is imperative to strengthen partnership in peacekeeping operations. A strong partnership can effectively channel resources in different fields, strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations and expand the influence of peacekeeping operations. The Security Council, the Secretariat, financial contributors, TCCs and PCCs should strengthen their communication and carry out in-depth discussions through existing mechanisms, such as TCC and PCC meetings and Security Council peacekeeping working groups, in order to create synergy for peacekeeping reforms. The United Nations should work more with the African Union (AU), the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and other regional organizations. The United Nations can support these organizations, which in turn can do the same for the United Nations. Instead of seeking a dominant role in this process, each organization should use its strengths and work together to maximize the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. The AU's independent peace missions, as a good example of the African solution for African questions, provide important support to the United Nations peacekeeping operations. The United Nations should therefore provide them with sustained and predictable funding. In September 2016, the Secretary-General briefed the Security Council on recommendations to strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and African Union. This recommendation should be fully implemented. President Xi Jinping of China announced at the 2015 United Nations Peacekeeping Summit that China would continue to support Africa in its efforts to build an African standing army and rapid crisis response forces. All these commitments have been honoured. China will, to the best of its abilities, continue to contribute to the peace and security in Africa. The United Nations will celebrate its seventy-fifth anniversary in a week's time and the seventy-fifth general debate of the General Assembly will begin. The theme of this important event highlights our collective commitment to multilateralism. The United Nations peacekeeping operation is an important underpinning for upholding multilateralism and maintaining international peace and security. China will continue to work together with other peace-loving countries to improve peacekeeping operations, stand for multilateralism and safeguard the international system, with the United Nations at its core and international order based on international law.
