Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis
for his briefing and for his ongoing dedication and
leadership of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We also acknowledge the
presence of Mr. Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, and we thank him for the very important
role he plays in New York.

This is clearly a decisive time in Afghanistan's
transition. Significant progress has been made in
security in the past few months. President Karzai's
announcement, on 18 June, on milestone 2013 and the
fifth and final tranche of transition will see the Afghan
National Security Forces (ANSF) take national lead
responsibility for security across the country and mark
a turning point in the modern history of Afghanistan.
Their capability has improved significantly, as
demonstrated by their swift response to recent attacks
in Kabul. In Uruzgan province, where Australia has
focused its efforts, the ANSF is already in the lead and
will assume full responsibility for security by the end
of the year. The international community has signalled
its strong commitment to the Afghan National Security
Forces, which will be important for consolidating
security gains. Finalizing ANSF sustainment
mechanisms will be essential.

Economic and political transition will also be
critical. International support will help to reinforce
Afghan sovereignty.

A credible presidential election in 2014 will be
indispensible to political transition. Afghanistan must
take steps to intensify its preparations, in particular
passing an improved electoral law by the upper
house of Parliament. Resolving the impasse over the
Independent Election Commission's structure law so
that a new chairperson can be appointed is vital. It is
axiomatic that the presidential elections be Afghan-
led and run, but we also urge the Afghan Government
to utilize international support, including that of the
United Nations. The Enhancing Legal and Electoral
Capacity for Tomorrow 11 project of the United Nations
Development Programme provides valuable technical
support, which is important for maximizing voter
participation and strengthening anti-fraud measures.
UNAMA also has an important role to play in supporting
Afghan institutions to prepare for the elections.

We urge the full implementation of the law on
the elimination of violence against women, which
is a bellwether commitment under the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework. Advancing opportunities
for women and girls in Afghanistan is a must and will
be a decisive measure of the country's success.

The scale of international donor pledges at the
2012 Tokyo Conferences illustrates the international
community's commitment to helping Afghanistan to
achieve a secure, stable and prosperous future. But the
international community's ability to sustain support
for Afghanistan depends upon the Afghan Government
delivering on its commitments under the Framework.

Only the Afghan Government itself can implement
the reforms that will deliver good governance and
ensure growth and stability. Concrete progress on
anti-corruption efforts, human rights and economic
reform is vital if the legitimate expectations of ordinary
Afghans and of the broader international community are
to be met. The forthcoming meeting in Kabul ofa team
of senior officials will be an important opportunity to
review progress and address the shortfalls.

As the Secretary-General noted in his report
(8/2013/350) and as Mr. Kubis has outlined, Afghanistan
continues to face significant humanitarian challenges.
The increase in civilian casualties, attributed to
anti-Government elements, is obviously of grave
concern. We must all condemn, in the strongest possible
terms, the recent attacks that have targeted civilians,
including humanitarian workers, the Afghan judiciary
and the offices of the International Organization for
Migration.

The situation of children in particular is of greatest
concern. The indiscriminate use by insurgents of
suicide bombers and improvised explosive devices
is deplorable. All parties must respect international
humanitarian law, and the Taliban must do so. The
issue of counter-narcotic efforts is a critical challenge.
It is a matter of concern that the Secretary-General has
reported a probable increase in poppy cultivation for a
third consecutive year.

Australia has been a long-term supporter of an
Afghan-led process of reconciliation and encourages the
commencement of such a dialogue. We recognize that
that will not be an easy or straightforward process and
that there is no guarantee of success. But work towards
peace and reconciliation must continue. We support
efforts to build the conditions for reconciliation and,
as Chair of the Security Council Committee esbalished
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), we will work to
ensure that the Taliban sanctions regime supports an
Afghan-led process. It is essential that momentum is
sustained to build the foundations for an Afghan-owned
peace and reconciliation process taht leads to a durable
political settlement. It is also important that we provide
effective support for the role of the United Nations and
United Nations-affiliated agencies in Afghanistan as
transition moves forward and beyond 2014. We must
get the UNAMA future mandate right, and ongoing
adequate funding will be required.

In conclusion, as Ambassador Tanin has just
said, Afghanistan's mission is unfinished but is well
on its way. The United Nations and the international
community remain committed to working to help
Afghanistan complete that journey and consolidate its
long-term security and stability well beyond 2014.

