Mr. Lamba (Malawi): Let me begin by saying
that I shall present what one might call a summary in
the interests of time. Copies of my complete statement
have been deposited with the conference officers.

I should like to join preceding speakers in
congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
this important organ of the United Nations and in
thanking you and the Security Council for organizing
this important debate to highlight the plight of children
in conflict situations. My delegation would also like to
congratulate the Secretary-General on his lucid and
candid report on children and armed conflict
(S/2002/1299), which forms the substance of this
debate. Special acknowledgement also goes to the
excellent presentations by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Olara Otunnu, and by the
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund, Ms. Carol Bellamy. The information that has
been provided will undoubtedly lead to soul-searching
with regard to the strategies needed for the protection
of children, especially in armed conflicts, but also for
the necessary post-conflict care. My delegation is
satisfied with the approach aimed at monitoring and
reporting the treatment of children through the
codification of international norms and standards to
secure maximum protection.

Malawi cannot claim much experience in armed
conflict, and the problem of children now under
discussion might be considered rather peripheral on
Malawi's socio-economic agenda. However, the
welfare of children must form the central feature of any
nation's socio-economic planning. Malawi has
supported all actions designed to create an improved
environment for our children's realization of their full
physical, emotional and intellectual potential. All
regional and international protocols for children have
been accorded Malawi's support.

Malawi considers imperative the promotion of
any action that alleviates children's suffering and
deprivation, which negatively affect their hope for a
good future. Although Malawi may not be engaged in
conflict or warfare, it - like many other African
countries - is engaged in a more subtle war against
the HIV/AIDS pandemic, which has created
approximately 600,000 orphans, of whom no less than
one fifth were born already infected with HIV and
therefore face a bleak future in an environment
blighted by excessive poverty.

The Malawi Government has placed children high
on its development agenda, and its vigorous
intervention in child development - which covers
nutrition, water and sanitation, psycho-social care,
education and health - demonstrates its seriousness in
addressing the welfare of children. Malawi ratified the
Convention on the Rights of the Child in 1991, and the
Government is working in collaboration with the
Committee on the Rights of the Child to assiduously
monitor the implementation of the Convention.

Other concrete measures taken by the
Government include the establishment, in 1999, of a
children's rights unit within the Malawi Human Rights
Commission to protect children from abuse, violence
and exploitation. The Malawi Law Commission has
embarked on a review of existing legislation to bring it
into conformity with international human rights
standards, including those for children. Financial and
technical assistance will be needed here to promote the
administration of juvenile justice and human rights
education. Malawi is also a signatory to all
International Labour Organization protocols, and
national legislation has been enacted to regulate the
minimum age of employment. The United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) has always proved to be an
ardent partner in the improvement of the state of
Malawi's children.

Our achievements today must contribute to a
positive and hopeful future for our children. That is
why my delegation commends the Secretary-General's
report for exposing and providing heightened
awareness of the plight of children created by a
senseless adult world. My delegation fully endorses all
measures proposed and adopted for the creation of a
world fit for children and all actions taken under
international humanitarian and human rights law to
induce compliance by the perpetrators of crimes
against children.
Therefore, my delegation hopes for systematic
international compliance, on the part of both States
parties and insurgent armed groups, with two
instruments: the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict and the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. In the report, Malawi is
pleased to note the United Nations offer of technical
and legal assistance in the area of ensuring children's
rights.

In conflict regions, no child can be safe, whether
that child is in the fighting ranks or in a devastated
home environment. The trauma experienced by
children in conflict remains with them long afterwards.
Malawi therefore endorses the establishment of child
protection advisers in affected countries, such as
Angola, Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of
Congo, to collaborate with other stakeholders, such as
UNICEF and Governments.

Indeed, children's rights must be highlighted on
the United Nations agenda of peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace-building, with child protection
adequately integrated into that agenda. It is our hope
that the draft guidelines formulated by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Political Affairs will make an effective contribution to
the promotion of effective child protection. The
proposed comprehensive child protection training to
supervise the conduct of staff towards children in
mission areas stands out as a necessary initiative that
deserves unqualified support. Equally important is the
suggested inclusion of landmine risk education
programmes and rehabilitation of child victims of
mines.

The exploitation of children as forced labour to
extract natural resources in various countries, including
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, only
emphasizes the inhuman tragedy faced by displaced
children. A childhood spent in refugee camps
encounters enormous challenges. Indeed, apart from
forced labour, the recruitment of children by armed
forces and by other groups deprives them of the right to
education, to proper health care, to development and,
above all, to choices. A refugee camp in a foreign
country creates an even more complicated situation for
children. Malawi fully supports the work of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, whose work and intervention brings hope to
the many suffering children.

The horrible experiences of girls and women in
armed conflicts present a nemesis to any norms of
civilization and form a topic deserving urgent action.
The substantial claims of sexual exploitation involving
rape, forced recruitment, abduction and trafficking all
serve as condemning testimony to the absence of
commitment to practical support for girls' welfare. On
a different occasion in the United Nations, Malawi
expressed total condemnation of the despicable sexual
exploitation of girls in conflict zones not only by
armed forces, but, more disturbingly, by aid workers
and peacekeepers. Malawi notes with satisfaction the
Plan of Action of the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee's Task Force on Protection from Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse in Humanitarian Crises, the
strict implementation of which should make a
significant difference and contribution towards the
protection of girls from sexual exploitation.

My delegation would like to pay special tribute to
the Secretary-General for including in his report lists of
people and States involved in the violation of the legal
and human rights of children who find themselves
subjected to various indignities and deprivation. The
list should create a time for reflection over the
important obligation of international child protection
through unquestionable compliance with international
agreements and protocols. Malawi will support any
Security Council actions with respect to States and
organizations listed in the report. Children's rights
deserve respect and their flagrant violation with
impunity should not be tolerated and must be addressed
through recourse to punitive measures, such as tough
sanctions.

Finally, the field visits of the Special
Representative have demonstrated the crucial
importance of such an approach to verify and elucidate
the war-affected child's situation in conflict zones.
Such visits, which need to be encouraged, give the
Special Representative a visual picture of the extent of
the problem. The data so competently collected
enriches our comprehension of the child's predicament.
As the Security Council deliberates the problems
facing the child in conflict areas, it is Malawi's strong
plea that children facing other crises, such as
HIV/AIDS, should feature in the Special
Representative's future itinerary. For example, Malawi,
where the pandemic has created untold misery for
children, would benefit from a proactive visit by the
Special Representative to assess the efficacy of the
interventions and child-protection measures currently
in place and subsequently to advise appropriately.

My delegation would like to conclude this
statement by once again thanking the Secretary-
General for submitting a landmark report on children,
which will challenge the deliberations of the Security
Council. If the mishandled child, who holds the future,
cannot be considered a security issue, what can? If we
cannot demonstrate concern for the child now, who will
and when? There is no time to stand idle and watch.

