Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
First of all, like my colleagues I would like to say that I am
pleased by the presence at today's meeting of the Minister
for External Relations of Angola, His Excellency
Mr. De Miranda. We also join in the thanks expressed here
today to the Panel of Experts and its Chairman,
Ambassador Mollander, for the work they have done. We
are also grateful to the Chairman of the sanctions
Committee, Ambassador Fowler, for his introduction of this
report to the Security Council.

As can be seen from this preliminary discussion today,
members of the Security Council are united in their
assessment of the situation in Angola and also in their
assessment of the role to be played by Council sanctions in
settling the conflict. It is clear that enhancing the
effectiveness of the sanctions regime offers great potential
for stepping up pressure on the military and political
leaders of UNITA, who are responsible for the breakdown
of the Lusaka process.

There is a direct link between violations of the
sanctions regime and the continuing threat the region
poses to international peace and security. This is the
standpoint from which we are looking at the report that
has been submitted to the Security Council, which
contains extensive factual information about sanctions
violations and specific recommendations on how to step
up monitoring of the implementation of the sanctions.

Like other delegations, we are very carefully
analysing the information contained in the report, and we
are also looking at how in practical terms the
recommendations could be adopted. It is clear that
substantive consideration of the report will take place
once members of the Security Council have studied the
document. It is also clear that the report has to be studied
in the capitals, but even at this stage we can say that the
information contained in the report does confirm the need
for the Council's sanctions Committee to continue
working vigorously, with a view to taking further steps so
as to more successfully implement the relevant decisions
of the Security Council.

We believe that the most serious attention should be
given to the Panel's recommendations on stepping up the
sanctions Committee's efforts, inter alia, in enhancing the
effectiveness of the current sanctions regime as regards all
the areas set forth in the Security Council resolutions.
These areas include illegal supplies of arms, petroleum
products, the export of diamonds, the handling of
UNITA's assets and so forth. We are ready to work
closely and actively on this issue with the Chairman of
the sanctions Committee and all of our partners in the
Security Council. We feel sure that we will all continue
to make progress on this work and to conduct ourselves
with the utmost seriousness.

