Mrs. Gueguen-Mohsen (France) (spoke in French):
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to South Sudan, Ms. Ellen Loj; Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide,
Mr. Adama Dieng; and you, Sir, in your capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015) on South Sudan, for your
briefings. I would also like to particularly welcome
the activities of Ms. Laj in heading the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) over the past few
years in very different circumstances.

The seriousness of the situation that has just
been described fully justifies today's open meeting
to speak about the matter. France is deeply concerned
by the threat of a new escalation of Violence in South
Sudan. Since the conflict began almost three years ago,
civilians have been the victims of unspeakable violence
and abuse. Men, women and children have been
executed, murdered, raped, mutilated and abducted.
Violence has spread to many regions of the country.
In addition to the fighting between the two parties to
the conflict, there are now cross-community conflicts,
ethnic violence and armed group attacks.

While that is already a bleak picture, today South
Sudan is in danger of plunging further into a new
spiral of violence. The Secretary-General, the Panel
of Experts of the Sanctions Committee and Mr. Dieng
himself have sounded the alarm. They have alerted us
to hate speech and incitement to murder, which makes
us fear the worst. They have drawn our attention to
the risk of an escalation of violence, particularly along
ethnic lines, which could result in mass violence.

The Security Council cannot turn a deaf ear to
such dangers. As was underscored by Mr. Dieng, such
a spiral of violence is not inevitable and therefore can
be prevented. The people of South Sudan cannot be
abandoned to such a fate. They are in danger and we
have to provide them with the necessary support. The
Security Council must therefore mobilize to prevent
South Sudan from descending into chaos. It cannot
and must not stand idly by. It has to act in accordance
with its responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations and take the necessary measures.

First of all, establishing an arms embargo is now
urgent. The ongoing influx into South Sudan of light
and heavy weapons feeds the conflict and makes it
easier to commit acts of violence against civilians. We
need to do our utmost to slow this flow of weapons.
France has long called for such an embargo and regrets
that the Security Council could not decide on it earlier.
However, there is still time. We support the United
States proposal and call on members of the Council to
stop prevaricating.

Next, the resumption of the political process is
critical to restoring hope to South Sudan. The conflict
cannot be resolved militarily; any settlement must be
political. The parties must therefore urgently commit to
ceasing hostilities and participate in inclusive dialogue
that can stabilize the governance of the country and
move towards an exit to the crisis. For that reason, we
welcome the active roles that the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the African Union have
played since the beginning of the crisis in trying to
promote a political solution. Today more than ever it
is necessary to redouble the efforts in that regard, and
the United Nations can help, in particular through the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. The
Security Council must also play its role by supporting
those efforts. We must stand ready to remind those who
seeking to impede peace initiatives that the Council is
ready to take necessary measures against them.

Lastly, UNMISS mustbe in a position to carry out its
mandate. We strongly condemn the attacks perpetrated
against the Mission and humanitarian workers. The
obstacles that have been set up to prevent UNMISS
access to vulnerable populations are unacceptable.
We call on the Government of South Sudan and all
the parties to the conflict to guarantee full freedom
of movement to UNMISS. The Government of South
Sudan must also honour its commitments and ensure the
proper deployment of all Mission contingents, including
the Regional Protection Force, and their equipment.

I also want to reiterate the full support of France
to UNMISS, which is implementing its protection of
civilians mandate in very difficult circumstances. In
that regard, we welcome the efforts deployed by the
Secretariat to draw lessons from the shortcomings
noted during the outbreak ofviolence in Juba in July. We
welcome and support the commitment of the Secretariat
to implementing the recommendations as quickly as
possible. The Council must support those efforts.

The civilian populations of South Sudan have
suffered for far too long from the war, which to them
seems endless. That situation could deteriorate further.
It is the Council's responsibility to mobilize in order
to prevent South Sudan from plunging further into the
spiral of violence. It is time for us to act.

