Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I am
delivering this statement on behalf of the United
Kingdom, France and Germany.

The United Kingdom, France and Germany are
seriously concerned about the current stalemate in the
Middle East peace process. We each voted in favour of
the draft Security Council resolution because our views
on settlements, including in East Jerusalem, are clear:
they are illegal under international law, are an obstacle
to peace and constitute a threat to a two-State solution.
All settlement activity, including in East Jerusalem,
should cease immediately.

Our primary goal remains a just and lasting
resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We will
continue to work actively to turn this ambition into
reality: the creation of a sovereign, independent,
democratic, contiguous and viable Palestinian State,
living in peace and security side by side with Israel.
Our views are clearly set out in the European Union
Foreign Affairs Council conclusions, most recently in
December 2009 and December 2010.

We believe that Israel's security and the
realization of the Palestinians' right to statehood are
not opposing goals. On the contrary, they are
intimately entwined objectives. We therefore call on
both parties to return as soon a possible to direct
negotiations towards a two-State solution on the basis
of clear parameters.

For those negotiations to be successful, they will
need to achieve an agreement on the borders of the two
States, based on 4 June 1967 lines, with equivalent
land swaps as may be agreed between the parties. They
will need to achieve security arrangements that for
Palestinians respect their sovereignty and show that the
occupation is over, and for Israelis protect their
security, prevent the resurgence of terrorism and deal
effectively with new and emerging threats. The
negotiations must achieve a just, fair and agreed
solution to the refugee question, and they must fulfill
the aspirations of both parties for Jerusalem. A way
must be found through negotiations to resolve the
status of Jerusalem as the future capital of both States.

Despite the challenges ahead, the key elements of
a solution are well known. Thanks to work commended
by the international community as a whole, the
Palestinian Authority has developed the capacity to run
a democratic and peaceful State, founded on the rule of
law and living in peace and security with Israel.
Further delay will reduce, rather than increase, the
prospects for a solution. We therefore look to both
parties to return to negotiations as soon as possible on
that basis.

Our goal remains an agreement on all final status
issues and the welcoming of Palestine as a full Member
of the United Nations by September 2011. We will
contribute to achieving that goal in any and every way
that we can.

