Mr. Moriko (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes the holding of this
briefing following the recent visit to Afghanistan of
Ms. Amina Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General of
the United Nations.

Cote d'Ivoire condemns in the strongest terms
the deadly attacks yesterday in Kabul and extends
its condolences to the Afghan Government and the
families in mourning.

My delegation thanks the Deputy Secretary-General
and Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General,
for their briefings, which inform the Security Council
of the lessons learned from their solidarity mission
on women and peace and security. We also thank
Ms. Jamila Afghani of the Afghanistan section of the
Women's International League for Peace and Freedom
for her briefing. The high level of the United Nations
delegation for the visit - composed of Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Natalia Kanem, Executive
Director of the United Nations Population Fund, and
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of UN-Women - reflects the importance of women's
participation in the process of restoring peace and
security in Afghanistan.

In a context marked by many persistent social
obstacles, the visit of the Deputy Secretary-General is,
in our View, a strong message and encouragement to
the Afghan authorities to continue their efforts aimed
at increasing the participation of women in institutions
and the peace process, in keeping with the conclusions
of the national conference held on 12 December 2018
in Kabul. Despite the persistent challenges, the status
of Afghan women has made encouraging improvements
in recent years in terms of access to basic education,
health and employment. As a result, Afghan women
are increasingly contributing to the development of
their country.

Despite the limited funding, the efforts of Afghan
authorities to implement resolution 1325 (2000) have
resulted in, inter alia, the adoption of the National
Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan, in the
interest of peace and security. This initiative strengthens
the role of women in negotiation and conflict-
resolution processes. However, although article 22 of
the Constitution guarantees gender equality, women's
contribution to peace processes and their participation
in political life remain low, owing to the obstacles
related to gender inequality.

While ongoing negotiations are giving hope for
peace in Afghanistan, my delegation is hopeful that
the current gains of Afghan women in the political and
economic fields will be consolidated. In this regard,
my delegation welcomes the gradual increase in the
number of women in education, the judiciary, the army
and the police. There are now more than 68,000 female
teachers, including 800 female university professors
in private and public institutions, as well as more
than 6,000 female judges, prosecutors, lawyers, police
officers and army personnel.

In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the
appointment of two women to head the Independent
Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission, two key institutions in the organization
of the presidential election to be held on 28 September.
The successful organization of these elections will be
proof of the indispensable contribution of women to
strengthening peace and stability in Afghanistan and in
the rest of the world.

