The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nikolay
Mladenov for his briefing, which complements the very
comprehensive written report (S/2019/251) submitted
a few days ago by the Secretary-General. I take this
opportunity to welcome the circulation of that report
in response to a request by France and the majority of
the members ofthe Security Council. It is an important
step towards the submission of at least two reports per
year, which we have requested. We thank the Secretary-
General, the Secretariat and Mr. Mladenov. It is our
responsibility and the responsibility of the parties, as
we have just been reminded by my German colleague,
to oversee the implementation of resolution 2324
(2016). It is equally our joint responsibility to make
progress and find points of agreement with a view to
stepping outside our automatic pilot mode with regard
to this question.

I turn first to the situation on the ground, which
is extremely worrisome. Once again, in recent days
the Gaza Strip has found itself on the brink of a new
conflict, as it has experienced three times in the past
decade. The firing ofa rocket into the central region of
Israel, which killed several people, including children,
less than two weeks after shots were fired in Tel Aviv, is
something that has not been seen since the 2014 conflict.
We condemned that launch in the strongest possible
terms and we reiterate our unwavering commitment to
Israel's security. These launches represent a dangerous
escalation, which could quickly spiral out of control.
The return to a ceasefire, thanks to the efforts of Egypt,
which should once again be welcomed, must not blind
us to the frequency of those incidents of escalation over
the past several months. Everyone knows that, in the
absence of a fundamental change in the situation in the
Gaza Strip, a new conflict is inevitable.

The situation in Gaza is now characterized by a
multidimensional crisis. On the humanitarian level,
the situation in the Gaza Strip is disastrous and fuels
despair among the population. The efforts of the
Special Coordinator and all United Nations agencies,
including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, have enabled
an emergency humanitarian response that must be
resolutely sustained, but a long-term response is
still needed.

The despair generates a wave of protest, which
Hamas and other armed groups are trying to exploit
and which has as its source the plight of the people
of Gaza. Those protests led to a disproportionate
and indiscriminate use of force, which has led to the
deaths of nearly 200 protesters and the injuring of
6,000 people, including a large number of people who
should have enjoyed protected status - including
children, medical personnel and journalists - and
which we have condemned. Israel must respect the
right of Palestinians to protest peacefully. We call on
everyone to exercise maximum restraint in the run-up
to the commemoration of 30 March, which could lead
to large-scale rallies.

At the political level, the inter-Palestinian
division aggravates the situation of the people of
Gaza and weakens the national aspirations of the
Palestinians. There is an urgent need to relaunch the
inter-Palestinian reconciliation process. Everyone must
commit themselves to the Egyptian efforts, and we
call on Mr. Mohamed Shtayyeh, whose appointment as
Prime Minister I welcome, to make Palestinian unity,
the return of legitimate Palestinian authorities to Gaza
and the democratic strengthening of the Palestinian
Authority the priorities of his future Government.
Furthermore, France also reaffirms that the Gaza Strip
must be an integral part of the State of Palestine.

There can be no solution to the humanitarian
crisis in the Gaza Strip in the long term without lifting
the Israeli blockade, in accordance with Palestinian
aspirations to live in dignity and in line with Israel's
security concerns. In the immediate term, the measures
taken by Israel following the most recent rocket
attacks - from the closure of crossing points to the
limiting of fishing zones - must be lifted.

Secondly, developments in the settlement policy
in the West Bank, which are described in detail in the
Secretary-General's report, are of particular concern
and are leading to the automatic erosion of the two-State
solution on the ground. During the three-month period
covered by the report, 2,500 housing units advanced
in the approval process and 650 units were opened
to tender. At the same time, the policy of legalizing
so-called wildcat settlements, which are illegal even
under Israeli law, has continued, as has the practice of
demolishing Palestinian structures and expropriating
and forcibly relocating their inhabitants. The latter trend
is particularly alarming in East Jerusalem, in particular
in the Old City and its surrounding neighbourhoods,
such as Sheykh Jarrah.

With more than 600,000 settlers, including 200,000
in Jerusalem, we are close to the point of no return. The
fragmented territorial unit that is taking shape before
our eyes has already meant that two peoples must
coexist in an unequal manner on the same territory. If
the process continues unchecked, the Palestinians will
be forced to abandon their national aspirations, which
are first and foremost the establishment of a State;
and, for Israelis, the renunciation of the democratic
nature of the State ofIsrael. Settlement, which is illegal
under international law, is also dangerous because of
the tensions it raises on the ground. That is reflected
in the increase in acts of violence over the reporting
period, as noted in the report, in particular in Hebron.
A total of 71 settler attacks against Palestinians and 46
Palestinian attacks against settlers were carried out.

We know that the destinies of the Israelis and
the Palestinians are intertwined: neither of the two
peoples will achieve their aspirations over the long
term at the expense of the other. France, which is a
friend of both Israelis and Palestinians, has only one
objective: the implementation, through negotiation,
of the two-State solution, on the basis of parameters
agreed by the international community. In that respect,
the findings set out in the Secretary-General's report
are particularly worrisome: the trajectory is negative
and the irreversible trend jeopardizes the two-State
solution, which are far from being offset by the few
positive developments that occurred during the past
quarter. France especially regrets the decision of the
Israeli authorities, noted in the report, to freeze a part
of the tax revenues they are required to pay to the
Palestinian Authority under the Paris Protocol, at a time
when the Palestinian Authority's financial situation is
already very precarious. We call on all parties to fully
respect their obligations under the Oslo Accords, in
particular those under the Paris Protocol. In today's
context, everyone must refrain from any measure that
could make it even more difficult to resume dialogue.

At a time when a peace plan has been announced for
the next few weeks by our American partners, we would
like to kindly recall that any attempt to deviate from
the parameters agreed by the international community
would be doomed to failure. Those parameters are not
optional or a menu from which one can pick and choose
at will; rather they are a package that forms the bedrock
of any peace plan and any future negotiations.

Twenty-five years after Oslo, there might be a
temptation to break away from the agreed framework
based on international law and Security Council
resolutions and pursue unilateral decisions. However,
I think we are all aware of the dangers posed by the
temptation to pursue a unilateral path. A unilateral
approach would widen the divisions that must be
decreased and exacerbate the resentment that must be
overcome, and therefore cannot lead to peace in the
region. Beyond the Middle East, such an approach
would undermine the international rules-based order.

That is the message that France reiterated, together
with several Arab and European partners, at the
Dublin meeting in February. The same logic applies
to the establishment of embassies in Jerusalem, which
challenges the status quo of the city, which is guaranteed
by several Security Council resolutions, namely, 476
(1980) and 478 (1980). And let us make no mistake,
that also goes for the issue of the Golan Heights - a
territory that has been occupied by Israel since 1967
and is defined as such by the Council since the adoption
of resolution 242 (1967). The acquisition of territory by
force is illegal under the Charter of the United Nations.
France does not recognize the Israeli annexation of the
Golan in 1981. It is considered null and void by several
Security Council resolutions, including resolution
497 (1981). The recognition of Israel's sovereignty
over the Golan is contrary to international law, in
particular the obligation States have to not recognize
an illegal situation.

It is the responsibility of the Council to ensure
that those fundamental principles, which condition
international peace and security, are respected. That
is why silence by the Council on this subject is ever
more deafening and incomprehensible. For France it is
entirely unacceptable, which is why we will continue to
spare no effort in that regard.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of Palestine.

