Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank the President and Prosecutor
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), Judge Meron and Mr. Brammertz, as well as
the President and Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), Judge Khan and
Mr. Jallow, for their briefings. I would also like to take
this opportunity to congratulate Judge Meron on his
election to the presidency of the ICTY.

I would like to make the following comments on
the work of the two Tribunals. First, both have entered
a critical wrap-up period. All ICTY fugitives have now
been arrested. And all ICTR trials have now reached
their final stages, with the pre-trial phases of all cases
remaining expected to be completed in the first half of
next year. We note both Tribunals' progress and urge
them to continue to take effective measures in
accordance with the provisions of resolution 1966
(2010), in order to enable them to complete all their
work by the end of 2014 and achieve a smooth
transition to the Residual Mechanism. We hope that the
relevant United Nations bodies and other organizations
will work together to actively explore flexible and
feasible ways to address the Tribunals' difficulties with
staff retention.

Secondly, we welcome the cooperation of Serbia
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as
of the countries in the relevant regions, in arresting and
transferring fugitives to the Tribunals. National
cooperation, particularly on the part of countries in the
region, is very important to the Tribunals' ability to
carry out their mandates smoothly. We have noted the
challenges that the Tribunals face in transferring those
convicted for the enforcement of their sentences and in
relocating those who have been acquitted. We call on
those countries in a position to do so to display the
necessary political will and give positive consideration
to offering the Tribunals more support and cooperation.

Thirdly, we welcome the recent progress made by
the ICTR in referring cases to Rwanda, and we thank
Prosecutor Jallow for his work. Referring as many
cases as possible to countries that are able and willing
to do so is an important step in the Tribunals'
completion strategy. We hope to see more progress on
the part of the ICTR in that regard.

