Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): I wish to thank
Mr. Kouchner for an account which was at once frank
and thought provoking. I appreciate his frank
assessment of UNMIK's achievements, but I would
like to add that mistakes are a problem only if they are
not corrected. In that sense, we have the fullest
confidence in Mr. Kouchner and the men and women of
UNMIK.

Once again, I find myself in full agreement with
the Special Representative and the concerns expressed
by him about the security situation and continued inter-
ethnic violence. I share also his concerns about missing
persons and detainees in Serbia. I share Mr. Kouchner's
assessment of the importance of the municipal
elections he is organizing in Kosovo. And I agree with
his insistence on the importance ofjoint multi-ethnic
deliberative organs at the local level.

I will not therefore use the parts of my prepared
statement dealing with those issues. Instead, I will pass
directly to two points which relate more tangentially to
Kosovo proper and concern the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia more directly.

We are all awaiting the final results of the
elections in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The
results as announced by the Federal Election
Commission in Belgrade last night point to a clear
victory for the opposition. We can only hope that
President Milosevic will respect the will of the
majority. If he does, and when democracy prevails, the
people of Serbia, of Montenegro and, to be sure, of
Kosovo can be certain ofbetter days ahead.

My other point regarding the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia concerns the fate of the four Dutch
nationals who, as Ambassador Greenstock today
reminded us, along with two Canadians and two British
citizens, are still being held, over two months later,
under circumstances incompatible with the treaties and
conventions to which the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is a party. The preliminary detention of the
four Dutch citizens has been extended by two more
months until 17 November, and they remain in solitary
confinement. Consular access is minimal, and so far
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia authorities have
refused examination of the four by an independent
physician. We call upon the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia authorities to end this travesty of justice
and to accelerate legal proceedings so that these
detainees may be released quickly.

Finally, to return to Kosovo, I would like to
conclude by echoing Ambassador Levitte's upbeat
suggestion that UNMIK's performance in Kosovo may
yet become a true success story for the United Nations.

