Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): I would
like to take the opportunity of this public meeting to
convey heartfelt congratulations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of our Council for the
month of December. We assure you also of our full
support. On behalf of my delegation, I would convey to
your predecessor heartfelt congratulations on the
particularly effective way the Chinese delegation
conducted the Council's business last month. Allow me
also to convey congratulations to Mr. James Morris, the
Executive Director of the World Food Programme
(WFP), and to say how very much we appreciate the
quality of his briefing and, above all, the commendable
efforts he has constantly made at the helm of WFP
since he recently assumed office.

Famine in Africa has become much worse
following the natural disasters and conflicts that have
afflicted people there. Flooding and drought are the
main causes in the southern region, the Horn of Africa
and in some Sahelian countries in the western
subregion of Africa. The magnitude and depth of these
crises require that urgent comprehensive action be
taken. The international community must do everything
possible to mobilize the necessary resources for the
success of the campaign to prevent any worsening of
the situation and to save millions of lives that are at
risk.

We take note of the joint appeal that the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) and the
United Nations launched on 18 July 2002 in New York
to solicit assistance, in order to prevent the
humanitarian crisis from getting any worse. We
appreciate what was done by the General Assembly on
21 November, when, in its resolution 57/44, it called
upon the international community to respond
generously to the needs resulting from the drought in
southern Africa by, inter alia, giving support to
strategies for preventing and managing drought.

On this occasion, we wish to reiterate our
commitment to General Assembly resolution 46/182,
which highlighted the need for a more consistent and
firm approach in organizing humanitarian assistance.

Humanitarian aid provided by the United Nations
goes beyond emergency assistance and must be centred
on long-term economic development and recovery.
That is part and parcel of the declaration made by
world leaders at the United Nations World Food
Summit, held in Rome in 1996, to halve the number of
starving people by the year 2015. My delegation
believes that, in trying to attain that goal, cooperation
and coordination by Governments on an increased
scale for the victims of these crises are essential. The
safety of humanitarian workers, too, should be the
focus of special attention.

Before I conclude, I have a few questions to put
to Mr. Morris. First, within the context of the famine
alert campaign in Africa, we would like to find out
whether the allocation and management of food aid
will take place on a national or regional level.
According to you, Sir, what should be the most
effective approach for Africa?

My second question is: what could be the role
played by civil society - particularly that of
women - in implementing the food aid policy within
the context of this campaign?

Question number three: how, in your opinion, do
you think one can move from emergency food aid to
real development for the affected people?

