Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I want to start
by congratulating Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix on
assuming the office of Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations.

(Spoke in French)
I thank him for his very clear detailed briefing.
(Spoke in English)

I also want to join in your words of condolence,
Madam, to the French delegation. The memories of
Council members are still fresh from visiting the
headquarters of Operation Barkhane in N'Djamena
as part of their journey to the Lake Chad basin, where
we were able to fully appreciate the role played by
the Operation's soldiers in the region, and in Mali
in particular.

Allow me to highlight three points: the security
situation, the political process and the activities of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

First, my delegation is extremely concerned by the
deteriorating security situation in Mali. The scale of
terrorist attacks in central and northern parts of Mali has
reached an unprecedented level, turning MINUSMA
into one of the most dangerous peacekeeping missions
in the world. This underlines the urgent need for the
parties to uphold their commitments in the security
sector. The launch of mixed patrols in Gao is a long-
awaited and positive step forward. We should encourage
the Government of Mali and the signatory armed groups
to expedite the work of launching the mixed patrols in
Kidal and Timbuktu, too. The redeployment of Malian
the defence and security forces throughout the country
is equally crucial for taking control of security. We
also support the initiative of the Group of Five for the
Sahel countries to establish a regional force, which
will contribute to fighting the spread of terrorism and
violent extremism in Mali and the region.

My second point concerns the political process. As
the transitional period comes to an end, progress on the
political track has remained limited. We believe that
the parties should redouble their efforts to complete
the installation of the interim administrations in the
north and to engage in inclusive national consultations
aimed at resolving existing differences in light of the
upcoming constitutional review and its referendum.
The ultimate goal of these efforts should be the
comprehensive reform of national institutions, which
will help to address the root causes of the conflict and
bring real peace dividends to the Malian people.

This leads me to my third and last point. We believe
that sustainable peace in Mali cannot be achieved
without the support of MINUSMA. Ukraine commends
the courage and dedication of the men and women of
the Mission, who continue to operate under extremely
difficult and dangerous conditions. Given the fact that
MINUSMA remains the primary target of terrorist
attacks, we are convinced that particular attention
should be paid to the enhancement of the safety and
security of its personnel.

Another issue of concern is the significant gap in
MINUSMA capabilities. As the Secretary-General's
latest report (S/2017/27l) notes, despite the adoption
of resolution 2295 (2016), none of the additional
authorized military and police personnel and none ofthe
additional military assets authored has been deployed.
The Mission will not be able to effectively carry out its

mandate unless the capability gaps are addressed.

As an active United Nations troop- and police-
contributing country, in particular in Africa, Ukraine
is exploring ways of doing its share to this end.

