Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to wish a warm welcome to the Security
Council to His Excellency Mr. Didier Burkhalter,
President of the Swiss Confederation and Head of
the Federal Department of Foreign Affairs. I thank
him for his very clear briefing on his priorities as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for 2014.

I will begin my remarks with a subject that the
Chairperson-in-Office mentioned and that concerns us
all, namely, Ukraine. We were shocked last week by the
escalation of violence in several Ukrainian cities, which
caused dozens of deaths and numerous injuries. In
Ukraine, as in other participating States, it is essential
that the commitments under the OSCE framework be
fully respected and implemented. Those responsible for
violence must be held accountable for their actions.

We welcome the efforts made by the international
community to stop the violence and find a peaceful
and negotiated end to the crisis. We call on all political
forces to show restraint and pursue dialogue. The unity,
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine must be preserved. A lasting political solution
to the crisis requires the formation of a new inclusive
Government, constitutional reform and the holding of
democratic, free and impartial elections.

The OSCE's contribution will be important in
supporting that political solution. The Chairperson-in-
Office has given us a glimpse of the shape that that
contribution could take, in close cooperation with the
European Union, the Council of Europe and other
partners. We believe that in Ukraine, the OSCE will
once again be able to play its role as a bridge between
the East and the West in order to promote peace,
democracy and stability.

As a member of the OSCE, Luxembourg fully
supports the priorities of the Swiss chairmanship.
We appreciate the close coordination of its priorities
with those of Serbia, which will assume the OSCE
chairmanship in 2015, and its strengthening of the
continuity of its activities, and thereby the effectiveness
of the organization.

We also welcome the close cooperation that has
been consolidated between successive chairmanships
since the Dublin Ministerial Council of 2012 with a
view to deepening the approach taken to envisioning
a Euro-Atlantic-Eurasian security community that
is free, democratic, united and indivisible. The
recent appointment of eight coordinators to conduct
discussions is a further step towards advancing the
"Helsinki-l-40" process.

We welcome the intention of the Swiss
chairmanship to enhance cooperation between the
OSCE and its partners on the ground. The OSCE plays
an essential role in mediation and in dealing with
and resolving conflicts, working in harmony with the
United Nations and other regional organizations. That
is the case in Central Asia and the Southern Caucasus,
through the Minsk Group and the process of Geneva
talks. That is also the case in Moldova with regard to
the Transnistrian conflict. In Kosovo, the OSCE has
provided indispensable support in facilitating elections
in the four northern municipalities, pursuant to the First
Agreement on Principles Governing Normalization
of Relations between Belgrade and Pristina. In that
regard, we welcome the successful holding yesterday of
the initial elections towards the selection of the mayor
of Mitrovica-North.

The Swiss chairmanship has rightly focused its
chairmanship under the leitmotif of creating a security
community for the benefit of everyone. Luxembourg
shares the importance that gives to the human
dimension of security. The OSCE was founded on the
idea that lasting security is possible only if human
rights and fundamental freedoms are respected. In
that context, I would like to highlight the continuous
support my country provides to the activities of the
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights,
the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media and
the OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities.
Their independence and impartiality are at the heart of
the organization.

During our chairmanship of the Forum for
Security Cooperation in the past four months of 2013,
Luxembourg worked to help the OSCE better respond
to the challenges posed by small arms and weapons,
and stocks of ammunition. We also encouraged
cooperation between the OSCE and the United Nations
in Afghanistan, in the light of the major challenges that
country must face in 2014.

I wish to assure the Chairperson-in-Office of the
OSCE and his team that Luxembourg will spare no
effort to support their efforts. In order to adhere to
the goal of making this briefing more interactive, I
will conclude my remarks by asking a question to the
Chairperson-in-Office. He referred to the phenomenon
of foreign fighters, which is of particular concern in
Syria at present. In resolution 2139 (2014), which was
just adopted the day before yesterday, the Security
Council demanded that all foreign fighters immediately
withdraw from Syria. In his veiw, what contribution can
the OSCE make to fighting against the phenomenon of
foreign fighters in general?

