Ms. Roxburgh (New Zealand): Wejoin others today
in thanking the Secretary-General and Commissioner
Chergui for their briefing. As a member of the Security
Council when resolution 2320 (2016) was adopted, New
Zealand was strongly supportive of the United Nations
and African Union (AU) taking a more structured,
complementary and integrated approach to tackling the
challenges faced by the continent.

We welcome recent developments, including the
Secretary-General's May report (S/20l7/454) and will
focus today's remarks on two priority areas: making
meaningful African Union-United Nations engagement
an everyday habit and fixing financing for African-led
peace operations.

First, while formal engagement between the
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council is
important, in our view it is through strengthening
informal engagement that we will see the greatest
value. Regular and constructive exchanges on specific
issues would contribute to a deeper understanding of
perspectives, a greater unity of purpose and, ultimately,
a stronger partnership. Overall, we need to see more
cooperation through joint assessment missions,
information exchanges, training and secondments, but
every Council member can also individually help make
this change simply by thinking and acting a little more
broadly and strategically.
For our part, while New Zealand was on the
Council, we supported the inaugural elected ten Peace
and Security Council of the African Union meeting
in Addis Ababa at the start of 2015. With Spain, we
met with the Chair of the AU Council at the start of
our presidencies to discuss the joint agendas of each
body. During our presidency, after the Council's
visit to South Sudan, we co-hosted - with the AU
Commission - Council members and senior United
Nations officials, including Special Representative
Menkerios, at an off-site meeting to discuss the United
Nations-African Union strategic framework. Those
actions did not require formal Council decisions or
consensus. We would urge current Council members,
both individually and collectively, to take similar steps
and make meaningful engagement with the AU an
everyday habit.

Secondly, we need to fix the fundamental issue of
financing for African-led peace operations. That will
not be easy, but we must agree on a new, more predictable
financing model. Fragmented, ad hoc arrangements for
each new AU-led mission are simply not sustainable.
Delays lead to longer, more expensive conflicts, and
less effective missions exact a cost in lives.

In his report, the Secretary-General laid out
pragmatic options for the Council's consideration. We
support those options as well as the AU decision to
have 25 per cent of the cost of AU-led peace operations
financed by African States. We also are supportive
of utilizing United Nations assessed contributions to
finance AU-led missions in defined circumstances. The
Council should also adopt, in principle, the Secretary-
General's proposal of an African Union-United Nations
jointly developed budget.

New Zealand stands ready to assist, including
through lending our support to any resolutions that may
come to the Fifth Committee, the General Assembly
or the Council, but we urge the Council to take action
as a matter of priority. In return, the Council will get
a strengthened partner to assist in tackling shared
challenges - likely at a significantly lower cost than
the United Nations - and will make an important
and practical, contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

