Mr. Eide: I am grateful for this opportunity to
address the Security Council. Allow me to start by
expressing my gratitude to all those around this table
who have given me and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) such great support
over these first three months. That has certainly been
an encouragement and has given us strength. Since I
have Foreign Minister Spanta next to me, I would also
like to express deep gratitude for the access that
President Karzai, Mr. Spanta himself and other
ministers have given me during this period.

This is, of course, not a regular Security Council
report and it is therefore limited in its scope, but it is
an important report, concentrated on the outcome of
the Paris Conference and the guidance that the
Conference has provided, as requested by the Security
Council in its resolution 1806 (2008).

Our work over the next 18 months will be guided
by three components: the political calendar, the
commitments undertaken in Paris and, of course, the
evolving situation on the ground.

First, I would refer to the political calendar, and
by that I mean in particular the election process that
lies ahead of us. Today in Kabul, the Afghan
08-41630

Independent Electoral Commission announced its
decision on how to move forward. That decision will
allow us to proceed with the voter registration process.
It has been our View that the process must be
conducted in a way that allows all Afghans equally to
take part in the elections, while taking into account the
difficulties we encounter with regard to security. The
decision of the Commission creates a sound basis for
the international community to provide the financial
support that is required. UNAMA stands ready to
support Afghan authorities throughout the election
process, as requested by President Karzai.

The second component I mentioned that will
guide our work is, of course, the commitments
undertaken in Paris on 12 June. The Paris Conference
was a great success. It was a success as a pledging
conference, by raising more than $20 billion in support
of our joint efforts in Afghanistan, and it was a success
in political terms, by creating the basis for a
strengthened partnership between the international
community and Afghanistan. The Government of
Afghanistan presented the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy, which will be our common road
map under Afghan leadership for the next five years,
and the international community pledged to align its
resources behind the Strategy.

The launching of the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy comes at a very critical juncture.
We need a clearer sense of direction and we need
greater energy injected into our work. I am not at all
inclined to trivialize the achievements of the past seven
years; they are substantive, far-reaching and, in many
cases, still underacknowledged. But what I face every
day are questions relating precisely to the kind of
commitments we undertook in Paris. Do we have a
plan that can unite us? Does the international
community spend its resources well enough? Is the
Afghan Government sufficiently committed to
addressing corruption and malpractice? I am convinced
that if we do not live up to the commitments
undertaken in Paris, we will jeopardize the support that
we depend on - both from the Afghan people and in
the public opinion of donor countries.

The Paris conference has created new
momentum. We will now all have to look at our
development plans to make sure that we respect the
priorities of the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy. If we do not align our resources behind that
document, then it is unimplementable. We must
08-41630
demonstrate an ability to adapt to changing
circumstances. This is not the time to navigate by
autopilot. The challenge for the United Nations will be
to provide assistance to the Government in its efforts to
implement its strategy and to ensure that the
international community responds adequately.

An important part of the implementation of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy will be to
ensure that we respect its priorities. There are two
important pillars, which will be decisive for the
success of all other efforts. First of all, we need to
undertake a massive institution-building effort. More
solid, competent and accountable institutions are a
precondition for security, for development and for
enhancing the trust of the Afghan people in their own
Government.

The second pillar is the expansion of key sectors
of the economy. There is an urgent need to increase
agricultural production and to invest in large-scale
energy projects. In spite of the fact that more than 80
per cent of the Afghan population depends directly on
agriculture for their livelihoods, only a very modest
amount of money has been diverted to that sector of
the economy. It has been neglected, and it cannot be
neglected any longer. It is from the agriculture and
energy sectors that real and sustainable growth in the
economy can take place.

The Paris Declaration also includes a strong
commitment to deliver aid more effectively. In Paris,
donor countries demonstrated that there is now a
greater readiness to ensure that more resources are
spent inside Afghanistan, that more is channelled
through Afghan budgets and that more attention is
devoted to promoting Afghan procurement and
capacity-building. That is an important development. It
is also important to emphasize that the benefits of
development must reach all provinces equitably. We
cannot allow a situation where poor provinces that are
poppy-free, secure and have better leadership are
neglected in our development efforts. They must see
that there is fairness in development, and we must
inoculate those provinces against future instability.

Such improvements in the delivery of
international assistance must be matched by
determination on the Afghan side to improve the
quality of its administration, show greater
accountability and combat corruption. I am encouraged
by the fact that President Karzai now convenes his key
3
ministers weekly to discuss the commitments that the
Afghan Government undertook in Paris.

Resolution 1806 (2008) gives UNAMA the
challenging task of improving the coordination of our
common efforts. The most daunting part of that
challenge will be to coordinate development activities.
To me, it is important that the Paris Declaration very
clearly stated that coordination must include all
development assistance, which means whether it is
delivered through development agencies,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) or Provincial
Reconstruction Teams. There can be no exception to
coordination of development assistance. Together with
our Afghan partners, we are now setting up the
structures required to improve our joint coordination
efforts.

The third component guiding us is the evolving
situation on the ground. There can be no doubt that we
have underestimated the humanitarian challenges in
Afghanistan. John Holmes will address that in greater
detail. As late as in January of this year, a joint food
appeal was launched by the Afghan Government and
the World Food Programme. Yet another joint appeal
was launched in Kabul today to meet an emerging food
security crisis. The constant humanitarian challenges
have revealed a clear lack of capacity to address the
needs of the most vulnerable people. NGOs have
criticized us, and rightly so. We must urgently
strengthen our capacity to forecast, assess, coordinate
and respond to humanitarian crises; and we should be
imaginative in order to mobilize such resources
quickly.

The situation on the ground is further
complicated by an increasingly difficult security
environment. We did expect an increase in insurgency
activities over the past months. What we have seen is
an unprecedented level of insurgent and terrorist
activities, especially in the volatile provinces in the
south and the east. But we have also seen a greater
insurgency presence in other districts and provinces in
the central parts of the country. The attack three days
ago outside the Indian Embassy in Kabul demonstrated
the ability of terrorists to carry out extremely deadly
operations in the capital.

The situation on the ground demonstrates that
there will be a need for a strong international military
presence for the foreseeable future. There is also a
need for better cooperation and understanding between
the military and civilian components of our work. For
UNAMA's part, we will engage in further discussion
with the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) in order to enhance civilian-military
cooperation. We will do so, and we will expand
UNAMA's presence across the country in a way that
ensures the integrity of, and understanding for, our
independent mandate and in a way that can strengthen
respect for humanitarian principles.

One particularly sensitive topic is the question of
the protection of civilians, which is a core element of
UNAMA's human rights and humanitarian agenda. The
rising number of civilian casualties is a matter of grave
concern to all of us. First and foremost, every effort
must be made to reduce the number of civilian
casualties to a minimum. I am in regular contact and
dialogue with the Commander of ISAF concerning that
and other topics. We are in agreement that we must
develop ways to avoid confusion over the facts when
civilian casualties are reported. However, when we talk
about civilian casualties, we should be clear: the
insurgents have continued to display a total disregard
for civilian life, as was most tragically demonstrated
by the targeted attack on the Indian Embassy in Kabul
three days ago.

I have also repeatedly stated that the solution to
the conflict in Afghanistan will not be a purely military
solution. It will fundamentally have to be a political
solution. There is a need for a broadly based Afghan
political dialogue that could reinforce national unity,
add momentum to the nation-building exercise and
promote prospects for peace. That dialogue will have
to be defined by the Afghan Government itself and be
conducted with respect for the Constitution as well as
the relevant Security Council resolutions. But the
political dimension of achieving stability now needs
greater prominence.

Finally, there is a need to strengthen regional
cooperation and dialogue on some of the critical issues
facing the region, such as drugs, refugees and security.
There is also great potential in other sectors, such as
cooperation on energy, infrastructure and trade. That
positive agenda must be exploited. UNAMA stands
ready to be engaged whenever the countries of the
region so desire and see a constructive role for us. I
discussed those issues with the Foreign Ministers of
both Pakistan and Afghanistan earlier today. During
those discussions, I also underlined the need to pursue
08-41630
the cross-border jirga process and a political dialogue
that seeks to find solutions to common challenges.

In conclusion, the Secretary-General states in his
report, the tasks facing UNAMA are very significant. I
agree with his conclusion that those tasks can be
addressed within the mandate specified in resolution
1806 (2008) and that there is no need for amendments
or additions to that mandate. What we do need is
resources - more and qualified personnel and
financial resources to carry out our work on the
ground. We are now slowly reducing the number of
vacancies in the Mission, which is encouraging. But we
will need to go significantly beyond the ceiling that we
have today if we are to meet the challenges of the Paris
meeting. We are at a critical juncture in Afghanistan.
UNAMA will only be able to play its role if significant
additional resources are provided.

