Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank the Under-Secretary-General and High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, for her briefing.

The international security situation is currently
undergoing profound and complex changes, with
traditional and non-traditional security threats
intertwined and the frequent occurrence of regional
conflicts and hotspot issues. The illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons fuels regional armed
conflicts in peace, peace processes and post-conflict
reconstruction, facilitates the spread of terrorism and
transnational organized crime and is detrimental to
efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.

In recent years , the international community has
taken a series of measures to address the problem of
small arms and light weapons and to achieve progress
in that regard. The Security Council has adopted
resolutions 2117 (2013) and 2220 (2015) and issued
relevant presidential statements, thereby demonstrating
the political will of the international community to
address this problem. In order to further prevent and
combat the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons,
China wishes to make the following proposals.

First, we must eliminate the cause of the problem of
small arms and light weapons through efforts to achieve
peace, cooperation and development. The international
community must adhere to political and diplomatic ways
as a means to settle disputes and maintain international
and regional peace and stability. At the same time,
there is a need to strengthen peacekeeping in post-
conflict reconstruction in order to help the countries
concerned resume economic development, restore social
stability as soon as possible and realize sustainable
development. Only by taking a multi-pronged approach
to address both the symptoms and the root causes can
it be possible to eradicate the problem of small arms
and light weapons and build a peaceful and prosperous
world without guns and violence.

Secondly, we should give full play to the important
leading role of multilateral institutions, including the
United Nations. The United Nations has successively
adopted the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in
a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons, thereby providing a policy basis for
the international community in its efforts to respond
to the problem of small arms and light weapons. It
is necessary for all parties to comprehensively and
effectively implement the Programme of Action and
the International Tracing Instrument to push for
further progress in the combat against illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons at national, regional and
international levels. China pays great attention to the
Secretary-General's latest report on small arms and
light weapons (S/2017/1025) and supports the Secretary
General, various United Nations agencies, INTERPOL
and other multilateral organizations in playing an active
role in addressing the problem.

Thirdly, we should strengthen and control small
arms and light weapons and enhance international
cooperation and assistance in that regard. National
Governments bear the primary responsibility in
combating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. They must implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions to the letter, adopt responsible
arms trade policies, improve laws and regulations
and intensify law enforcement to prevent small arms
and light weapons from flowing into illegal channels.
There is a need to strengthen information exchange
and pragmatic cooperation among countries and
between countries and international organizations.
It is particularly necessary to increase assistance
to developing countries to help them enhance their
capacity in stock management, marking and tracing, as
well as collecting and destroying illegal firearms.

The Chinese Government has always been
firmly against the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. We have been conscientiously implementing
the Programme of Action and the International Tracing
Instrument and we have submitted compliance reports
on time.

China has been steadily strengthening domestic
legislation and law enforcement and has supported
and taken an active part in international and regional
cooperation in combating the illicit trade in firearms.
China has participated in three consecutive conferences
of States parties to the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) as an
observer. We hope that the ATT will help resolve the
problem of the illicit trade in conventional weapons,
including small arms and light weapons - without
prejudice to the sovereignty, security and legitimate
national defence needs of countries and without
affecting normal and legal arms trade among countries.

The outcome document of the Ssxth Biennial
Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of
the Programme of Action has laid a sound foundation
for the third Review Conference on the Programme of
Action, to be held in 2018. China is ready to take an
active part in the relevant work within the framework
of the United Nations, strive with others for a positive
result of the third Review Conference and contribute to
the international endeavour for an early solution of the
problem of small arms and light weapons.

