Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): Ijoin others
in thanking Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix for his briefing, and I welcome the presence
among us of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru,
Mr. Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, to whom we wish every
success in fulfilling his new responsibilities.

The relationship between the United Nations
and Haiti has reached another important stage, with
the transformation of the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) to the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH). In this
regard, I wish to thank MINUJUSTH for the work
carried out over the past two years - often in difficult
circumstances - with a view to strengthening the rule
of law, particularly in the justice and prison-system
sectors, supporting the Haitian National Police and
promoting human rights. These efforts followed the
work carried out since 2004 by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti and were pursued
with constant commitment from all MINUJUSTH
teams, which should be commended. In this respect,
I wish to commend Ms. Helen La Lime for her work
and congratulate her on being appointed Head of
BINUH yesterday.

We must be clear about the gravity of the crisis
that has been afflicting Haiti for more than a year. The
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/805) accurately
reflects the many dimensions of this worrisome crisis.
The country's political institutions are no longer
functioning, owing in particular to the absence of the
Government, and Haiti is facing a constitutional crisis
with the postponement of legislative elections. The
violence is widespread. Corruption is endemic. Haitians
are being hit hard by the deteriorating economic
situation and demanding better access to basic services.
In the light of the situation, waves of protests have been
a regular occurrence since the riots of July 2018, which
has given rise to unacceptable levels of violence, which
we strongly condemn.

The resolution of the crisis is in the hands of
Haitians themselves, but the international community
must continue to support Haiti along this demanding
path, especially through the action of BINUH starting
tomorrow. Given the systemic difficulties in Haiti,
France believes that the solution lies in inclusive national
dialogue, with the involvement of all political, business
and civil society stakeholders. It is the responsibility
of President Jovenel Moise to put in place measures
for genuine dialogue. The Special Representative of
the Secretary-General will have as her top priority to
contribute to this process through her good offices.
France is ready to support this dialogue together with
such other organizations as the European Union, whose
observer will speak shortly, and the International
Organization of la Francophonie.

BINUH should also advise the Haitian authorities
in other key areas to allow for the restoration ofpolitical
stability, including on preparing elections, promoting
human rights and providing support to the Haitian
National Police. It will carry out this work with the
support of the United Nations country team in Haiti and
by taking into account the lessons learned by the United
Nations from its presence on the ground in Haiti for
more than 25 years, especially through the Economic
and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti.
In this regard, I welcome the presence among us of the
President of the Economic and Social Council. The
fight against corruption and impunity at the heart of
protesters' demands must also be given top priority. By
leading this fight, Haitian politicians can re-establish a
dialogue of trust with the people.

The Security Council will remain vigilant in
relation to the situation in Haiti, which it showed in
the closed consultations it held on 3 October. In this
regard, we hope that the Council will be able to publicly
express its concerns about the current situation in the
country, its support for inclusive political dialogue
and the transition between MINUJUSTH and BINUH.
The Council will continue to take into account the
changing realities on the ground to determine the most
appropriate forms of international community support
for Haiti.

Lastly, I reaffirm that France stands by Haiti and
Haitians more than ever to face the challenges of the
current crisis and to achieve the stability and prosperity
to which they aspire.

