Mr. Costa: In today's world, conflicts take place
within rather than between nations, and are fought with
light rather than heavy weapons. Arms are acquired on
the illicit market, estimated globally at between $200
and $300 million a year, which is about 20 per cent of
the licit arms trade. Africa, the arms smugglers' most
profitable market, suffers the largest number of
casualties because of it. I am therefore grateful to the
Government of Gabon for placing this topic on the
Council's agenda.

Demand for military-grade weapons comes from
three sources: crime groups, combatant militias and
regimes under sanctions. Supply also originates from
various sources: stockpiles of nations undergoing
regime change, defence departments' clearance sales of
obsolete weapons, and manufacturers unwilling -
perhaps because of corruption - to meet
internationally agreed domestic controls.

Let me begin with demand, which certainly
concerns Africa. First, crime groups derive major
rewards from firearms. A handful of Somali pirates can
hijack oil tankers; poachers with rifles equipped with
night-sights and silencers plunder Africa's rare species;
cattle raiders steal the livestock of entire villages;
bandits hijack aid shipments; thugs in combat uniform
compel young slaves to mine rare minerals; gangs
assault, rob and kidnap nationals and tourists alike, in
homes and at resorts. As a result, several countries in
Africa tally the highest rates for crime, specifically
murder, in the world.

Secondly, by acquiring military-grade weapons,
combatant militias obtain the trappings and firepower
of a military force in the attempt to gain credibility,
even without a political cause. Double jeopardy is
caused when, most commonly, rebels fund arms
purchases by trafficking drugs and other resources in
exchange.

Thirdly, regimes under sanctions need arms to
perpetuate themselves, irrespective of domestic
opposition and/or pressure from the international
community, including decisions of this Council. Arms
traffickers circumvent the embargos, handsomely
rewarded by authorities that do not hesitate to bleed
citizens and natural resources alike to honour
payments.

In these troublesome hands, even small amounts
of arms can undermine the socio-economic progress of
a nation, break the State's monopoly on the use of
force, and create a tipping point in political or military
stalemates. One need only think of how the drugged-up
kids of the Revolutionary United Front held Sierra
Leone to ransom for a decade, or of the destruction
caused by the marauding Lord's Resistance Army in
Uganda for years.

In short, illicit arms fuel the violence that
undermines security, development and justice. Of the
34 countries least likely to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals, 22 - two thirds of the total - are
in the midst of or emerging from conflicts located in
regions that are magnets for crime, violence and arms
trafficking.

What about supply? Small arms, unlike drugs and
counterfeits, are a durable product. An attack rifle,
such as the AK-47 or the M-l6, can last indefinitely; it
just needs ammunition. As a result, arms trafficking
tends to be an episodic rather than permanent flow, but
with a predictable pattern - from countries with large
stockpiles to a region descending or pushed by
traffickers into crisis. Most of these regions, of course,
are in the third world.

The biggest stocks have been in Eastern Europe
and the former Soviet Union. Indeed, in the 1990s,
these stockpiles supplied almost every conflict,
particularly in Africa, from A to Z - from Angola to
Zimbabwe. A combination of factors has turned
Ukraine, in particular, into a major arms supplier. It has

huge stocks - there are 54 firearms for every
Ukrainian soldier, as against the accepted world ratio
of around 2:1 - and a large surplus of large planes,

including oversized Antonov and Ilyushin models.
With low regulation and high economic insecurity, we
get an environment in which merchants of death can
make millions - as portrayed by Nicolas Cage,
Goodwill Ambassador for the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, in "The Lord of War".

How can tons of arms, in large cargo planes,
move undetected? The key is corruption at source,
transit and destination. Although arms are smuggled
across borders - for example between the United
States and Mexico - most weapons are just shipped
through commercial channels, relying on fraudulent
papers and corrupt officials. Corruption at the
source - known as "point of departure diversion" -
enables traffickers to use fake end user certificates for
legal exports. Corruption at the "official" destination
enables a legal shipment to be diverted to a different
location. That is called post-delivery onward diversion.
For example, the tanks, weapons and ammunition on a
Ukrainian ship hijacked by Somali pirates in
September 2008 were intended for South Sudan, not
Kenya, as the papers said.

At the "true" destination - in countries, for
example, in the Sahel and Central, East and West
Africa - weapons are bartered for drugs and natural
resources such as oil, precious stones, metals and
timber. As a result, arms trafficking and organized
crime fuel conflicts, and Vice versa.

In conclusion, what can be done to curb illicit
arms trafficking, in particular into Africa? The baseline
is to promote development and security so as to reduce
the demand for arms. To reduce the supply, more must
be done to improve the safekeeping and destruction of
stockpiles, not least within the area of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. How to curtail
the illicit arms trade? There is no need to reinvent the
wheel. The United Nations Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition, which entered
into force five years ago to supplement the United
Nations Convention against Organized Crime, provides
a very strong legal instrument. I was glad to hear the
statement by the Deputy Secretary-General in that
connection.

The United Nations Protocol requires parties to
adopt legislation to prevent gun diversion and to
criminalize the removal of the markings on guns, keep
records necessary to trace them, prevent the
reactivation of disabled guns, promote cooperative
regimes to monitor gun flows, prevent weapons theft
and build law enforcement capacity across borders.
Yet, there are only 79 parties to the Protocol, which is
half the number of parties to the other two protocols of
the Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, namely, on smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in people. Of course, the Firearms Protocol
has some very notable absences.
To cut the illicit flow of weapons, I urge States to
use the Firearms Protocol to close loopholes in national

legislation, tighten up regulations on weapons
transport, develop regional databases on seizures,
promote inter-agency cooperation within national
administrations, profile suspicious shipments and share
information with other countries to verify compliance
with international agreements.

But that is not enough. All crime can best be
combated by following the money trail. Arms dealers
in particular swing between licit and illicit business,
covering their tracks through complex arrangements of
front companies that invest the proceeds from crime. I
urge States to implement article 52 of the United
Nations Convention against Corruption and article 7 of
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, which require parties to know their
customers and reveal the beneficiaries of funds
deposited into high-value accounts.

Arms trafficking is another pandemic. The
therapy is known and the surgical instruments are
available. I hope this meeting will spur Member States
to use these tools to cut the arms flows that fuel
conflicts, undermine States and enrich criminals.

