Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Australia wishes
to place on record its appreciation and strong support
for the work of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),
as well for the assistance of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate. (CTED). A global effort is
needed to counter terrorism effectively. Multilateral
action through the United Nations system is a vital
element in any international strategy to address
terrorism and violent extremism.

Australia encourages the three Committees and
their respective expert bodies to continue to work
closely together and with the broader United Nations
system, including the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force. In our View, cooperation is
particularly important in relation to streamlined
reporting regimes, assessment missions and the
facilitation of technical assistance. We note, in that
regard, the importance of all three Committees
continuing to recognize the regional context of their
activities. We also encourage the 1540 Committee, as it
increases its focus on technical assistance, to work
with CTED to identify effective approaches.

The relationship of the subsidiary bodies with
other international organizations is also important. My
delegation would like to draw attention to a recent best
practices paper adopted by the Financial Action Task
Force on implementing terrorist asset freezing
obligations arising from both resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1373 (2001). As Co-Chair of the project team that
developed that paper, Australia would like to
acknowledge the significant contribution to that work
by both the 1267 Committee and CTED.

Effective relations with Member States -
particularly, of course, with donor and recipient
countries - are also critical to the success of the
Committees' work. In that context, we welcomed the
recent visit to Australia, in July, by a CTED delegation.
We appreciated the opportunity to share our approach
to counter-terrorism efforts, both domestically and in
the region.

Continual institutional review is crucial. We
commend the 1267 Committee on its review of the
Consolidated List and for the conclusion of procedures
for drafting narrative summaries on the reasons for
listing each entry. That approach could be a model for
other regimes to follow. We also welcome the recent
open meeting of the 1540 Committee that was held as
part of its comprehensive review of the implementation
of that resolution.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Australia's
active and ongoing support for the Council's counter-
terrorism bodies and our commitment to assisting
efforts to advance their work. The United Nations has
the unique capacity to set international norms and
standards on countering terrorism, as well as to
encourage adherence to them. That is a capacity that
my delegation will continue to support.

