Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his pertinent briefing. We very much
welcome his commitment to addressing the volatile
situation and contributing to a de-escalation of violence.

I would like to begin by expressing deep regret about
the violence and about the large number of people who
have been killed and injured over the past few weeks.
Sweden condemns yesterday's indiscriminate firing
of rockets by Palestinian militants from Gaza towards
Israel. Such attacks are unacceptable and must stop
immediately. We note that at least one of the rockets
fell in the vicinity of a kindergarten. As we have clearly
stated in the Chamber, children must never be the target
of violence, be put at risk or encouraged to participate
in violence.
Yesterday's attack did not take place in a vacuum.
Since 30 March the Council has been seized repeatedly
of the violence in and around Gaza. As we all know,
Gaza is on the verge of social and economic collapse.
We must urgently address the humanitarian crisis and
alleviate the suffering of its people. Just last week, we
welcomed proposals to that end. We encourage efforts
to take such measures forward with renewed urgency
and determination.

It is important to prioritize initiatives that
have immediate positive effects on the daily lives
of Palestinians in Gaza and the wider region. The
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) plays a critical
role in providing fundamental services, such as health
and education, thereby contributing to stability in
the egion. It must receive needed urgent political and
financial support from us all. In words and deeds,
Sweden has repeatedly encouraged and called for a
remedy to UNRWA's financial crisis, .

We also underline the importance of unimpeded
access to Gaza for all humanitarian actors. It is crucial
that our humanitarian support contribute to increased
intra-Palestinian unity. It is therefore high time to end
the policy of closure in Gaza. While fully understanding
the legitimate security concerns of Israel, Palestine and
Egypt, we repeat our call for the lifting of restrictions
and full and sustained access and movement. We
welcome Egypt's opening of the Rafah crossing point
during the holy month of Ramadan, as well as Egypt's
efforts towards intra-Palestinian reconciliation.

Yesterday's developments occurred at a sensitive
time. Once again we urge all parties to act with the
utmost restraint to prevent loss of life and protect
civilians, in particular children, ensure that all
measures taken are proportionate and take immediate
steps to de-escalate the situation and break the cycle
of violence. We welcome the fact that the attacks and
retaliation appear to have ended, at least for now.

The Council has the responsibility to contribute
to de-escalation in Gaza. As many others around the
table have said today, we regret that the Council has not
been able to agree on public statements relating to the
situation. The Council must come together to address
the crisis and more broadely engage in efforts to advance
the peace process and the two-State solution. We thank
the Kuwaiti delegation for the draft resolution, which
includes a call for measures for improving the situation
for civilians in Palestine, including the establishment of
a mechanism for that purpose. We hope for constructive
engagement by everyone on the draft resolution.

