Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank you, Sir, for having organized this
meeting and, in your capacity as Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), for the
programme of work that has been developed under
your leadership and which Bulgaria supports
wholeheartedly.

As an associate member of the European Union,
my country endorses the statement to be made shortly
by the Ambassador of Italy on behalf of the Italian
presidency of the Union, an organization that is making
a substantial contribution to the fight against terrorism
around the world.

Terrorism continues to be an immediate and
tangible threat to peace and security throughout the
world and to all States without exception. That is why
counter-terrorism remains a fundamental priority of
Bulgaria's foreign policy. We continue to believe that
the full implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) is a
priority task for all Members of the United Nations.

I should like briefly to mention several major
vectors for action that we feel should be undertaken by
the Committee on the basis of firm and unchanging
principles.

Any counter-terrorism activity, be it at the
national, regional or subregional level, should always
and fully conform to the norms of international law and
respect the principles of human rights and international
humanitarian law. Terrorists should not enjoy even a
hint ofjustification for their reprehensible actions. One
specific measure that would anchor our fight against
terrorism in international law would include, as
indicated in resolution 1373 (2001), the signature or
ratification by States of the relevant United Nations
conventions.

Paragraph 7 of the work programme of the CTC
mentions the fact that, before 11 September 2001,
fewer than 12 countries had signed all of the United
Nations counter-terrorism conventions, while now, the
number of those countries is more than 40. However,
that figure should not be overly reassuring to us,
because what counts is the implementation of those
conventions. Moreover, permit me to mention the fact
that Bulgaria not only has signed and ratified the 12
conventions in question, but also has harmonized its
national legislation so as to permit their effective
implementation.

International terrorism calls for coordinated
action on the part of the international community. On
that point, the work being done by the CTC - and,
Mr. President, you have already contributed
enormously to the Committee's effectiveness, for
which I thank you- has enabled it to become the
heart of the global anti-terrorist effort. It is the
reference point of all organizations and States that are
active in this area. From that perspective, it is very
important that the relations that have developed over
time between the CTC and other international
organizations be deepened, developed and focused. As
a number of previous speakers said, it is very often
regional and subregional organizations that have the
resources and the means to implement counter-
terrorism measures. As far as my country is concerned,
Bulgaria is contributing actively to this fight in its
subregion of South-Eastern Europe by cooperating with
regional European organizations.

It is very important, in our View, that the
competent international organizations include the non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in the
fight against terrorism in order to prevent them from
falling into the hands of terrorist organizations. The
universalization of international conventions and
treaties in the area of non-proliferation and
disarmament seems to us an essential point. Bulgaria
unreservedly supported the changes that have been
made to the founding documents of a great number of
international export control regimes in order to lessen
the danger posed by nuclear, chemical and biological
materials.

The fight against terrorism is a challenge
requiring long-term stamina. It seems to us that the
mechanism that the CTC has represented since its
creation has proved itself effective, but obviously - as
Ambassador Thomson said a few moments ago - we
will not really know how effective it is unless our
action makes a difference on the ground. The technical
assistance that has been provided - particularly by
organizations such as the World Trade Organization,
the International Civil Aviation Organization and the
International Monetary Fund and by donor countries -
is of major importance. It is therefore disturbing that
there still are some countries that, for objective reasons
such as a lack of resources, have yet to undertake
adequate measures to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions, particularly resolution 1373
(2001).
It is true that terrorism is a danger that changes
its approach and its complexion and is sometimes very
subtle. It is a multiform phenomenon that knows no
borders and thus is difficult to deal with. However,
Bulgaria is convinced that it can be vanquished. To do
that requires the efforts of all States. The Committee
that you have the honour to chair, Mr. President, is at
the heart of that struggle.

