Mr. Flynn (Ireland): Thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today's debate. I would also like to thank
our briefers.

At the outset, I would like to align myself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group.

Working methods are not an end in themselves. We
and others seek to improve the way the Security Council
operates because we want the Council to be more
effective. This means we want the Council to be able
to effectively tackle the many and complex challenges
to international peace and security we face. We also
want the Council to operate in a way that maximizes its
legitimacy, which means making it as representative,
transparent and accountable as possible. We believe
that a reformed, more accountable and transparent
Council would be better placed to meet its core tasks
of preventing and resolving conflicts. It is with this in
mind that my country, Ireland, approaches the issue of
working methods.
Kuwait deserves special praise for its efforts
to improve the working methods of the Security
Council. In addition to convening two open debates
on working methods, last year's (see S/PV.8175) and
today's, as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
Kuwait has done valuable work in seeking to update
elements of note 507 (S/2017/507, annex). In particular,
it has advanced the role of incoming elected members
and troop- and police-contributing countries. It has
also secured agreement on important improvements to
the day-to-day operation of the Council.

The foregoing reforms build on other recent
improvements to working methods, for example, the
improvements made to the selection process for the
current Secretary-General. Due to the work of ACT
colleagues and others, it was possible to arrange a
much broader and more transparent process. For the
first time, all candidates were publicly declared, and
all of them appeared in hearings before the General
Assembly. Such a process greatly enhanced the
democratic legitimacy of the selection and reinforced
the authority of the candidate selected.

Mr. President, I know that you are also pushing for
further improvements. There are, as others have noted,
many important areas that need to be addressed. I
wouldjust like to highlight three, starting with the issue
of the Sanctions Ombudsperson. The Ombudsperson
mechanism is a key element for ensuring the integrity
and effectiveness of the Security Council's sanctions
system, but it needs to be strengthened by extending the
mandate of the Ombudsperson to the other sanctions
regimes. This is an important issue of due process and
the rule of law.

Secondly, there is the issue of fairness and
equality in the allocation of Council responsibilities.
There is nothing in the Charter that states that only
permanent members can draft resolutions. In fact, as
the Council's work has grown, it makes little sense not
to share the burden of this task and utilize the skills
and experience of elected members. Equally, allocating
excessive workloads in respect of subsidiary bodies to
elected members may affect their ability to participate
effectively in other aspects of the Council's work.

Finally, I would refer to the relationship between
the Council, the General Assembly and other bodies.
In this context, I would like to welcome the positive
developments we have seen, in particular the regular
interaction with the Peacebuilding Commission in its
role as an advisory body to the Council, and also with
regional and subregional organizations, including the
European Union and the African Union. But there is
more we can do.

Working methods are not only what we put down
on paper, but also the mindset with which we approach
the challenges we face. Ireland believes that many
recent and current elected members have brought new
thinking and a new dynamic to the Council. They
have rightly looked askance at the sterile debates and
grandstanding that can sometimes characterize the
work of the Council and have asked what we can do
differently. Sometimes, as with Germany's recent
presidency, it was literally letting in the light and trying
to promote more interactivity during debates. New
Zealand initiated more regular informal interaction
among permanent representatives, and also a focus
on situational awareness to prevent conflict. Others,
including Kuwait and Sweden, have shown how they
can play a key role on humanitarian issues, and, in so
doing, bridge divides on the Council.

Five new Council members will be elected
tomorrow. This continual process of renewal of the
Council should also be an opportunity to reflect on
and improve the way the Council operates. We need a
sense of urgency and shared purpose. We need a strong
commitment to preventing and resolving conflict. For
some, the rules of procedure are used to block action,
not to facilitate it. This has to change. As an aspiring
elected member, Ireland will continue to work to ensure
that the Council's working methods are fit for purpose
and to help the Council meet its primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security.

