Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): The
United States will join the consensus with other Council
members in voting to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINURCA) until 15 November 1999. Our support
reflects our concern over the deteriorating regional
security situation in Central Africa and our respect for the
Council's strong desire to continue this mission.

It must be clearly noted, however, that our decision
to endorse the extension of MINURCA's mission was
made despite our deep misgivings concerning the pace of
reform and the need for Government-coordinated
programmes to improve the political, economic, social
and military situation in the Central African Republic. We
remain concerned that the Central African Republic
Government will not meet its commitments under this
draft resolution.

We are, however, mindful of the need not to
abandon African peacekeeping at this time of increased
conflict on the continent, as well as the need to strengthen
democracy in the Central African Republic. We therefore
have agreed to one further extension of the mandate of
MINURCA until 15 November. In our view this operation
should be brief, a temporary window of opportunity
during which the Government must implement stabilizing
reforms.

In agreeing to this extension, we have two
continuing concerns. First, the Government of the Central
African Republic must energetically avail itself of this
renewed opportunity to institute the kind of reforms that
engender long-term stability. This is a task that must be
fulfilled by the Government, not by MINURCA
peacekeepers. We hold President Patasse and his
Government responsible for implementing long-overdue
reforms and for meeting the specific benchmarks set forth

 

in this draft resolution, in accordance with the commitments
made by President Patasse in his letter of 23 January to the
Secretary-General. If the Government of the Central African
Republic fails to meet these commitments, the United States
will, in consultation with other Security Council members,
seek to review the merits of maintaining a peacekeeping
mission in the Central African Republic through
mid-November.

Secondly, this draft resolution clearly states that
MINURCA will end on 15 November. The Security
Council and the United Nations Secretariat must begin work
now to ensure a smooth transition from peacekeeping to
non-assessed peace-building. Any delays in planning for
this transition would be counter-productive and would not
serve the best interests of the citizens of the Central African
Republic. It is vital that the United Nations take steps now
to formulate programmes for continued reform after
MINURCA departs. Members of the group of Friends of
the Central African Republic and United Nations officials
must not delay in beginning to formulate a mechanism to
ensure that economic restructuring, good-governance
reforms, demobilization and military restructuring continue
after the peacekeeping forces depart.

