Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to join
other colleagues in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing.

I would also like to join other colleagues in
making clear that the United Kingdom also condemns
Hizbullah's building of tunnels leading into Israel. As
others have noted, that is a clear violation by Hizbullah
of resolution 1701 (2006). It threatens Israel's security,
Lebanon's security and regional stability. We are
clear that Israel has the right to defend itself against
Hizbullah and all other armed militia groups that put its
security at risk. All Israelis and all Lebanese have the
right to live in peace without fear for their security. As
other speakers have noticed, we have witnessed for too
long Hizbullah's blatant disregard for the resolutions
of the United Nations. Its continued possession of
weapons outside of the control of the Lebanese State,
reported attempts to acquire dangerous new missile
capabilities and its statements that threaten Israel
remain deeply alarming. Without an end to Hizbullah's
illegal activities in Lebanon and the region, we will
continue to see regional stability threatened.

The United Kingdom recognizes the important work
that has been carried out over the past 12 years by the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) to
maintain calm and stability along the Blue Line. We pay
tribute to those nations that have provided commanders
and troops to UNIF IL throughout that period. And the
existence of the tunnels reinforces the importance of
ensuring that UNIFIL's mandate is effective, strong
and has full access to all its areas of operation. We
condemn any attempts to restrict UNIFIL's freedom of
movement. We recognize that there is the question of
access to private property in the context of investigating
where the tunnels are. We recognize that that can be
difficult, but it is not impossible to resolve this issue.
We look forward to a workable solution being found.
We welcome the response of UNIFIL and its actions
to monitor the situation and maintain calm, including
by deploying additional troops and liaison teams to
sensitive locations along the Blue Line. It is vitally
important for UNIFIL to continue to liaise closely with
the Lebanese and Israeli authorities.

We call on the Lebanese State, and in particular the
Lebanese Armed Forces - as the sole and legitimate
defenders of Lebanon - working closely with UNIFIL,
to take appropriate action, as a matter of urgency, to
neutralize the tunnels. We encourage Israel to continue
to share with UNIFIL, to the fullest extent possible,
any information that would assist UNIFIL and the
Lebanese Armed Forces in taking action. Where there
are difficulties, we urge all parties to work together
constructively to overcome them. It is not in the interest
of either of the sides for this situation to escalate.

The United Kingdom has been clear on many
occasions in the Council that it condemns Israeli
violations of Lebanese sovereignty - whether by land,
sea or air. Such actions undermine confidence and
stability. And we call for all the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 1559 (2004) and
1701 (2006), to be respected in full. In that regard, the
United Kingdom welcomes the commitments made both
by Israel and Lebanon, including the recent statement
by the Lebanese Ministry for Foreign Affairs regarding
the full implementation of the latter resolution, the
refusal to accept any violations and respect for the Blue
Line. Finally, the United Kingdom calls on all sides to
continue to abide by their commitments and to avoid
actions and rhetoric that could destabilize the situation
and the region.

