Mr. Haneda (Japan): The Government of Japan
is deeply concerned that the situation on the ground has
further deteriorated, owing to the continued terrorist
suicide bombings by Palestinian extremists and the
incursions by the Israeli forces into the Palestinian
autonomous territories, particularly the siege of
Chairman Arafat's headquarters.

Under those circumstances, the Japanese Foreign
Minister, Yoriko Kawaguchi, visited Israel and the
Palestinian territories on 8 and 9 June and once again
called upon the leaders of both sides to stop the
violence. The Foreign Minister also pointed out the
importance of pursuing concurrently the three
processes of restoring security, providing humanitarian
and reconstruction support, and resuming and
accelerating the political process. She also conveyed to
them that, as a part of the political process, an
international conference should be convened at an early
stage, with a view to breaking the deadlock, and that
the Government of Japan, for its part, is prepared to
play a role to help make the conference productive. In
response, the leaders of both Israel and the Palestinian
Authority pointed out the importance of the
Government of Japan's involvement.

In order to advance the peace process, it is
important to defuse the deep mistrust between the
parties. To that end, it is essential for the international
community to lend its support. The Government of
Japan is ready to provide assistance to the Palestinians
in response to progress in the peace process, including
assistance for the reform of the Palestinian Authority,
which is now under way. In addition, for the purpose of
confidence-building between the parties, the Japanese
Government is prepared to provide a venue where a
broad range of Israelis and Palestinians would be able
to discuss ways of peaceful coexistence and the vision
of a future Palestinian State.

Experience to date shows that the active role of
the Government of the United States provides an
essential catalyst for peace in the Middle East, and the
Government of Japan welcomes and supports the
United States Government's efforts for peace.
However, what is most important is that the parties to
this conflict exert the utmost self-restraint and take the
necessary political decisions. With that in mind,
Iwould like to conclude my statement by once again
calling upon the leaders of the Government of Israel
and of the Palestinian Authority to make every possible
effort to resume their dialogue.

