Mr. Calovski (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia): I would like to join the previous speakers
who have praised the dynamic, thoughtful and
important leadership of Ukraine's presidency of the
Security Council as headed by you, Mr. President, a
very good friend of Macedonia and of mine.

We are pleased to see Mr. Hans Haekkerup,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), in the Security Council
Chamber. I have followed his briefing carefully and
with great interest. The Republic of Macedonia, like
the other States of the region, of the European Union
and of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) would like to see more security,
more law and order, full observance of human rights,
better economic and social development and, of course,
much more democratic development in Kosovo. In this
regard, we very much appreciate the efforts of UNMIK
and the Kosovo Force (KFOR), as well as of Mr.
Haekkerup and General Carlo Cabigiosu, commander
of the international security presence in Kosovo - the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization-led (NATO)
KFOR - who was supposed to be here today.

From the contents of the Secretary-General's
report of 13 March 2001 (S/200l/2l8) and from what
we have heard today, it is clear that UNMIK and KFOR
are achieving important results in spite of the enormous
problems that they are facing daily and that they will
be facing in the period to come. As expected, we see
that the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) is
not an easy affair, but it must be fully implemented in
all its parts. The political balance of this resolution
requires that all its parts and provisions should receive
equal attention. I am pleased to note the expressed
commitment and readiness by Mr. Haekkerup to work
in that manner 4 of course, in very close cooperation
with the Security Council, NATO, the European Union,
the OSCE and all the States of the region. It should be
clear to everybody - and I would like very much to
stress this - that the failure to implement resolution
1244 (1999) will be seen as a failure of our
Organization and of NATO. I am sure that will not
happen.

At this very moment the main preoccupation of
Macedonia is that Kosovo should not continue to be a
source of tension in the region or a factor in
destabilizing the region. In the words of the President
of the Republic of Macedonia,

"The security situation in Macedonia has
deteriorated as a result of armed violence led by
terrorist mobs infiltrated from Kosovo. These
mobs are comprised of old KLA members, mainly
from Kosovo. They aim to destabilise Macedonia
through constant attacks on inter-ethnic relations
and State structures."

The elimination of paramilitary extremists' bases
that have been established in the border area in order to
penetrate Macedonia is an urgent necessity. In other
words, Kosovo's security tensions and security troubles
should not be allowed to spill over to the region and to
Macedonia. The activities of the extremists were
strongly condemned by the Security Council on 2 and 7
March, and by the Secretary-General on 28 February.
But in spite of that, the extremists have continued their
terrorist activities, have managed to penetrate into
Macedonia and have engaged in armed attacks against
our army, police and population.

What we are witnessing, in effect, is armed
aggression against Macedonia from abroad, from
Kosovo. In this regard, I would like to stress what Mr.
Carl Bildt, United Nations Special Envoy to the
Balkans, said yesterday, that he is "very disappointed
by the fact that a country which is a member of the
United Nations is being attacked from a territory that is
under United Nations administration". Under Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999), the duty to control the
Kosovo border to prevent a spillover of negative
effects from Kosovo lies with those who govern
Kosovo: UNMIK and KFOR. Our evidence and that
given to us by friendly countries points to the fact that
armed extremists are Albanians from Kosovo.

It is urgent that the extremists be isolated and
unable to proceed with their agenda and terrorist
activities. That should be done by UNMIK and KFOR
undertaking adequate military and police measures.
They should control the border with Macedonia and
should eliminate the bases of terrorism in Kosovo. It
should be clear that the efforts of the extremists to
undermine the stability, security and territorial integrity
of Macedonia will not succeed. We will not allow that
to happen. In this regard, I am pleased to express my
Government's satisfaction that we have the Security
Council's support. I am also pleased with the KFOR
statement that:

"KFOR has responded vigorously to the concerns
of the Macedonian Government and has
conducted robust and successful operations along
the border with Macedonia to ensure that the
Kosovo border area is not a safe haven for armed
extremists inside Kosovo."

All legitimate political entities in Macedonia and
in all countries of our region and Europe have
condemned the extremists' activities, the use of force
and terrorism for achieving political goals. Now we
have to see to it that what was said would be done will
be. Among the efforts of the international community
and individual States, the most important role,
responsibility and task fall to UNMIK and KFOR, the
United Nations and NATO. The Security Council, the
Secretary-General and other concerned States or
international institutions should help Mr. Haekkerup
and General Cabigiosu carry out successfully this
important task of stopping Kosovo from being a source
of tensions and an exporter of security troubles and
should help the province become a place of
development and democracy and a multi-ethnic society
of equals.

In our view, that is possible. Macedonia will help
UNMIK and KFOR without reservation or hesitation. It
is unacceptable that the Kosovo extremist terrorists be
allowed to destabilize the Republic of Macedonia, a
Member State of the United Nations, or to jeopardize
its successful democratic development and integration
into the Euro-Atlantic structures.

It is important, in our view, that we see Kosovo,
in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as a part of
Europe. At present it has many difficulties, but it has a
very good future. Kosovo, too, one day will be
integrated into the Euro-Atlantic structures. That is
Kosovo's future. Integration into Europe is Kosovo's
future. But that will not happen if Kosovo becomes an
obstacle to the integration of the States of the region
into the European Union, if Kosovo continues to be a
problem to Europe, if the Kosovar people are
brainwashed with nineteenth-century ideas of creating
a greater Albania, a greater Kosovo State or a pure
Albanian State, or if the Kosovars are pushed to
become criminals and terrorists.

Mr. Haekkerup and General Cabigiosu, as heads
of UNMIK and KFOR, do not have an easy task before
them. But taking into account the human dimension of
the task, it is worthwhile to work towards its
accomplishment, on the implementation of the mandate
under Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). We
sincerely wish them much success, along with the
promise, as I have already said, to help and support
them.

As you have seen, Mr. President, our position
coincides with those expressed by the representative of
Sweden, speaking on behalf of the European Union.

But coming back to Macedonia's present
concerns, I would like to read to you what the Prime
Minister of Macedonia stated yesterday:

"It is a fact that for the period of one month
now our country has been attacked by structures
that have the serious intention to threaten its
security and integrity.

"At the beginning, we all thought that those
were only activities of some criminal groups. But
today all indications show that perhaps they have
logistical and technical support by structures
located in Kosovo. We do not know what their
ultimate goal is, but we are deeply convinced that
they will cause enormous damage to the
Albanians in the Balkans."

He added,

"Every reasonable Albanian politician is
aware of that. Those who want to create war in
Macedonia should be aware that the Macedonian
army and police will respond severely. We will
ask for the direct involvement of NATO and
KFOR troops in the confrontations. We are facing
a special situation, but I am deeply convinced that
we have no other choice but to defeat the
terrorists. But it has to be a political Victory and
not a military one."

I have many questions to ask Mr. Haekkerup. Due
to the time factor, I will take this opportunity to ask
only one question, to make one specific comment: how
will UNMIK and KF OR implement the Security
Council presidential statement of 7 March 2001 and the
presidential statement the Council is going to adopt
today?

Specifically regarding the aggression - and I use
the word "aggression", which is what is really going
on - by the terrorists from Kosovo against the
Republic of Macedonia, are you going to discuss this
statement with the legitimate political leaders in
Kosovo? They are in a position to promote the peaceful
development of Kosovo, European views and standards
and good-neighbourliness, and they are in a position to
influence the leaders of the terrorists.

Mr. Haekkerup, are you going to discuss these
statements with the legitimate political leaders in
Kosovo? They are in a position to promote the peaceful
development of Kosovo, European views and standards
and good-neighbourliness, and they are in a position to
influence the leaders of the terrorists. Are you going to
discuss these statements with the Macedonian
Government? The Government of Macedonia is keen to
see Kosovo start to develop as a democratic European
society, and not become a danger to its neighbours. Are
you going to take special measures against the
extremists and, if so, what kind of measures? It is
crucial that the extremists be disarmed quickly, without
delay, and that they be isolated. Various preventive
measures can be undertaken if there is a readiness to do
so. Of course, I do not question that. I am sure that you
are thinking of doing something concrete and practical.
The implementation of the Security Council
presidential statements is a very important affair; they
should not remain solely words on paper, since they
argue very strongly for the full implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999).

It is common knowledge that there are many
armaments in Kosovo and that many illegal
transactions are taking place. It is the duty of UNMIK
to stop these illegal activities, which are financed by
money from drug-trafficking and illegal funds from
abroad. It is also important that KFOR examine the
present situation along the Macedonian border
urgently, with a view to undertaking further concrete
practical measures to prevent a spillover of tension
from Kosovo to Macedonia. I hope that General Carlo
Cabigiosu is doing that right now. Perhaps this is why
he is not with us today. I was encouraged, as I said, by
his expressed readiness to do so. I will repeat: we
really miss his presence here today.

Let me end by expressing our hope that UNMIK
and KFOR will discharge their duties and implement
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) fully and
responsibly and that they will succeed in preventing the
aggression of the terrorist extremists who are
endangering the security and territorial integrity of
Macedonia. Also, we hope that they will help Kosovo
to begin a healthy development with a European
orientation.

