Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): For Kazakhstan, the
fight against proliferation and the use of weapons of
mass destruction remains one of the most important
priorities of its foreign policy. For that reason, we are
most seriously concerned about the current state of
the non-proliferation regime in Syria, as well as in the
region as a whole. We must recognize that the use of
chemical weapons in Syria continues, with persistent
threats of chemical terrorism a grave reality. In addition,
many allegations on the use of chemical agents in Syria
are still undisclosed.

Based on those circumstances and on our
understanding of the need to preserve the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM), we
intended to support both draft resolutions that were to
extend the mandate of the JIM. Having read its seventh
report (S/2017/904, annex), we became even more
convinced that the investigation should continue and
that the methodology behind the investigation should
be fully and strictly enforced.

However, to our great regret, we again saw an
extremely disappointing picture when the Council
could not act with a single voice, meaning that as a
collective body, we have failed to act as one. The results
of the voting clearly show, yet again, that we have to
work more to be inclusive of all opinions in order to be
successful. It is always important and relevant for all
parties to work closely in the search for a compromise,
despite the existing principled positions.

It was commendable that during the latest
consultations, the United States demonstrated the
willingness to accommodate some changes. At the
same time, we are also sympathetic to the concerns of
the Russian delegation regarding the JIM. report and its
conclusions. We support the need to further improve
the work of the Mechanism. But both sides must work
out their differences, and we are here to make sure that
we achieve a solution.

I want to emphasize once again that for Kazakhstan,
the main priorities are to relentlessly continue to fight
against the threat or the use of chemical weapons, in
Syria as well as anywhere in the world. The situation
today is that all members of the Council are convinced
of the need to continue the work of the JIM. But
clearly it needs to undergo some changes to meet the
expectations of all member countries of the Security
Council. We therefore call on all, first and foremost
those countries that initiated the creation of the
Mechanism, to actively continue consultations and
search for mutually acceptable language, so that the
Mechanism can resume its work.

