Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): 1, too, would like to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Nebojsa Radmanovic',
Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
to the Council and to thank him for his statement. I
also thank the High Representative, Mr. Valentin Inzko,
for his views on the developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since his last report (see S/2010/235, annex).

We are pleased with the positive developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina since the Council's last
meeting on this item (see S/PV.6319). In particular, we
note the successful conclusion of the sixth national
election last month. We congratulate the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina on their commitment to
democracy, as demonstrated by their participation in
the elections. We welcome the decision to allow visa-
free travel to all Bosnians. Equally, we welcome the
European Union's improved relations with the
country's neighbours.

We recall with nostalgia the high hopes that
attended the signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement
15 years ago. As we welcome the achievements of the
past 11 years, we also share the Secretary-General's
concern over the limited progress made in
implementing the Dayton Peace Agreement and in
meeting the outstanding requirements set by the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
for the transition from the Office of the High
Representative to a European Union presence.

In the same vein, we observe that the reported
increase in provocative and nationalistic rhetoric
further undermines efforts towards achieving a stable
and peaceful country, fully integrated into
Euro-Atlantic structures. We encourage political
leaders to commit to the necessary reforms and to
ensure the completion of the five objectives and two
conditions for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. They should also refrain from
nationalistic and anti-Dayton rhetoric, surmount their
differences and commit to dialogue.

We welcome the contributions of the regional and
international partners in support of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's progress towards Euro-Atlantic
integration. We encourage it not to relent in its efforts
to ensure that all outstanding issues pertaining to the
country's integration into the European Union are
resolved speedily. We appreciate the role of the
European Union's peacekeeping, in collaboration with
the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
ensure a safe and secure environment in the country.

We commend the High Representative for his
tireless efforts to promote the entry of Bosnia and
Herzegovina into the European Union and to facilitate
the implementation of the Dayton Agreement. We look
forward to a more collaborative effort between the
Office of the High Representative, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the Government in ensuring the full implementation of
annex 7 of the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to close the
chapter of displacement in Bosnia and Herzegovina by
2014.

It is a positive development that the economy of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is showing signs of
improvement. Economic growth in the country is
essential to supporting efforts to sustain peace and
stability. The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
will need to continue the necessary reforms and to
work assiduously with its international partners to
improve the economy. We call on the international
community to continue to support the Government in
its efforts to foster economic progress, thereby
improving the lives of the average Bosnian.

Let me conclude by stating that Nigeria, along
with Council members, will remain focused in efforts
to support the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
achieve a prosperous and democratic country. We urge
all concerned to display more maturity, as we believe
that the Bosnian people can confront the current
challenges with the necessary political will.

