Mr. Zarif: The first quarter of this year has been
an important one for Kosovo and for the South-East
European region. I wish to begin by commending the
new Pristina Government for its prudent and reasoned
approach to tackling the many inherited and new
challenges it faces and for its ambitious reform agenda.

Both Belgrade and Pristina stand at important
stages along their respective European paths. Their
demonstrated ability to work together on subjects of
common concern has been of fundamental importance
in overcoming the legacy of hostility and conflict. An
equally encouraging fact is that, over the recent months,
there have been increasing direct contacts at the
local level, alongside the European Union-facilitated
dialogue at the higher political level.
Two meetings between Prime Minister Vueic' of
Serbia and Kosovo's new Prime Minister Mustafa, held
on 9 February and 21 April in the framework of the
Brussels dialogue, were further important milestones
that will, we hope, lead to concrete achievements.
Excuses should not be countenanced for procrastinating
in the remaining implementation steps of the April 2013
Agreement, nor, I believe, should older issues become
shackles on the stakeholders to embrace opportunities
to open new ground in this dialogue.

Along with our European Union (EU) and other
international partners on the ground, I continue to
encourage the political leaders in Belgrade and Pristina
to demonstrate creativity and foresight in identifying
areas of common interest. It is also important for
technical engagements at working levels to be free from
polemical haggling and focus on facilitating delivery of
tangible results that directly benefit people's lives.

With regard to the vital processes of judicial
integration, it is encouraging that the recruitment of
judges and prosecutors has begun, with a number of
applications having been submitted for these positions
by yesterday's deadline. I trust this process will
continue with flexibility and goodwill, particularly
regarding educational qualifications. I applaud the
initiative of Prime Ministers Vucic' and Mustafa to
also communicate directly to resolve pressing issues.
Such direct engagements, which usefully complement
and help maintain the momentum of their structured
dialogue, should gradually become the norm, rather
than the headline-worthy exceptional event.

One of the core provisions of the April 2013
Agreement, namely the establishment ofthe association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities, however,
remains unresolved. Steady leadership is required from
both Pristina and Belgrade in order to enable progress
during the technical discussions in Brussels scheduled
for today. While fully acknowledging the complexity
of issues and time required to establish a functional
association/community, it will be vital to demonstrate
good will in order to maintain the political momentum.
Equally firm support on the part of the international
community will also remain essential in this regard.

Turning to developments within Kosovo, on
23 April, after some two months, the representatives
of the main Kosovo Serb political platform, the Serbian
Civic Initiative, resumed their participation in the
Kosovo Government and Assembly. It is encouraging
that Kosovo Serb leaders, together with Prime
Minister Mustafa and others in his Cabinet, found
ways to overcome their differences and preserve the
integrity of the governing coalition. Additionally,.
a member of the Serbian Civic Initiative was also
appointed as Minister for Communities and Returns.
After protracted disagreements, on 24 April all four
municipal assemblies in northern Kosovo agreed to
adopt their budgets in line with Kosovo legislation,
which led to the effective unblocking of the municipal
bank accounts on 15 May.

I should also note the practical cooperation that
has been developing between the mayors of North
and South Mitrovica, Goran Rakie and Agim Bahtiri,
respectively. On 30 April, both attended the funeral
held in North Mitrovica for a Kosovo Albanian boy
whose body was found some three weeks after his
disappearance. The two mayors, in a meeting held on
21 May with the Kosovo Ministers for Communities
and Returns and Local Government Administration,
as well as representatives of the Kosovo Albanians in
the Kroi international Vitakut/Brdjani neighbourhood,
reached agreement on addressing the long-festering
issues of returns and residential construction in that
area through an interministerial working group. I
commend both mayors for their prudent leadership, and
believe that the success of such an inclusive approach
will serve as an instructive example on the way forward
for other issues that remain outstanding in that and
other regions of Kosovo.

The 24 May incident in the Leposaviq/Leposavie
municipality, in which a regular rotation convoy of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
suffered material damage, reportedly due to gunfire,
was unfortunate, and I hope the investigation into
that regrettable event will be prompt and enjoy the
cooperation of the local community.

A matter of pressing importance is the completion
of necessary steps towards the establishment of the
specialist court in order to try cases arising from the
findings of the EU Special Investigative Task Force, in
accordance with the highest standards of international
justice. In my meetings across the Kosovo political
establishment, I have underlined the clear expectations
of the international community, as well as of those
who may have been the victims of past crimes, that
there shall be no undue delays in the steps required
from Kosovo towards the establishment of the court.
I had hoped to be able to report today that the relevant
constitutional and legislative steps had been completed.
The Assembly of Kosovo is seized of the urgency of
the matter, which is tentatively scheduled for action this
Friday. In that connection, I have also urged political
leaders in Pristina to work diligently to promote a
clearer public understanding of the importance of this
matter to Kosovo's future. I am pleased to note growing
public acceptance of the court as a way to deal with the
past and focus on the future. In the meantime, the Chief
Prosecutor, Mr. David Schwendiman, has officially
assumed his functions last week.

With regard to progress on establishing the fate of
missing persons, a total of 1,653 persons are still listed
as missing as a result of the Kosovo conflict. Swift
progress on this issue is essential to help heal the wounds
of the conflict and alleviate the grief of the families of
the victims. The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)continues to support and
encourage progress on this issue, which will largely
depend on disclosure of further information by all sides
regarding events leading to such disappearances.

The pace of returns and reintegration of internally
displaced persons has further slackened, while the
continued occurrence of security incidents affecting
returnees and their properties further undermines
efforts aimed at promoting returns, reconciliation and
integration. The repeated incidents in recent weeks and
over this past weekend targeting returnees in Kline/
Klina municipality, in western Kosovo are particularly
troubling. I have called for intensified efforts to bring
the perpetrators to justice, and am pleased to report that
several arrests have been made. We will follow up on
the investigation and look forward to the completion of
due process. At the same time, I welcome the initiative
to establish an interministerial group for return, led by
the Minister for Communities and Return, as well as
the temporary deployment of additional police officers
to Kline/Klina.

With regard to UNMIK's human rights-related
activity, let me take this opportunity to brief the
Council on the Mission's Human Rights Advisory
Panel, established in 2006 to investigate individual
complaints of alleged human rights violations during
the early years of UNMIK's deployment. The Panel
has received 527 complaints and closed 464 of them,
while 63 cases remain outstanding. The Panel has
consistently recommended compensation for moral
damages. However, the relevant General Assembly
resolutions prohibit compensation by the United Nations
for non-economic loss resulting from peacekeeping
operations. Nonetheless, in my discussions with our
local and international interlocutors, I have been
advocating the establishment of a suitable mechanism
to compensate for moral damages, as well as for further
investigation by the appropriate judicial authorities of
inconclusive cases.

With regard to the preservation of cultural and
religious heritage, the draft law on cultural heritage
that was recently submitted to the Kosovo Assembly
has generated significant controversy. I welcome the
decision of the Government of Kosovo to withdraw the
draft law in order to allow for broader consultations,
which will lead to the early adoption of a consensual
law.

On 30 April, the European Commission adopted a
proposal for a Stabilization and Association Agreement
with Kosovo. The dynamic approach of the Government
of Kosovo contributed to that development. Political
leaders in Pristina have expressed their resolve to
redouble their efforts so that further progress can be
made in upholding the rule of law, stimulating economic
development and promoting democracy.

1 should also note the regional cooperation within
the Western Balkans 6 forum, in which Kosovo
participates. The meeting, held at the prime-ministerial
level in Brussels on 21 April, demonstrated the potential
for enhanced regional cooperation and integration. The
forum should be used to facilitate agreements in the
future, such as on the construction of a Nis-Pristina
highway, the resumption of service on the Mitrovica-
Peje/Pee rail line, and the re-establishment of a direct
air link between Pristina and Belgrade.

The powerful potential for efficient regional
cooperation was also demonstrated in addressing the
recent phenomenon of irregular migration from Kosovo.
Similar efforts will be needed to tackle issues ofviolent
extremism. In that respect, the substantial efforts of the
Kosovo authorities, including the adoption of the law
on the prohibition of joining armed conflicts outside
Kosovo, in March, and the establishment of a Government
anti-radicalization task force, are particularly notable.
Kosovo's law enforcement agencies and leaders of the
religious communities have also played a key role. We
have already seen concrete results of those measures,
most recently in the indictment of 32 people on charges
related to violent extremism, and continuing active
investigation of other cases. Radicalization is a global
concern, and the Western Balkans is no exception
to it. I trust that outreach efforts and active regional
cooperation will continue so that adequate responses to
this transnational challenge are developed.

1 would like to also add my voice to those of
the many regional and European leaders who have
expressed deep concern with regard the deadly armed
clashes with the police in Kumanovo, in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, on 9 and 10 May.
The violent clashes involved several individuals from
Kosovo. I am pleased to note that regional leaders,
including the President and the Prime Minister of
Kosovo, denounced the violence and took great care
not to inflame tensions. Time should be permitted for
a transparent and comprehensive investigation by the
relevant authorities.

I conclude my remarks by expressing my deep
appreciation to you, Madam President, and other
members of the Security Council for your support for
UNMIK. I also Wish to thank the membership of the
Council for its sustained and constructive engagement
with both parties. That engagement will remain
essential in encouraging the full implementation of
the April 2013 agreement and in supporting progress
on other challenging issues, such as the establishment
of the specialist court. UNMIK will continue working
closely with its local and international interlocutors
to support all vital processes in accordance with its
mandate.

