Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Allow me, at the outset,

to thank you, Mr. President, for your leadership of the
Council during the month of May and for convening
this important meeting. We also wish to thank the
Chairpersons of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
Al-Qaida Committee and the 1540 Committee for their
concise reports and invaluable contribution in steering
their Committees in this vital task.

Three months ago, in a similar briefing before the
Council, I warned that terrorism is sowing the seeds of
the first world war of the twenty-first century. Today
we must sadly and emphatically state that terrorism is
indeed the third world war. This is "World War Three".

No country is immune from international
terrorism. It lurks in dark corners and strikes the blow
of destruction, death, indiscrimination and chaos.
Terrorists have executed horrific attacks in Egypt,
Indonesia, Iraq, Morocco, Pakistan, Qatar, Russia,
Saudi Arabia and Turkey. Terror has struck in Jordan,
Kenya, Tanzania, Tunisia, Uzbekistan and Yemen.
Terror has devastated Algeria, Argentina, Colombia,
Great Britain, the Philippines, Spain and the United
States. It continues to strike brutally, ruthlessly and
daily in Israel. There are many, many more States
targeted. And yet, foreigners targeted in terrorist
attacks represent an even wider circle of victims. The
victims were Australians. They were Dutch. They were
from each and every corner of the globe. They were
just unlucky enough to be at the wrong place at the
wrong time. We are linked, and we are all in this
together.

As this is a world war, the allies should fight this
axis of terror, just as 60 years ago the Allies fought the
Axis. To paraphrase Winston Churchill, never before in
the field of human conflict have so few inflicted so
much pain, horror, and destruction on so many. And
yet, never before have so many had the ability to defeat
the few if they only would mobilize their resources to
do so. If we do not stand together, we will fall together.
The world is no longer divided merely between rich
and poor or North and South. It is divided between
those who join in this fight and those who do not. It is
divided between those who spread evil and those who
do good; between those who incite violence and those
who preach tolerance. Those who stand idly and do not
fight this plague are in effect joining in collaboration

with

it. Unfortunately, even in this Council we

sometimes find members that, despite being victims of
terror themselves, do not always show the courage and
determination even to condemn it strongly and
unequivocally.

S/l'V.5446

 

I called the Council to arms and sounded a wake-

up call three months ago; yet progress is far too slow
and too little. We must join together and win this war.
We must mobilize in a unified, concerted effort.

There can never be any justification for terror, no

matter the motive - period. We, therefore, fully
support the statement agreed upon in the 2005 world
summit outcome document, which reads,

No

"We strongly condemn terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, committed by
whomever, wherever and for whatever purposes,
as it constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security." (General Assembly resolution 60/1, para. 81)

matter where it occurs, no matter the

circumstances, nothing can ever justify the wilful
targeting of civilians. Terror is terror is terror.

Israel welcomes the invaluable efforts of the

Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate, the Al-Qaida Committee and the 1540
Committee in combating international terrorism. We
see the work of the Committees as part of the
international fight against terrorism and hope their
efforts will lead to a significant reduction of
international terror. Similarly, and very importantly, a
global strategy to counter terrorism, should it be
action-oriented and concrete, could complement these
efforts.

We in Israel, unfortunately, have an intimate

awareness of the need to fight international terrorism.
The axis of terror represents an unholy alliance of Iran,
the greatest State sponsor of terrorism and the largest
threat to international peace and security; Syria, which

hosts

the headquarters of terrorist organizations

dedicated to wreaking havoc in the streets of Israel and
murdering as many individuals as possible; and the
terror organizations themselves.
A dark cloud is looming over the Middle East
and, indeed, the world. Iran, Syria and the terror
organizations they finance, harbour, nurture and
support, do not discriminate between their victims,
targeting innocents wherever they are, and in their trail
of terror kill Jews, Christians, Muslims and Druze,
Americans and Frenchmen and whoever happens to be
unlucky enough to be in their path. As the Foreign
Minister of the Hamas-led Palestinian Authority,
Mahmoud Zahar, recently stated, suicide terrorism
represents the realization of the ultimate dream of the
Palestinians. It is, indeed, a sad reality that the
Palestinians who went to the polls seeking a better life
and an end to corruption, find themselves in the grip of
a terrorist organization that is turning their dreams into
nightmares.

Unfortunately, there still exist elements that
believe that terrorism is a tool to fulfil political aims.
To that suggestion, the international community should
respond with a resounding "No". That fanatic outlook
is anathema to the principles of peace and human
dignity and all that the United Nations stands for.

The axis of terror is alive and active. Leaders of
Hamas meet regularly with, and have been offered
financial assistance by, the President of Iran - the
very same President who calls for the annihilation of
another State Member of this Organization and denies
the Holocaust while attempting to develop the nuclear
capabilities to perpetrate the next one.

Just 48 hours ago, we witnessed how volatile the
situation is on Israel's northern border, where Iran uses
Hizbollah to fight its war by proxy. With Iran and
Syria's active support, Hizbollah perpetrated a
Katyusha rocket terrorist attack deep into northern
Israel, which resulted in an extensive exchange of fire
along the Lebanese border. We not only hold the
Government of Lebanon fully responsible for all the
terrorist activity initiated from its territory, but also
hold fully responsible the Governments of Iran and
Syria for harbouring and supporting Hizbollah and
other terrorist organizations. We expect the
international community to enforce Security Council
resolutions 425 (1978), 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006)
in full.

As a result of the active collaboration between
Iran, Syria and their terrorist cronies, thousands of
innocent people have lost their lives, and the lives of
many more have been forever changed as a result of
wounds sustained from terror attacks. Indeed, more
than 24,500 terrorist attacks have been perpetrated
against the Israeli people during the current period. The
threat of terrorism is real and pressing, and we in Israel
face it every day, in every community. It is faced by
every single person. That horrific number is a
horrendous statistic of the wave of terror that is
sweeping the world while this third world war is
raging.

Sll'V.5446

 

We will meet here again in three months' time. If
all we do then is add the names of the hundreds more
victims and scores of countries hit, we will have failed
miserably. It is our moral duty and an urgent
responsibility to mobilize today. We owe it to our
children and grandchildren to fight this world war, so
that when we next meet we can declare substantial
progress, if not ultimate victory.

