Mr. Wetland (Norway): Thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to speak.

The situation in Afghanistan must be judged
against the depths from which that country is
emerging. Honouring its commitments made at the
Paris Conference last year, Norway remains fully
committed to rebuilding Afghanistan. At the

Conference, Norway pledged some $650 million for
the time period covered by the Afghan National
Development Strategy. More than 600 Norwegian men
and women in uniform are helping to bring security to
the people of Afghanistan and to train the Afghan
National Army. No other country receives more
development assistance from Norway and no other
country is seeing more Norwegian military and
development personnel. That is the measure of our
commitment to Afghanistan.

We thank Special Representative Kai Eide for his
leadership and for his forceful presentation here today.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/ 135) also
presents a precise picture of the many challenges we
are facing. We share the concern that the Taliban is
destabilizing previously stable areas and is showing
increased disregard for civilian lives.

But we must look beyond the horrific incidents of
violence and see the long-term achievements that form
the building blocks of a better Afghanistan. To mention
a few of the positive trends, Afghan security forces,
trained by their international partners, have increased
their reach, poppy production has been curbed in many
parts of the country, and the Government and donors
are working together to energize the agricultural sector.

I would like to raise three issues here today:
elections, the situation of women and our joint
international effort.

First, with regard to elections, free and fair
elections are to be held in August. The next six months
will test Afghan democracy. Well over 4 million voters
were registered earlier this year, and 1.6 million of
these new voters are women. They come in addition to
the nearly 12 million voters already registered. Some
argue that Afghanistan is not ready for democracy. The
more than 4 million Afghans who recently registered
clearly think that Afghanistan is ready and that they
should have their say. There must be no doubt in the
mind of any Afghan that elections will be held as
scheduled by the Independent Electoral Commission.
Norway has supported the election process with
$12 million given through the United Nations
Development Programme. Freedom of expression,
media and assembly must be guaranteed to ensure free
and fair elections.

Secondly, the situation of women overall in
Afghanistan has taken a worrying turn for the worse.
We remember the story of Latefa, who had acid thrown
in her face while on her way to school but who said
that the attack would not stop her from learning. The
most senior policewoman in Kandahar was killed
before she could become a role model to many young
girls. Women's rights are enshrined in the Afghan
Constitution, but it takes political leadership to protect
those rights. Increasingly, the men of Afghanistan must
change their mindset, too, and, increasingly, luckily,
they understand that their children lose opportunities
when they grow up with illiterate mothers. Poor
countries remain poor when they repress women, and
Afghanistan will not succeed without the active
participation of its women.

Thirdly, I recently conducted an Internet search
for the website of the Afghan National Development
Strategy. What I found was a page telling me that the
site was under construction. Nearly a year after the
Paris Conference, that still seems true for the Strategy
itself. Both we the donors and the Afghan Government
need to work still harder to fulfil the pledges we made
in Paris. We must explain what we are doing and let
ourselves be coordinated. The Afghan Government
must fulfil its pledge to fight corruption and narcotics.

The coordinating role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is
central to our efforts in Afghanistan. UNAMA will play
a crucial role in supporting the elections ahead of us.
We welcome the extension of UNAMA's mandate. We
pay tribute to the men and women of UNAMA and will
continue to support their vital mission.

