Mr. Al-Khatib: I appreciate this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the situation in Libya and
to discuss the events that have taken place since the last
briefing by the Secretary-General, held on 24 March,
including my second mission to the country.

Despite the effectiveness of the efforts made by
coalition members to implement a no-fly zone and to
protect civilians, the fighting has continued between
the ground forces of the armed opposition and Colonel
Al-Qadhafi's loyalists. On 31 March, Colonel
Al-Qadhafi's ground forces recaptured a strategic oil
town, Ras Lanouf, and moved within striking distance
of another major eastern city, Brega, nearly reversing
the advances made by opposition fighters since
international air strikes began on 19 March. Also on
31 March, one of the most senior officials of the
regime, Mr. Musa Kousa, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
flew to London and declared that he could no longer
serve as a representative of the Libyan Government.

Over the weekend, fighting continued in the cities
of Misratah, Zawiya and Brega. There are unconfirmed
reports that Government forces have started shelling
towns southwest of Tripoli. Air strikes also continued
2
over the weekend around Sirte and Ras Lanouf, 240
and 650 kilometres east of Tripoli, respectively.

At the London Conference on Libya, convened on
29 March by Prime Minister David Cameron, more than
40 representatives, including from the United Nations,
the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the
European Union, the League of Arab States and NATO,
gathered to take stock of the situation in Libya and to
consult on ways in which to help the people of Libya.

As an outcome of the conference, participants
agreed to establish an International Contact Group on
Libya, which would, first, provide leadership and
overall political direction to the international effort, in
close coordination with the United Nations, the African
Union, the League of Arab States, the OIC and the
European Union to support Libya; secondly, provide a
forum for coordinating the international response on
Libya; and thirdly, provide a focal point in the
international community for contact with the Libyan
parties.

Although discussions concerning the membership
are still ongoing, they tend towards a membership of
12 to 15 that would have a regional balance and
include international organizations. Participants in the
London Conference welcomed the Secretary-General's
offer to take a leading role in the coordination of
humanitarian assistance and the planning for longer-
term stabilization support.

On 31 March, I undertook my second mission to
Libya, starting with a one-day visit to Tripoli, where I
met with Libyan Government officials, including
Mr. A1 Baghdadi Al-Mahmoudi, Secretary-General of
the General People's Congress, considered as Prime
Minister, and senior members of the Foreign Relations
Committee of the People's Congress, including
Mr. Abdul-Ati al-Obeidi and Mr. Mohamed Siala, the
Secretary-General of the People's Congress.

I reiterated the international community's demand
for the full implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) and
emphasized the urgent need to immediately stop
military action, cease all hostilities against the Libyan
civilian population and end the siege of all cities and
towns. I also stressed the need to respect the legitimate
aspirations of the Libyan people and secure safe access
for humanitarian assistance in all cities and towns,
especially Misrata and Zintan, in addition to allowing
for the safe return of migrant workers from besieged
11-28770
cities. I called for the release of all foreign journalists,
including the four members of the Al-Jazeera crew.

On 1 April, I went to Benghazi and met with
Mr. Mustafa Abdul Jalil, Chairman of the interim
Transitional National Council (TNC), and many of the
members of the Council. They set out for me their
vision of a democratic Libya. The initial priority is to
restore constitutional legitimacy through a referendum.
It outlines their principles and obligations with respect
to political democracy, calling for economic prosperity
and development, and the use of science and technology
to enhance society, and condemning intolerance,
extremism and violence. It also lays out future relations
with the international community, whereby they seek
regional integration and international cooperation,
upholding the values of international justice, citizenship
and respect of humanitarian law, and confirms their
respect for international treaties and agreements with
other States, ensuring international peace and security
through cooperation with and peaceful coexistence
among nations and peoples.

I briefed the Council on my discussions with the
Libyan Government in Tripoli the previous day, and I
indicated that the Libyan authorities had informed me
of their willingness to accept a ceasefire under the
supervision of impartial observers if the TNC did the
same. The Chairman stated that the Council was ready
and willing to implement a ceasefire provided that the
other party did the same and that such a ceasefire
included ending the siege on all western cities,
withdrawing military forces, including snipers, from
the cities, and allowing the population to freely express
their position.

Furthermore, they indicated that the aim of the
people's uprising was to see the departure of Colonel
Al-Qadhafi and that a ceasefire alone would not be
sufficient to end the conflict in Libya. However, media
reports quote Government statements indicating a
rejection of a ceasefire. The Council raised concerns
about the lack of funds as well as issues surrounding
the marketing and sale of oil and gas in Libya,
stressing that the issue required urgent attention in
order to enable the economy to function effectively.
The Council pointed out that sustainability was
dependent on two major sources - loans guaranteed
against oil and gas sales and overseas frozen assets.

With respect to the Commission of Inquiry
established by the Human Rights Council, the TNC
said that it welcomed its establishment and that they
were prepared to work closely with the Commission.
11-28770
During my meeting with the TNC, I received a
briefing by one of its members, from the city of
Misratah, who had travelled for 30 hours to attend the
meeting. He and the other members of the TNC urged
that immediate action be taken to put an end to the
extremely grave situation that continues to prevail in

that city.

On 31 March, as I undertook my second trip to
Libya, the African Union held a technical meeting at its
headquarters to exchange views on the cessation of
hostilities in Libya. The meeting was attended by
representatives of the European Union, the League of
Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the United Nations. During the
meeting, participants discussed various possible
options for resolving the Libyan crisis and modalities
for a ceasefire.

I very much welcome the AU effort and strongly
hope that the international community will work in
unison to bring about a swift end to the violence and
suffering of the Libyan people. I also welcome the
25 March ruling of the African Court of Human and
Peoples' Rights, which calls upon the Libyan
Government to refrain from any actions that would
result in the loss of life or violation of the physical
integrity of persons, and requests that the Government
report to it within 15 days on actions taken to comply
with this ruling.

Information about the humanitarian situation in
Libya remains limited due to lack of access to different
parts of the country. However, it is feared that there are
significant protection concerns, such as landmines,
gender-based violence and human rights violations.
Overall, humanitarian conditions, especially in and
around areas where fighting is taking place, remain
grave, particularly regarding medical and protection
needs. These locations also suffer from the disruption
of regular services and supply lines.

There have been population movements reported
inside Libya around Ajdabiya. According to the
International Medical Corps, tens of thousands fled the
fighting in the city; while some have returned, as the
situation continues to be unstable they may be on the
move again. As of 4 April, over 400,000 people had
fled Libya. More than 12,000 remain stranded along
Libya's borders with Tunisia and Egypt. As of
29 March, the International Organization of Migration
and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees had provided evacuation assistance for more
3
than 88,000 people who had left Libya. While the
population movement initially consisted of male
migrant workers, the number of women and children
arriving at border crossing areas has increased slightly
over the past week. Some small but increasing numbers
of migrant families with women and children crossing
the borders are reporting having experienced
intimidation, harassment and violence within Libya.

Increasingly, more migrants with significant
medical conditions such as injuries, mental health
ailments and non-communicable diseases such as
diabetes, hypertension and other cardiovascular
diseases have been seen and referred for further
treatment and care.

The support provided by the Governments of
Tunisia and Egypt to facilitate the work of the
humanitarian community has been invaluable, as has
been the remarkable outpouring of assistance from local
civil society organizations and the people of those
countries. As of 3 April, the Flash Humanitarian Appeal
for Libya was currently funded at around 70 per cent at
$113 million, with $1.4 million in pledges. The United
Nations has now started its security needs assessments
to areas in the east. A humanitarian needs assessment
will follow shortly.
Since I assumed the functions of Special Envoy
more than three weeks ago, I have made four separate
trips to Libya - two to Tripoli, one to Tobruk and
another to Benghazi. I have engaged myself fully in
establishing contacts with both sides and consulting
broadly with the international community. I am
prepared to travel again to Libya as the situation
requires, and I am planning to undertake further
consultations with regional and international parties.

At this time, it is still very difficult to know how
long it will take for the Libyan conflict to be resolved.
However, responsibility for finding a solution lies with
the Libyan people themselves. Furthermore, it is also
clear that the international community must continue to
come together and do all it can to support this quest for
a solution, especially by providing the necessary
support for the United Nations to fully implement
Security Council resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973
(2011).

