I am pleased to submit this statement on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member States. I extend our congratulations to the briefers, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children in Armed Conflict, the Executive Director of UNICEF and Mariam from civil society. I thank the French presidency of the Security Council for organizing today's debate. This year we mark the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which established the United Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism and the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Since then, we have seen some significant progress: countries have criminalized recruitment, adopted protocols for the handover of children and implemented measures to protect schools and hospitals. The resolution is an important milestone, and, on this occasion, we commend Belgium for chairing the Working Group. Despite the progress made in some areas, the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525) shows that there are still significant gaps and concerns to be addressed. We expect members of the Security Council to deal with them as a matter of priority and with complete dedication. This means ensuring the mainstreaming of the agenda across the work of the Council, inviting the Special Representative to brief on country situations, raising issues from the children and armed conflict agenda, including those related to child protection, during Security Council visits, providing ample resources for child protection and making sure that these issues are addressed in relevant mandate discussions for all United Nations missions and with all Special Representatives of the Secretary-General who appear before the Security Council. It is shocking that, in 2019, over 25,000 grave violations were committed against children in the 19 situations assessed by the monitoring and reporting mechanism, with continuing sexual and gender-based violence, which remains vastly underreported, and a worrisome trend of a 400 per cent increase in denial of humanitarian access, with 4,400 verified incidents this year, and attacks against schools and hospitals. The EU urges parties to armed conflicts, State and non-State alike, to ensure universal respect for international humanitarian law, implement human rights law and refugee law and allow for concrete and effective protection, which is all the more important against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The EU also calls upon States Members of the United Nations and non-State actors to improve access to safe and quality education, in line with the recently adopted General Assembly resolution 74/275. This year, as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict, we call on its universal ratification. We also welcome other initiatives that build on the existing framework in a complementary manner, such as the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. The Safe Schools Declaration is also a valuable tool to this end. The EU remains a staunch supporter of the United Nations children and armed conflict mandate, which is equipped with essential tools that have a real impact: the Security Council Working Group, the monitoring and reporting mechanism, the action plans and the annual report, with its annex listing parties to conflicts that have committed grave violations. Considering the indispensability of these tools, it is of the utmost importance to protect the agenda's integrity and impartiality. The EU places a high value on accountability, including through the International Criminal Court. Every year, EU member States review the EU list of priority countries on children and armed conflict, based on the description of the country situations in the annual report. We encourage the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to continue to secure agreements on new action plans and support the implementation and monitoring of existing ones. In parallel, we value the Manual for Child Protection Staff in United Nations Peace Operations, and we actively support the practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict, launched in 2020. The protection and promotion of the rights of the child is central to the EU's human rights policy. The draft EU action plan on human rights and democracy 2020-2024 supports the demobilization, long-term rehabilitation and reintegration of children formerly associated with armed forces and groups. The children and armed conflict agenda is mainstreamed in EU common security and defence policy missions, and child protection aspects are taken into account in the planning of operations, trainings, early warning and peace negotiation, in close cooperation with the United Nations peacekeeping operations, agencies and funds as well as other actors, such as civil society. The EU continues to support projects in Bangladesh, Colombia, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Nigeria and the Sudan - providing tailor-made assistance for the release and reintegration of children associated with armed forces and groups, including access to education, psychosocial support and improved livelihood opportunities. Our strong engagement to the conflict-prevention agenda and dedication towards moving the children and armed conflict agenda forward in times of crisis, such as the one engendered by COVID-19, is key to ensuring that the rights of the child are taken into account in all our efforts aimed at building back better.
