Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Mr. President, at the
outset, allow me to congratulate you upon the
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are certain that, under your able
leadership, the Council will spare no effort to address
the many critical issues before it at this time. We would
also like to congratulate the Ambassador of Japan for
his stewardship of the Council for the month of
October. I would also like to thank Ms. Kane for her
briefing.

Before proceeding with my statement, I would
also like to thank the members of the Arab Group, the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), the Organization of
the Islamic Conference (OIC) and others for their
request to convene this timely meeting of the Security
Council. The number of members in these groups
represents the overwhelming majority of the countries
of the United Nations who are counting on the Security
Council to uphold its responsibilities, in accordance
with the United Nations Charter.

Over the past week, Israel, the occupying Power,
has continued and intensified its barbaric military
aggression against the Palestinian people in the
occupied Palestinian territory, especially in the Gaza
Strip. Flagrant violations and grave breaches of
international law - war crimes - are being
committed by the occupying Power against the
Palestinian civilian population every single day,
including at this very moment. I believe it is necessary
06-60930
to recall before the Council that wilful killing is
causing great suffering and serious injury to body and
health, and that the extensive destruction and
appropriation of property, not justified by military
necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly, are
among those acts considered to constitute grave
breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention.

In this regard, in grave breach of the Convention,
which governs military occupation, and in serious
violation of other relevant provisions of international
law, Israel continues to use excessive and
indiscriminate force against Palestinian civilians,
killing men, women and children, and wantonly
destroying Palestinian homes and properties in the
occupied Palestinian territory, particularly in the Gaza
Strip. Defenceless and unprotected by the international
community, the Palestinian people continue to suffer
the wrath of Israel's violent and lethal occupation
policies and practices.

Yesterday's massacre of innocent Palestinian
civilians by the Israeli occupying forces in Beit
Hanoun in the northern Gaza Strip is the most recent
and the most telling illustration of the vicious and
barbaric behaviour and actions of the occupying Power.
As unprotected victims slept in their beds, Israeli tanks
unleashed a barrage of tank fire, shelling the residential
neighbourhood of Al-Kafaraneh. This massacre took
the lives of 19 Palestinian civilians, including 16
members of one family - the Al-Athamneh family.
Among the victims were a one-month-old infant, a
one-year-old baby, seven children and six women. The
survivors of the attack woke up to the gruesome scenes
of blood and body parts scattered across their
neighbourhood.

Until now, Palestinian medical personnel have
been unable to identify several of the victims because
the amount and non-conventional nature of the
explosives used by the occupying Power have left most
of the murdered with severe burns and shattered and
distorted body parts. Doctors in the Gaza Strip insist
that these kinds of severe injuries are caused by the
most vicious types of weapons that Israel, the
occupying Power, has been unleashing against the
besieged Gaza population for the past six months.

This is terrorism. This is State terrorism. These
are war crimes for which the perpetrators must be held
accountable under international law. What we have
seen today, and in recent days and months - the blood
06-60930

of Palestinian civilians flowing in the streets, the
demolition of their homes, and their constant
humiliation, suffering and collective punishment - is
exactly what the Palestinian people have been
subjected to under nearly 39 years of Israeli
belligerence. There has been a constant barrage of war
crimes, State terrorism and systematic human rights
violations, for which the international community must
hold this occupying Power responsible. The
lawlessness and impunity of Israel must be brought to
an end, and the Palestinian people must be accorded
their rights under international law, including their
right to protection as a civilian population under
occupation.

The latest massacre in Beit Hanoun took place
less than 24 hours after the Israeli occupying forces
declared an end to their aggression in the area, which
has been carried out since 1 November 2006. Families
and lives are being destroyed by the occupying Power
on a wholesale basis, as it continues launching military
assaults.

In the past eight days alone, Israeli occupying
forces have killed over 100 and have injured over 350
Palestinians. Since the end of June more than 450
Palestinians have been killed in the Gaza Strip, making
death, mourning and grief a nearly daily ritual for the
population of Gaza. Indeed, the bloodshed and loss
caused by the occupying Power has been great, because
Israel has breached every single one of its obligations
as an occupying Power under international law. It has
blatantly violated all norms and standards of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law.

To be frank, one of the most regrettable aspects
of what is taking place in Gaza is the fact that Palestine
has sent countless letters to all members of the Security
Council, and the Council has done nothing. In those
letters, we have described the dreadful situation under
which the Palestinian people are forced to live as a
result of the occupying Power's brutal actions. We
have also warned that the absence of a clear and strong
position by the international community to demand an
immediate cessation of Israel's military aggression
would result in further carnage among the Palestinian
people.

That warning has also come from President
Mahmoud Abbas who has repeatedly called on the
Security Council and the international community to
5
shoulder its responsibilities and to stop Israel's brutal
crimes. Despite that, the Security Council has failed to
act, it has failed to uphold international peace and
security and it has failed to protect the lives of
hundreds of Palestinian civilians. The sanctioning of
savage acts committed by the occupying Power creates
a culture of impunity among the Israelis.

It should be highlighted that all of this has been
occurring while President Mahmoud Abbas has been
exerting all efforts to secure agreement among all
Palestinian parties for national unity and to promote
calm. President Abbas continues to call for diplomacy
to be given a chance, in order to save many lives on the
Palestinian side as well as on the Israeli side. However,
the way Israel has reciprocated is by inflicting more
suffering and loss among the Palestinian people and
further destabilizing the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory and beyond, in the region as a
whole, clearly making this a matter of international
peace and security.

It must be said that we do not accept the repulsive
repeated statements by Israeli officials expressing their
"regret" or their "apology" for committing these
atrocities against our people. Of course it regrets the
loss of civilian lives, especially children. What
civilized nation would not? Israel is always quick to
respond with a forked tongue. However, in the same
vein, its occupying forces continue to commit crime
after crime with a culture of impunity. When a criminal
is facing charges before a court, he often pleads before
the judge, expressing his deepest regret. But in a real
justice system, the judge will tell him, "Sorry is not
enough, and you will have to be punished". That is
why the perpetrators must be brought to justice.

As I said at the beginning of my statement, the
wilful killing and injury of civilians constitutes a grave
breach of international law - a war crime. Without a
doubt, therefore, Israel is repeatedly committing war
crimes against the Palestinian people. As such, the time
has come for urgent action on the part of the Security
Council. Failure to act at this time will seriously
damage the Council's credibility. How many more
Palestinians will have to be killed before the Security
Council acts? How many Palestinian families will
suffer complete annihilation by the occupying Power?

Enough is enough, and the Security Council
cannot continue to remain silent and inactive when it
comes to the lives of the Palestinian people. If the
6

Security Council fails to uphold its obligations and to
bring a halt to Israeli aggression, it will only bolster
the occupying Power's impunity and that will only
come at the cost of more innocent Palestinian lives. We
trust that this is not the intention of the members of the
Security Council.

Again, we call on the international community to
voice its strong condemnation of the ongoing
aggression and the massacre in Beit Hanoun. We are
calling for the immediate cessation of this aggression
and the immediate withdrawal of the occupying forces
to the positions they held prior to 28 June 2006.
Moreover, we call for an investigation of the massacre
as well as a mutual ceasefire, and for a United Nations
observer force to monitor and observe the ceasefire.

The international community, in particular the
Security Council, must hold the Israeli Government
accountable before its legal and political obligations
under international law; it must ensure that Israel
abides by the principles of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and brings its military aggression in the
occupied Palestinian territory, in particular the Gaza
Strip, to a complete halt. The Palestinian people - the
Palestinian children - are awaiting the Council's
response.

