The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of Ethiopia.

We are pleased to have taken the initiative to
convene this briefing meeting, together with our
Russian colleagues. We join other Security Council
members in congratulating Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov on his appointment as the head of the new
Office of Counter-Terrorism, as well as for his maiden
briefing to the Council, in which he outlined his vision
and priorities. I would also like once again to express
appreciation to Ambassador Aboulatta for his briefing
today, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
concerning Counter-Terrorism (CTC). We are also
thankful to David Scharia for sharing the perspective
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED).

The scourge of terrorism has been a major threat to
us all for decades now, and the adoption of resolution
1373 (2001)provided the international community with
a framework to combat terrorism and violent extremism.
The resolution established the Security Council
counter-terrorism architecture, including the CTC and
CTED, and laid the foundation for other resolutions.
We recognize and commend the indispensable role
of the CTC in monitoring the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions on
counter-terrorism.

We also appreciate the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate fo inimplementing
the decisions of the CTC, the expert assessments it
provides, as well as its assistance to Member States
in the implementation of resolutions on terrorism on
behalf of CTC. We particularly note the increase in
the number of country assessments and follow-ups in
facilitating technical assistance when that is needed by
the Member States concerned. In that regard, the CTC
and CTED have rightly contributed to enhancing the
capacity of Member States to prevent terrorist activities.
The adoption by the General Assembly of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, on 28 September 2006, was
another milestone thatprovided a global framework for
enhancing national, regional and international efforts
to counter terrorism.

The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
has also played a very important role in implementing
the Strategy in that regard. The recent creation of the
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the appointment of
the Under-Secretary-General are very much welcomed.
We hope that will enhance greater coherence and
synergy among United Nations entities working on
counter-terrorism.

Although significant progress has been made by
Member States in implementing resolution 1373 (2001)
and other resolutions, what has been done remains
insufficient and terrorists continue to pose a serious
threat to international peace and security. Today's
briefing will help us to reflect on the achievements made
so far and the challenges that need to be addressed.

The CTED global implementation survey and the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy clearly indicate that new and emerging
threats, including transnational organized crimes and
their linkage to terrorism financing and the use of the
Internet and other communications technologies by
terrorists, are posing an enormous challenge, and they
require greater attention. The challenge that developing
countries face in that regard is particularly enormous.

We believe that efficiently and effectively
addressing the issues of the compliance of Member
States with their obligations, establishing more
coordinated and enforcement mechanisms under
the auspices of the CTC and CTED to monitor the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and other
relevant resolutions, ensuring better cooperation among
the relevant stakeholders and facilitating the provision
of technical assistance under resolution 1373 (2001) for
Member States when they need it, will go a long way in
facilitating implementation and addressing the new and
emerging challenges.

On its part, Ethiopia is striving to implement
resolution 1373 (2001) and other international and
regional counter-terrorism frameworks. In that context,
it is keen to work with all of the stakeholders in
existing and new regional and international corporation
platforms, but it is not only a matter of carrying
out our obligation. We find ourselves in a volatile
neighbourhood, which is facing threats of terrorism and
violent extremism, and we can see that implementing
resolution 1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions on
counter-terrorism is a matter of absolute necessity.

We have enacted an appropriate policy and legal
measures and an appropriate institutional framework in
that regard. In addition to what we are doing within
the framework of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and African Union, we are also
cooperating with the United Nations. The recent
comprehensive monitoring and promotional visit by the
CTC to Ethiopia is a case in point.

Therefore, I would like to conclude by reaffirming
Ethiopia's readiness to continuing to work with Member
States, the United Nations and other stakeholders
in countering the menace of terrorism and violent
extremism, which are among the biggest international
peace and security threats of our time.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Voronkov to respond to the
comments and questions raised.

