Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): I welcome First
Deputy Prime Minister Dacie and Ambassador Citaku
to the Security Council today, and I thank Special
Representative Tanin for his briefing.

New Zealand welcomes progress in the political
situation in Kosovo, as outlined in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2016/666) and in Special
Representative Tanin's briefing. In particular, we are
pleased to see some improvement in the standards
of political engagement, following the disruptive
incidents in the Kosovo Assembly earlier this year. We
look forward to an even more settled political future
for Kosovo, free from political violence and with due
respect for its democratic institutions of Government
and for its courts and judges.

In a climate where political disillusionment is
apparently increasing, it is particularly important
to ensure all people, in particular youth, feel they
have a stake in Kosovo's future. We continue to call
for renewed efforts to normalize relations between
Kosovo and Serbia. In that regard, we hope that more
progress can be made in implementing agreements
reached between the two sides, including in relation
to energy, telecommunications and Serb-majority
municipalities in Kosovo.Kosovars and Serbians
will always be neighbours, and all will benefit from
pursuing reconciliation and developing habits of
peaceful coexistence.

We welcome efforts by the European Union (EU),
including by EU High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy Federica Mogherini, to
facilitate dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. It
is encouraging that European leaders remain focused
on supporting reconciliation in Kosovo and the
normalization of relations in the region. Reconciliation
efforts will be strengthened by confronting the past
in order that people can move forward together.
We therefore welcome the progress made towards
establishing the Specialist Chambers to try cases
brought forward by the EU Special Investigative Task
Force. We hope that the court will be operational this
year, with support from the EU and, in particular, of
the Netherlands.

Finally, we continue to support the Security Council
considering the adoption of a more flexible approach to
how it considers this agenda item, mindful of the many
other issues of more immediate gravity that the Council
has to deal with.

