Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me, Mr. President, to congratulate
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea and express our
thanks for the efforts that you have made as President
of the Security Council. We also thank the Dominican
Republic for its efforts during its presidency of
the Security Council last month. We congratulate
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), and
wish her every success during her stewardship. She
has demonstrated a distinguished presence from the
early days in office. We also thank her predecessor,
Mr. Jan Kubis, for his work. We thank the Special
Representative as well for her briefing and look forward
to strengthening our bilateral cooperation to serve the
interests and needs of Iraq, within the framework of the
UNAMI mandate. She can count on our full support.

On the political level, Iraq has done an enormous
amount of work in the preceding period. The legislative
elections were transparent and characterized by
integrity. That was followed by the formation of the
three presidencies within the deadline stipulated by
the Constitution. The different political blocs are now
working to overcome every obstacle so that they can
reach agreement on the completion of the Government
through national partnership that puts Iraq's highest
interests first, make progress, ensure stability and
guarantee social peace, which will also contribute to
the stability of the entire region.

On the economic level, the Parliament adopted a
national budget for 2019 within the time line stipulated
by the Constitution. The federal Government plans to
pay salaries to all officials in the Kurdistan region in
2019, including the Peshmerga. Furthermore, Iraq has
set up a development plan for the period 2018-2022, so
as to achieve a rate of growth of 7 per cent and reduce
rates of poverty and unemployment, all in line with
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. A high
anti-corruption council has also been established to
implement a strategy in that area.

On Iraq's cooperation with United Nations agencies,
we have worked recently with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, as well as with United Nations
Children's Fund in order to implement the provisions
of the joint statement in accordance with the executive
plan launched during the visit to Iraq by Ms. Pramila
Patten in 2018. Furthermore, in cooperation with the
United Nations Population Fund, Iraq opened its first
shelter for women victims of sexual violence. A United
Nations team on implementing the pertinent laws also
visited Iraq to work with our Supreme Judicial Council
to help align Iraqi laws with United Nations provisions.

Iraq's competent bodies are working to complete
the second report on the national plan to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). We were among the first
States in the Middle East and North Africa to have
promulgated a national plan of action to implement
that resolution. The plan is focused on increasing
the representation of women in political, social and
economic spheres and protecting them against gender-
based Violence. Similarly, we are working to integrate
resolution 1325 (2000) into all of our national strategies
and development plans.

In addition, the Iraqi Government has begun to
implement joint projects with the United Nations Office
on Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) Executive Directorate. They include
measures for capacity-building and work opportunities
for young people, countering the financing of terrorism,
and the fight against violent extremism. We are also
working to contain the threat posed by weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs) by responding to four of
the 16 priorities outlined by the CTC in 2015, which
Iraq adopted. We have also appointed a representative
to develop a national counter-terrorism strategy. Last
week we received a visit by a CTC representative and
carried out a workshop on WMDs.

I have just brought to the Council's attention a
number of our achievements and told it about the
path followed by the new Government in the recent
period. The Iraqi Government is working to address
the challenges posed by reconstruction so that we can
ensure sustainable development for future generations.
That requires a safe and healthy environment. In
that regard, my Government believes in the role to
be played by the international community in support
of our efforts. We endeavour to cooperate with the
international community in the following areas.
First, strengthening the education sector whereas in
the 19705 we had an exceptional education system. We
want to undertake real efforts to develop a clear vision
of the reality of education in Iraq, so as to allow us to
put forward options in this area and develop that sector.

Second, we want to achieve development that
guarantees access to psychosocial and psychological
services. The wars that have been waged against Da'esh
have left deep psychological scars on women and girls,
in particular those who have been displaced or were
victims ofviolence, as well as people with special needs.

Third, we call on friendly and brotherly countries
to keep the commitments they undertook during the
conference on Iraq's reconstruction that took place
last year in Kuwait. We encourage the international
community to support Iraq and its Government
in rebuilding infrastructure throughout every
Iraqi town and city. That is essential for achieving
economic prosperity.

Fourth, we call on Member States to help rehabilitate
archaeological areas destroyed by Da'esh terrorists. We
call, as well, for support in placing the Babylon site on
UNESCO's list of World Heritage Sites.

Fifth, capacity-building is also important to
guarantee a criminal justice system that is viable.
We call for the principles of sound governance to be
respected in combating corruption, which is one of the
main obstacles to good-governance in Iraq.

Sixth, the national plan to implement resolution
1325 (2000) faces a number of challenges. The initial
implementation period for the plan coincided with
the terrorist gangs of Da'esh taking certain regions in
Iraq. Although the ministerial and institutional teams
took training courses in the areas of monitoring and
assessment of women and peace and security, the
national team still needs greater capacity and support
so that it can be more effective.

Seventh, we call on Member States to strengthen
their cooperation on intelligence for counter-terrorism
and organized crime. We also need to build the capacity
of the Iraqi armed forces in all categories, including the
army, police, counter-terrorism apparatus, the popular
mobilization forces and the Peshmerga.

On 10 December 2018, Iraqis celebrated the first
anniversary of the victory against the terrorist gangs
of Da'esh and the liberation of all Iraqi cities from
the control of those terrorist groups. Since then, my
country has turned the page on the battlefields so that
the era that cost so many lives can end.

We are now in the phase of a security challenge.
That requires eradicating the breeding grounds for
terrorism and rooting out any residual terrorism, but
there is also an intellectual battle that must be waged so
that we can put an end to extremist thinking.

Furthermore, my country's Government is working
to ensure the security of our borders and to restore
the normalcy that prevailed before Da'esh gangs took
control of areas in Iraq. We are trying to reconstruct
the areas that were damaged so that displaced persons
can return to their homes and receive financial
compensation and reparations for mental harm.

On Iraq's relations with the neighbouring countries,
there have been repeated Turkish attacks in Kurdistan,
northern Iraq. They represent a blatant violation of
Iraq's sovereignty. We vehemently condemn and reject
such attacks regardless of the justification. They are
a violation of the rules of international law and are
contrary to the principles of good-neighbourliness.
In that regard, we reiterate our commitment to
rejecting any notion that our territory be used to
carry out actions that could undermine the security of
neighbouring countries.

The relations between Iraq and the State of Kuwait
have significantly developed. My country notes that
there is potential for further brotherly relations between
the two States. We can reinforce peace, security and
stability in the region. We are therefore working to
develop and to strengthen sustainable development so
that we can achieve positive results for the two brotherly
peoples and for the region. We hope that we will be an
example for the future if we achieve that.

In that regard, I wish to reiterate the importance
that we attach to finding and repatriating the remains
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals who went
missing, in addition to the repatriation of the Kuwaiti
property that was lost. We have recently returned part
of such property to Kuwait, including certain Kuwaiti
national archives.

Iraq is a rich country. It has many material and
human resources. That puts it in an ideal position to play
its role in ensuring stability and security in the region.
Our policies are based on economic openness and on
cooperation with all brotherly and friendly countries.

In conclusion, we once again thank the Special
Representative and wish her every success in her task of
supporting Iraq in the context of the UNAMI mandate.

