Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Allow me at the
outset to say that my delegation would like to associate
itself fully with the statement that will be made later by
the Permanent Representative of Cambodia on behalf
of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
(ASEAN).

I am also very pleased to be the first of many,
hopefully, to commend Ambassador Greenstock, the
three excellent Vice-Chairmen and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) as a whole for the
remarkable work that the Committee has done. The
CTC is clearly at the tail end of phase I of its work. It
has gone through more than half of the paragraph -
6reports submitted by Members and is on target to
complete the task by the end of May. By all measures,
the CTC has done extremely well. This is a point that I
hope the Council will take note of this morning.

I think it is also important to bear in mind that we
should compare our battle against terrorism to a
marathon rather than to a sprint. It is clearly a long-
term task that we in the United Nations have taken
upon ourselves. Incidentally, in trying to find some
ideas for this speech this morning, we looked in history
books and discovered that terrorism is as old as human
history and has, indeed, been practised worldwide since
time immemorial. One of the earliest references we
found was a remark made by the ancient Greek
historian, Xenophon, who, 2,400 years ago, noted the
effectiveness of terrorizing the population of enemy
cities in bringing victory. We make this comment in the
hope that in today's discussion we will reinforce the
need for a long-term commitment in the struggle
against terrorism.

To obtain such a commitment, it may be useful
for us to reflect and to ask ourselves a fairly simple yet
fundamental question: How exactly does the work of
the CTC help to eliminate terrorists? We ask this
question because we thought that if the other Members
of the United Nations and the public at large can see a
direct connection between the work of the CTC and the
battle against terrorism, I think that support for the
CTC and for this battle will become even stronger.
In an effort to try to get the discussion going, we
have suggested at least four clear areas in which the
CTC does not merely produce reports and engage in
discussions such as this one but actually has an impact
in the real battle against terrorism. The first way in
which the CTC does this is by forcing Member States
to look carefully at their national legislation and to
assess its adequacy in addressing the demands of
resolution 1373 (2001). If, in the process, more and
more countries review their legislation, we suggest that
this is one direct, practical benefit that comes out of the
work of the CTC.

Secondly, we hope that with the work of the CTC,
the momentum towards the ratification of conventions
and instruments related to counter-terrorism will also
increase in pace. This is something we can measure and
see: since the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) and
the creation of the CTC, more and more countries are
ratifying the key conventions in the battle against
terrorism.

Thirdly, the CTC has directly - or perhaps even
indirectly - deepened the mechanisms for information
and intelligence exchange through the creation of a
directory of Member States and related United Nations
and international bodies and through the hiring of
counter-terrorism experts to assist the CTC. All this
flow of information that has come from the CTC is also
very important.

Fourthly, the CTC has pushed for an increase in
the assistance available to Member States in the fight
against terrorism. We hope that the end result of all
these efforts will be to close the various loopholes that
exist in the international system, through which the
terrorists are able to operate, either in terms of their
financial systems or their movements. We hope that the
work of the CTC will close these loopholes and have a
direct impact on the activities of the terrorists.
Ambassador Greenstock has also pointed out the need
to consolidate cooperation at the regional level and to
work closely with other intergovernmental bodies such
as the Financial Action Task Force.

Here, we are pleased to note that within the
ASEAN region, we understand this need and are trying
to step up our efforts. I believe that last month
Ambassador Greenstock made a lightning visit to
Hawaii to participate in an ASEAN Regional Forum
meeting, which was specifically dedicated to the
question of terrorism. It is meetings such as that, which
expand the impact of the CTC in various parts of the
world. As I said earlier, we are pleased that the
Permanent Representative of Cambodia will be
describing ASEAN's efforts in the battle against
terrorism.

Finally, I would like to end by touching upon the
last point mentioned by Ambassador Greenstock: his
appeal for more translation services to ensure that the
reports of the CTC are translated in good time. I
support that request and want to enhance it by saying
that the time has come for the United Nations to ask
whether it needs to provide more resources so that such
translation work can be done in good time. If we
consider the battle against terrorism to be important
and if we believe that more resources are needed from
the Organization, then it is incumbent upon Member
States to agree to provide more resources to the
Organization in this battle. I hope that we will agree to
do that today.

