Mr. Pascoe: Since Special Coordinator Serry last
briefed the Security Council on 17 September (see S/PV.6190), political efforts to resolve the Arab-Israeli
conflict have continued, but there has been no
significant progress on the ground and some worrying
developments have emerged.

On 21 September, in the first face-to-face
meeting of Israeli and Palestinian leaders since 2008,
President Obama urged the parties to meet their
responsibilities and personally committed himself to
help them restart negotiations. He stressed to the
General Assembly the illegitimacy of continued
settlements, as well as the suffering inflicted by the
ongoing conflict on Palestinian and Israeli civilians. He
detailed his goal of urgently starting talks, without
preconditions, on the key issues of security for Israelis
and Palestinians, borders, refugees and Jerusalem.

The Quartet met on 24 September and supported
President Obama's efforts to relaunch negotiations,
stressing the urgency of progress. The Quartet also
reiterated its call on the parties to implement their
Road Map commitments, and in particular for Israel to
freeze all settlement activity, including natural growth,
and refrain from provocative actions in East Jerusalem,
and for the Palestinian Authority to make every effort
to improve law and order, fight extremism and end
incitement.

Both the Quartet and the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee (AHLC), which met on 22 September,
expressed support for the Palestinian Authority's plan
to construct the institutions of a Palestinian State
within 24 months. AHLC members noted that effective
reform efforts by the Palestinian Authority and donor-
funded fiscal stimulus were the primary drivers of
economic growth in the West Bank. The Government
of Israel's relaxation of some restrictions on the
movement of goods and people within the West Bank
has complemented these efforts.

United States envoy Mitchell returned from the
region on 12 October. Further discussions between the
United States, Israeli and Palestinian interlocutors are
now expected to take place in Washington in the days
ahead. However, even with the full determination and
support of the international community to achieve the
two-State solution, the essential ingredient is the
09-55731
political will of the parties to meet their obligations
and negotiate an end to the conflict.

As the parties returned from New York, tensions
increased on the ground. There were a number of
incidents in East Jerusalem centred around Al-Haram
Al-Sharif/Temple Mount. Clashes started on
27 September between Israeli police and Muslim
worshippers at Al-Aqsa mosque. Rumours and an
atmosphere of mistrust subsequently provoked more
confrontations between Palestinians and the Israeli
police during the Jewish holiday of Succoth, when tens
of thousands of Jewish worshippers were present in the
Old City of Jerusalem.

From 28 September, the Israeli authorities
imposed new restrictions on worshippers and tourists
entering the compound after several hundred
worshippers associated with the Islamic Movement of
Northern Israel stationed themselves within the site,
claiming that radical Jewish groups were intending to
alter the status quo at the compound. The Israeli
authorities strongly denied these rumours. Bitter
accusations from both sides, however, underline the
gulf of mistrust that exists.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan was active in
negotiating between the Israeli authorities and the
Islamic Movement members for an orderly end to the
stand-off, and Special Coordinator Serry visited the
compound and was in close touch with the parties to
urge calm. By Saturday, 10 October, the restrictions
imposed on 28 September had been lifted.

The status of the Old City and the religious sites
within it are extremely sensitive issues that will be
fully resolved only in final status negotiations. Until
then, the repeated call of the Quartet on Israel to
refrain from provocative actions in East Jerusalem and
on the Palestinian Authority to refrain from incitement
remains more relevant than ever. The Secretary-
General continues to appeal to all sides to exercise
restraint.

While the immediate crisis may have passed, we
remain concerned about the broader situation in East
Jerusalem and the potential for renewed tensions. On
12 October, the Israeli authorities carried out
demolition orders against two Palestinian buildings in
the Beit Hanina area of East Jerusalem. On 7 October,
the cornerstone was laid for the further expansion of
the Nof Zion settlement in the heart of the Palestinian
neighbourhood of Jabal Mukabbir in East Jerusalem.
3
Settlement activity is illegal and undermines the efforts
of all those who are striving for peace.

Throughout the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, levels of violence remained constant during
the most recent reporting period. In total, there were
two Palestinians killed and 105 injured, and 35 Israelis
injured. Serious incidents took place at the Qalandiya
checkpoint, where several Palestinians were injured; at
Hussan checkpoint, where a Palestinian was shot and
killed; and at Shu'fat checkpoint near Jerusalem, where
an Israeli border policeman was stabbed by a
Palestinian youth. There were 23 recorded incidents of
violence involving settlers attacking Palestinians and
their property during the reporting period, and seven
recorded incidents of Palestinian attacks on settlers.

As of 29 September 2009, there were
592 movement obstacles in the West Bank, down from
618 in August. Of the 100 closure obstacles that the
Israeli authorities announced that they would remove
immediately prior to last month's briefing, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
has been able to confirm that 35 were removed and
22 remain in place. The remaining 43 obstacles were
not recorded in the OCHA database.

In addition to these developments, tensions
among Palestinians were heightened in the aftermath of
the deferral of consideration by the Human Rights
Council of the report (A/HRC/12/48) of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict
headed by Justice Richard Goldstone, which was
presented to the Human Rights Council on
29 September. The deferral led to severe criticism
among a wide range of Palestinian institutions and
factions and the public, which included the affected
populations and organizations in the region; heavy
incitement against President Abbas from Hamas
leaders; and public demonstrations of discontent. On
11 October, President Abbas indicated that he had
given instructions to seek a special session of the
Human Rights Council on the report, and such a
session has now been scheduled for 15 and 16 October.

Members will recall that, at the beginning of
2009, the Secretary-General visited both Gaza and
southern Israel in order to help end the fighting and to
show his respect and concern for the deaths and
injuries of so many people during the conflict in and
around Gaza. He was and remains deeply affected by
the widespread death, destruction and suffering in Gaza
City, as well as moved by the plight of civilians in
southern Israel who have been subject to indiscriminate
rocket and mortar fire for too long.

The Secretary-General believes that international
humanitarian law needs to be fully respected and that
civilians must be protected in all situations and
circumstances. As he said in his address to the General
Assembly, where conflicts arise justice and
accountability should follow. Accordingly, the
Secretary-General has from the outset supported the
work of the Fact-Finding Mission.

The report makes a number of recommendations
for ensuring accountability for perpetrators and redress
for victims. It calls on the Government of Israel to
conduct independent investigations into the many
allegations of serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law committed during
the Gaza conflict. It similarly calls on Hamas - the
relevant authority in Gaza - to initiate genuine and
effective proceedings into the many allegations of
serious violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law committed by forces under its
control, and calls on Palestinian armed groups to
undertake to respect international humanitarian law by
renouncing attacks on Israeli civilians.

As the Secretary-General has said repeatedly,
peace and justice are two sides of the same coin. The
Secretary-General calls upon all of the parties to carry
out credible domestic investigations into the conduct of
the conflict without delay. He hopes that such steps
will be taken wherever there are credible allegations of
human rights abuses throughout the world.

The broader situation in Gaza, especially the
continued closure policy, remains unsustainable and
unacceptable. Resolution 1860 (2009) contains the
elements of a more strategic and principled approach,
but key elements remain unfulfilled. The situation in
Gaza cannot be left to further deteriorate and unravel.

After several months of relative calm, there was a
worrying increase in violence between Gaza and Israel
in the reporting period, with 12 projectiles fired from
Gaza into Israel, including seven in one day on
28 September, as well as nine Israeli incursions and
12 air strikes. It is essential that calm not only be
restored but solidified. Seven Palestinians, including
two civilians, were killed and 15 more, including three
children, were injured in these incidents. We continue
to be concerned about reports of the smuggling of
09-55731
weapons into Gaza as well as the continued closure of
the Strip.

No exports were allowed out of Gaza during the
reporting period, and food and hygiene items continue
to make up the bulk of imports. During his meeting last
month with Prime Minister Netanyahu, the Secretary-
General expressed his disappointment that, despite
extensive discussions, there had been no Israeli
approval of the United Nations Gaza recovery
proposals for schools, clinics and housing, which are
strongly supported by the Quartet and the AHLC. The
Prime Minister gave the Secretary-General his personal
assurances that he would revisit the issue and Special
Coordinator Serry has remained engaged with the
Israeli authorities.

Despite ongoing recriminations among
Palestinian factions, Egypt is continuing intensive
efforts to secure the agreement of all factions to
proposals to overcome the Palestinian divide and hold
elections in the first half of 2010. We continue to
support efforts to reunite Gaza with the West Bank
within the framework of the legitimate Palestinian
Authority, as called for by the Quartet.

Between 2 and 4 October, Israel released
20 Palestinian female detainees after Hamas presented,
through a German mediator, a film clip showing Israeli
Corporal Gilad Shalit alive and in good health. We
certainly welcome these developments.

We continue to stress that efforts on the Israeli-
Palestinian track must be situated within the broader
context of comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace. On the
ground, the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan was
quiet during the reporting period, although Israeli
settlement activity continues there. Syrian Deputy
Foreign Minister Faysal Mikdad met with senior
United States officials in Washington, DC, following
the General Assembly's general debate. After the Visit
of President Al-Assad to Saudi Arabia on
23 September, King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia arrived
in Syria on 7 October for a two-day summit with
President Al-Assad in an important visit for the region.

Let me now turn to developments in Lebanon. On
16 September, Lebanese President Sleiman reappointed
parliamentary majority leader Saad Hariri as Prime
Minister-designate. Mr. Hariri has since been engaged
in intense consultations with all parliamentary factions
aimed at reaching agreement on the composition of a
new Cabinet and its programme. We continue to
09-55731

believe that the early formation of a Government
supported by all is critical to enabling the country to
face important challenges in the political, economic,
social and security spheres.

On 7 October, eight people were wounded when a
rocket-propelled grenade exploded in the J abal Mohsen
neighbourhood of Tripoli. There was also a hand-
grenade blast in another neighbourhood of the city.
While these incidents were contained, they are an
ongoing test of Lebanon's stability. Efforts to
reconstruct the Nahr el-Bared refugee camp have been
further delayed by the discovery of archaeological
artefacts. The Secretary-General remains hopeful that
the reconstruction of Nahr el-Bared can resume
without further delay.

The situation in the area of operations of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
generally remains quiet. In the evening of 12 October,
an explosion took place at a residential building in the
village of Tayr Filsay, just south of the Litani River.
The cause and circumstances of the incident are not yet
entirely clear. If it was due to the explosion of a rocket
or ammunition, this would be a clear violation of
resolution 1701 (2006). UNIFIL, in close cooperation
with the Lebanese Armed Forces, is conducting an
investigation into the incident, which is still ongoing.
UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces are continuing
intensified operational activities in sensitive areas from
which rockets could be launched. Israeli air violations
continue on a daily basis.

Efforts to resume the political track are
continuing, and have our full support. However, the
pattern of events over the past month in the Middle
East is a powerful reminder that without a credible
political horizon - including commitments made,
monitored and kept on the ground, and a calling to
account when obligations are breached - forces of
violence, tension and extremism on both sides will fill
the vacuum.

Now more than ever, it is vital that politics be
made credible and that those who try to undermine
politics by changing facts on the ground or resorting to
violence not be allowed to set the agenda. The United
Nations will continue to work for a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East, achieved through
negotiations that are based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002),
1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008), previous agreements, the
5
Madrid framework, the Road Map and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

We believe that robust third-party support will be
helpful to the parties, and that the end goal of a two-
State solution, based on the 1967 lines and the
resolution of all core issues, can and must emerge
quickly and meaningfully. If we do not go forward
decisively towards the two-State solution, we may go
back to more violence, suffering and the loss of hope.
Once extinguished, that hope will be very difficult to
rekindle.

