Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, allow me first to convey to you the
sincere thanks of the delegation of Guinea for your
warm congratulations on the occasion of the
proclamation of the African Union at Durban.

The present meeting attests to the interest the
States Members of our Organization attach to the
question of the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH). This meeting enables us to exchange
views on considerations concerning the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court in relation to the
peacekeeping operations.

The international community's engagement in the
Balkans amply testifies to its determination to find a
lasting solution to the problems in that part of the
world, including in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
various reports of the Secretary-General on UNMIBH
clearly depict the efforts deployed and the progress
made, as well as the challenges the Mission faces.

The unhindered adoption of Council resolutions
on UNMIBH and their implementation by the
international community have so far been possible only
thanks to the combined efforts of all. That dynamic
must continue in a spirit of responsibility. But the
recent discussion in the Security Council demonstrates
the delicacy and complexity of the question of
extending the mandate of UNMIBH. My delegation
considers that the question deserves a comprehensive
approach taking into account both its legal and its
political aspects.

The 1 July 2002 entry into force of the Rome
Statute, just four years after its adoption on 17 July
1998, proves the extent of the international
community's increasing determination to fight all
forms of impunity, particularly for war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide.

In fact, we must recall that the International
Criminal Court, unlike the ad hoc tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, is a permanent
court whose universality lies in the acceptance by
States of its Statute in the form of a treaty to which
they freely accede. It is precisely that relation of the
States parties to the treaty that gives the International
Criminal Court all its integrity and strength.

In conformity with the principles of international
law and bearing in mind the hierarchy of legal norms,
no Security Council resolution could therefore modify
a provision of an international treaty.

Moreover, my delegation fully appreciates the
importance of peacekeeping operations. It perfectly
understands the concerns of certain States not parties to
the Rome Statute, in relation to the possible appearance
of their citizens who are members of United Nations
peacekeeping forces before the International Criminal
Court, whose authority those States do not recognize.
However, we should underline that in accordance with
the principle of complementarity, national courts
maintain their primary responsibility for legal
proceedings and judgements.

Equally, we are conscious of the fundamental role
that those States play in peacekeeping operations
throughout the world, and we encourage them to
maintain their efforts.

Finally, my delegation shares the analysis made
by the Secretary-General at the 30 June 2002 public
meeting on UNMIBH, the extension of whose mandate
must not be linked to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court.

That is why it is now up to all of us to adopt an
approach that could reconcile the various aspects of the
triptych - the extension of the mandate of UNMIBH,
the preservation of the integrity of the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court and the safeguarding
of peacekeeping operations - while simultaneously
bearing in mind the need to preserve the credibility of
the United Nations.

