Mrs. Junod (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, as well as the members of
the Council, for having invited the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) to speak in this important debate.

(spoke in French)

The provision of protection and assistance to the
victims of armed violence - which is the raison d'etre of
the ICRC - depends upon the existence of a minimum of
security conditions for humanitarian personnel. That is why
this subject is particularly close to our hearts. The
deterioration of security conditions today raises a daily
challenge to humanitarian action in numerous contexts. Like
the protection of civilian populations, the protection of
humanitarian personnel is linked to a number of legal and
operational considerations that are to some extent the tools
to be used in trying to meet this challenge.

Allow me briefly to outline, not exhaustively, the
three major compartments of this toolbox: legal protection,
the implementation of and respect for law and, lastly, the
modalities for humanitarian action.

With regard to legal protection, it may be useful to
recall that the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their
Additional Protocols contain basic rules for the protection
of humanitarian personnel that are rooted in the principle
of protecting civilian populations against the effects of
hostilities. Civilians must be protected and respected in all
circumstances. To this general immunity are added
specific rules of protection covering individuals
participating in impartial humanitarian assistance actions.

Moreover, the red cross and red crescent emblems
confer special protection to medical facilities and
personnel, be they military or civilian. As the Council is
aware, these emblems, whose use is strictly governed by
international humanitarian law, also protect the activities
of the ICRC, as well as those of other components of the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement -
in other words, national Red Cross and Red Crescent
societies and their International Federation.

The Convention on the Safety of United Nations
and Associated Personnel, adopted by the General
Assembly in 1994, has bridged certain gaps. Fresh
thought is being given today to strengthening the
protection it provides. In that exercise it will be important
to take into account the relevant rules of international
humanitarian law, a good part of which fall under
customary law. The ICRC will be pleased to contribute its
expertise on this subject and will follow this work with
all the attention it deserves.

The law exists, however imperfect it may be. What
remains to be done is to implement it.

The protection of humanitarian personnel requires
concrete measures that States must enact in order to
reduce the numerous violations of law and to put an end
to the impunity of the perpetrators. Ratifying treaties,
adopting national legislation to make possible the
prosecution of war criminals and more effective
dissemination of legal rules are all sine qua non
conditions, as was emphasized repeatedly in this
morning's debate. It is important and encouraging to recall
in this regard that the Statute of the International Criminal
Court specifically stipulates that it is a war crime to
attack persons involved in humanitarian assistance
operations.

The last aspect that I would like to touch upon is
no less important, for it has to do with the modalities of
humanitarian action, which can have a decisive effect on
the security of humanitarian personnel. Effective
humanitarian action must be conducted neutrally,
impartially and independently. Rigorous respect for these
principles in such a way as to foster relations of trust with

 

the parties to a conflict is a key factor for the security of
humanitarian personnel. In order to gain a minimum level
of trust, the ICRC attaches great importance to the
establishment of a regular dialogue with all actors in the
field so that its mandate, its role as neutral intermediary and
the limits of its action can be clearly understood.

That approach, based on the acceptance of its
presence by all the parties involved, has led the ICRC to be
extremely prudent in taking measures of armed protection
for its personnel; these are taken only in situations where
there is a significant risk of banditry and when it is
genuinely vital for the victims it seeks to reach.

The ICRC remains firmly convinced that
humanitarian action must be clearly distinguished from the
use of force. This position, which is well known, is also
supported by a recent experience in which the ICRC was
forced to withdraw from a region and to evacuate its
representatives, whose security had been gravely
jeopardized due to the use of armed escorts by another
humanitarian organization that had chosen that option to
protect its own personnel.

I would also like to point out that, as we understand
it, a dialogue with all actors is not confined to the political
or military authorities, be they legal or de facto; it is also
a question of working transparently with all the other
humanitarian organizations present.

Day-to-day cooperation between the members of the
humanitarian community is another factor in reducing risks
and in this connection I would stress the importance of the
conduct of humanitarian personnel in the field, which
requires not only professionalism, but also a thorough
knowledge of the cultural context and customs. One can
never overemphasize the value of advice from locally
recruited personnel or the number of lives that such Wise
advice has saved.

In conclusion, I wish to note that the ICRC is
thinking more and more in terms of preventive strategy
through its network of regional delegations. In most cases,
these have already been in place for several years when a
crisis arises in a country, which allows us from the outset
to benefit from the trust of being known, particularly
through educational programmes on humanitarian law.
Hence, we are in a position to respond first and speedily to
the most urgent needs of the victims.

