Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from, French):
The Security Council is meeting, as it has done several
times over the past 12 months, to discuss a situation that
endangers the Middle East peace process, and to reaffirm
its wish for that process to continue on the basis of the
agreements enteredinto by the parties.
Security Council 37451h meeting
Fifty-second year 5 March 1997

The implementation of the Oslo agreement made it
possible to establish a lasting peace between Israelis and
Palestinians. Only a short time ago, that goal might have
seemed unreachable. Thanks to the determination and will
of a few individuals, dialogue and negotiation have
overtaken violence and confrontation. One of those
statesman, a Prime Minister of Israel, Yitzhalc Rabin, paid
for his commitment to peace with his life. Unfortunately,
there have been other victims on both sides in the violence
of recent months. This shows that the path to peace is a
tortuous one, a chaotic one; it shows too how essential it is
that no action or decision jeopardize this process, a process
which virtually all the States of the world support.

In our' View, the Israeli Government decision to
authorize the establishment of a new settlement at Jabal
Abu Gneim is not a step in the right direction. As we,
along with our European Union partners, have said, we
deeply deplore that decision, which runs counter to
international law and to guarantees that have been given.
While the signing of the Hebron agreement gave us hope
that the peace process would regain its momentum, this
decision creates new tensions on the ground and could
undermine the trust which must exist between the parties
and which is indispensable. In any negotiating process, it is
not good for an agreement -- which constitutes progress --
to be followed by a retrograde measure.

The question of Jerusalem, a holy city that is sacred
to three major religious, is clearly a particularly sensitive
one. In the context of the peace process, the parties agreed
to negotiate its status. Negotiations cannot accommodate
unilateral decisions; they cannot accommodate decisions
that prejudge the outcome of the discussions; nor can they
accommodate decisions that alter the status quo.

Until the parties Come to an agreement, East Jerusalem
remains subject to the principles set out in resolution
242 (1967), including the principle of the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by force. Moreover, we recall
that the Fourth Geneva Convention is applicable here, as
well as with respect to the other occupied territories.

We therefore urge all parties to the peace process to

do nothing that could complicate or slow down the process.

In the present case, we earnestly hope that the Israeli

authorities will understand that it is in the interest of all to

abandon the planned construction and to focus entirely on

the success of the forthcoming phases: the initial

redeployment of Israeli forces and specific-negotiations

between the parties onvthe many issues that remain to be

resolved, '

