Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, first, to welcome His Excellency Mr. Jose
Luis Guterres, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, and to thank him
for his statement to the Council. I would also like to
highlight the work carried out by Ms. Ameerah Haq.
As the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) until 9 June 2012, she did her
job with admirable devotion and commitment.

We also welcome Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen, the
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. I commend the work ofUNMIT and the United
Nations country team for its support of the efforts of the
people of Timor-Leste to consolidate peace, stability
and development - conditions that are essential to the
strengthening of the State. I also thank our colleague
Ambassador Baso Sangqu of South Africa for his
briefing on the visit of the Security Council to Timor-
Leste, which he led. We very much regret that we were
not able to participate in that visit.

This has been a particularly important year for
Timor-Leste. The holding of successful presidential
and parliamentary elections led to the formation of a
new Government and the renewal of Parliament. The
country celebrated the tenth anniversary of its restored
independence and the thirteenth anniversary of the
1995 referendum. Timor-Leste has also asssumed a
new regional leadership role, including in co-presided
the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and
Statebuilding, together with the Group of Seven Plus
fragile States. Those are commendable milestones. As
President Ruak has said, the key to those achievements
lies in the unity and resolve of the people of Timor-
Leste.

The United Nations, through a series of operations
and missions, has worked for more than 10 years in
close cooperation with the authorities and people
of Timor-Leste, supporting their efforts to emerge
from conflict and to build lasting peace and security,
creating robust democratic institutions, and developing
an inclusive and equitable socioeconomic system. The
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste will
come to an end on 31 December, but we wish to say that
we will continue to support the Government and people
of Timor-Leste in consolidating the successful process
of institution-building.

Timor-Leste has made much progress since
regaining independence and particularly since the 2006
crisis, which led to the creation of UNMIT. Tangible
proof of that is the progress made in restoring stability
and security, the return of thousands of internally
displaced persons, and the gradual reintegration into
civil life ofthe excluded members of the Falintil-Forcas
Armadas de Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL). The
Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) is continuing
to mature and to extend its reach throughout the country,
which has led to a drop in the crime rate. We have also
seen institution-building and human resources grow
in other State sectors, such as the judiciary, security
and governance. We have also seen the Parliament
become a dynamic forum for parliamentary debate,
with the participation of the Government coalition
and the opposition. All those achievements reflect the
unwavering commitment of the leadership and people
of Timor-Leste to democracy, the rule of law and the
creation of a secure and stable State.

Many challenges remain in Timor-Leste's path,
particularly in the four priority areas of UNMIT's
mandate. Certain gaps remain to be filled, due in part
to the ongoing limitations in available capacity and
human resources. We acknowledge that much progress
has been made in the security sector through legislation
defining the respective competencies of the F-FDTL,
the PNTL and other institutions. Sustainable capacity-
building is required in the justice sector, the economy
and the PNTL through the training of prosecutors,
judges, public defenders and private lawyers and
support for the Legal Training Centre and the Office of
the Provedor for Human Rights and Justice.

It is important to enhance access to justice,
especially for the most vulnerable groups, and to
promote accountability, especially for crimes against
humanity. It is therefore important for Parliament to
promptly resume the pending debates on legislation
on restitutions and to establish the institutions that
are to replace the Commission for Reception, Truth
and Reconciliation and the Commission of Truth and
Friendship. The Timor-Leste Strategic Development
Plan for 2011-2030 is a major step towards full
socioeconomic development and the creation of a
more inclusive and equitable system. My country
welcomes the establishment of the working group to
start discussions with the United Nations on matters
identified in the Joint Transition Plan for the post-2012
period, and of the National Planning Matrix.

The United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste is one of the most successful examples of United
Nations efforts to enhance stability, promote a culture
of democratic governance and facilitate political
dialogue. Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao's letter to the
Secretary-General on 20 September (S/2012/ 736, annex)
expressed the sincere gratitude of his Government
for the support it has received and stated that, as
of 31 December, there will no longer be a need for a
United Nations peacebuilding mission in Timor-Leste,
but that his country wants an innovative cooperative
partnership with the United Nations, focusing on
strengthening institutions and development. Successful
and effective collaboration among the people of Timor-
Leste, UNMIT and the United Nations country team has
made a decisive contribution to the successes obtained.
Now comes the consolidation process. Cooperative
work will have to continue to ensure the full fruition of
a sustainable, lasting peace.

