Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon (Republic of Korea): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his informative
briefing. I also listened carefully to the statements made
by the observer of Palestine and the representative of
Israel.

Three months have passed since Israel and
Palestine began negotiations in July. Although not
much information has been made available about the
details of the talks, the lack of information should
be understandable in the light of the long history
of 20 years of staggered negotiations. However, it
would be naive to simply assume that no news is
good news. The deteriorating security situation in
the West Bank, sporadic rocket fire from Gaza, and
intermittent violence and clashes, as well as continuing
settlement activities, make up the hard realities that
could potentially spoil the atmosphere at any time. The
Republic of Korea therefore calls for joint efforts to
build mutual confidence in parallel with the talks.

The biggest challenges, however, still lie ahead.
The moment of truth for both sides will come when they
must overcome long-standing hurdles on substantive
and sensitive issues. The role of the international
community will become more instrumental as the
negotiations make progress. We must encourage both
parties to seize this momentum to achieve the two-State
solution. Creative incentives for both parties must be
explored more vigorously to facilitate the negotiating
process. We expect that the Quartet will accelerate
its mediation efforts at an appropriate juncture. My
delegation sincerely hopes that both Israel and Palestine
will remain firmly committed and reach an agreement
within the agreed time frame.

On Syria, we welcome the fact that the initial phase
of the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) is under
way following the timely proposal of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and the Security Council's endorsement
ofajoint mission of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and the United Nations. The
Republic of Korea welcomes the appointment of Special
Coordinator Sigrid Kaag, and trust that she will play
a critical role in keeping the work of the mission on
track. Most importantly, we call on Syria to faithfully
fulfil its obligations under resolution 2118 (2013) and
as a member of the Chemical Weapons Convention. On
that note, we would like to reiterate the need to find out
who is responsible for the chemical weapons attacks in
Syria and hold them accountable.

Despite the recent progress, continued hostilities
and the use of force in Syria are adding to the death
toll and increasing human suffering. We strongly
condemn continued violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, especially against
women and children, who are the most affected by the
crisis. We support and welcome presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/15 of 2 October, and urge all parties
to the Syrian conflict to respond to it immediately.
We especially urge the Syrian authorities to take
immediate steps to facilitate humanitarian assistance
for various humanitarian actors on the ground by
lifting bureaucratic obstacles and granting cross-border
access.

The spillover of the humanitarian crisis to
neighbouring countries also remains a deep concern.
The deteriorating Syrian refugee situation is straining
the host countries not only socioeconomically, but
also politically. Among them, Lebanon and Jordan
are suffering the most as refugees from Syria
comprise approximately one-fourth and one-tenth
of their populations, respectively. The international
community must share the burden by stepping up its
effort to translate its pledges into action. We applaud
the neighbouring countries that continue to open their
borders, as well as those countries that are participating
in the resettlement of refugees from Syria.

Finally, we would like to underscore once again
that we should not be satisfied with the initial stages
of the elimination of chemical weapons in Syria. The
international community, especially the Security
Council, must take further steps to bring the Syrian
crisis to an end through a negotiated political solution
based on the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex).
In this respect, we hope that the "Geneva II" conference
will be held as soon as possible.

