Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
would first of all like to welcome you once again, Mr.
President, and to thank you for having organized this
meeting to consider a question that is at the heart of the
work of the United Nations and that of the Security
Council in particular, namely, the issue of sanctions
imposed by the Organization. This discussion comes at a
crucial time in the history of the Organization, which in
entering a new millennium has left behind a decade that
some have not hesitated to describe as the "sanctions
decade". The practice of imposing sanctions during the
1990s provided many lessons, because of both the
multitude of sanctions regimes established and the
unprecedented scope of some of those sanctions.

It is true that we have today reached a juncture
where it is time to take stock of the past and consider the
future with regard to recourse to sanctions. Sanctions are
clearly an instrument that has been made available to the
international community by the Charter, an approach
halfway between peaceful settlement and coercive action
to impose a solution to a problem or crisis that poses a
threat to international peace and security. However, since
the end of the cold war the United Nations has had much
more recourse to sanctions than it had before. Nine
sanctions regimes are now in force, and their
implementation is monitored by an equal number of
Security Council committees.

Among the international community there is a
consensus today that there needs to be some adjustments
in the way sanctions are now used. This is to be done to
obtain two essential goals: first, to gain a real awareness
of the impact of sanctions on the civilian population of
the target country, neighbouring third countries or other
important economic partners and, secondly, to improve
the effectiveness of sanctions.

Particularly in the light of the experience of the last
decade, we are now aware of the immensity of the
difficulties and the suffering endured by civilian
populations of target countries. We know that those
consequences may even include humanitarian tragedies
and the blockading of the entire economy of a targeted
country as a result of the imposition of a wide range of

 

sanctions over many years. The example of Iraq is very
instructive in this regard. For 10 years now that country has
been under the harshest and most comprehensive sanctions
regime ever imposed. This situation cannot continue. We
are also aware of the enormous impact of the imposition of
a sanctions regime on the immediate economic
neighbourhood, as well as on international economic and
commercial partners.
In addition to the Security Council, the General
Assembly has also deliberated on this issue. We all recall
that this culminated in September 1997 with the consensus
adoption of resolution 51/242, which pointed the way for
the introduction of a variety of revisions and improvements
to refine the use of the sanctions tool available to the
Organization. We think the solutions advocated at the time
by the General Assembly still have currency and relevancy.

Numerous discussions have been organized outside the
Organization on this issue. Those various forums have
decidedly given momentum to what now appears to be the
necessary reform of the use of sanctions. It is in this
context that we welcome the initiative taken by the Security
Council, under the leadership of your country, Mr.
President, to engage in an in-depth discussion of the
question of sanctions as a whole. That work is to be
entrusted to a Security Council working group.

In view of the varied work carried out and the
discussions that we have mentioned, we think that the
Council should base its future work on sanctions on the
following guidelines.

First, with regard to the conceptual framework of any
implementation of a sanctions regime, a certain number of
principles should be stressed, namely: keeping recourse to
sanctions as a final step, after all means of peaceful
settlement have been exhausted, pursuant to Chapter VI of
the Charter; delineating clear objectives of the measures to
be imposed; establishing clear conditions for the lifting of
sanctions and for their suspension, while suspension should
not take the place of lifting of sanctions - here we are
mindful of the case of Libya, where sanctions are still
legally in force although the country has complied with the
provisions of the Security Council resolutions; providing for
the gradual lifting of sanctions depending on the attainment
of the goals sought; envisaging as much as possible the
imposition of targeted sanctions; and that sanctions are not
an end in themselves, a point which has been made by
previous speakers, and therefore should be combined with
other political means as part of a comprehensive strategy to
attain the political goals outlined by the Security Council.

Secondly, we think that everything should be done
to limit the humanitarian impact of the planned sanctions
on civilian populations. The impact has to be evaluated
ahead of time, before the sanctions are imposed.
Evaluation has to be carried out periodically during the
implementation of the sanctions regime in order to
provide the necessary adjustments to it. In this context, a
series of exemptions should be provided for ahead of time
in the resolutions that impose the sanctions. This is the
case for the provision of basic humanitarian goods -
medicines, foodstuffs - and other exemptions that are
necessary for religious or other reasons.

Thirdly, there is the impact on third countries.
Notwithstanding Article 50 of the Charter, which
recognizes the right of all countries to consult the
Security Council with regard to a solution to economic
problems encountered as a result of the imposition of
sanctions on the target country, there is still no effective
mechanism to compensate for losses suffered by third
countries.

As the responsibility for the implementation of
sanctions is the collective responsibility of the
international community, it is entirely logical for the costs
of implementing sanctions to be borne by the international
community as a whole, and not just by a small number of
States, which happen to be the neighbours of the target
State or their economic partners. The idea of setting up a
compensation fund has already been put forward in the
General Assembly, and other ideas have been formulated,
such as special compensatory measures. All of these ideas
are interesting as we look for a specific solution to the
real problems of third countries affected by sanctions. We
think that the institutionalization of some appropriate
compensation procedure is still necessary.

Fourthly, turning now to the working methods of the
sanctions committees, we need to identify other
improvements here to strengthen transparency in these
committees, to improve their relationships and their
communication with other Member States and with
international organizations. Visits by the chairmen of the
sanctions committees to the regions concerned are also to
be encouraged - and the case of Canada comes to mind,
and the Visit made by Ambassador Fowler - in order to
investigate all aspects of implementation of the sanctions
regime on the ground, including by gathering first-hand
information about the impact of sanctions and their
results, and the difficulties encountered in applying them.

 

Fifthly, we need to devote the resources necessary to
give the United Nations Secretariat the necessary technical
and administrative means to enable it to carry out the
follow-up of the implementation of sanctions regimes
decided on by the Security Council.

In a word, we need to remove from sanctions any
punitive connotation, any idea of reprisals against peoples,
and make sure that they do not become a systematic
obstacle to development, in particular for the countries in
the south which suffer from the backlash of sanctions.
International peace and security are indivisible. They
certainly cannot be achieved by keeping entire peoples
under the yoke of suffering and under-development, which
themselves generate instability and tension.

These are the few comments I wanted to make on
behalf of my country. We believe that the working group
which we have just set up should get down to work as soon
as possible.

