Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina would like to start by thanking the
Panamanian presidency of the Security Council for the
month of February for organizing this debate, which
ratifies the political decision of this Council to put an
end to the suffering of children affected by armed
conflict.

We would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, and
the Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Ann Veneman,
for their comprehensive presentations on this complex
issue, as well as Ms. Jo Becker from Watchlist on
Children and Armed Conflict and the Coalition to Stop
the Use of Child Soldiers for the information she has
shared with us.

More than two years since the adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005), we welcome the progress made
in the protection of children affected by armed conflict
through the joint action of States and the mechanisms
created by the United Nations system, with the
invaluable contribution of civil society. We must
commend the actions taken by some national
Governments to put an end to crimes committed
against children in armed conflict and to bring
perpetrators to justice. We must also highlight the
activities of civil society in gathering information on
the situation of children in territories affected by armed
conflict and in denouncing the abuses to which
children are subject. It is indispensable to guarantee
their safety, as well as that of the victims and their
families, when denouncing such acts in order to
guarantee the proper functioning of the justice system
and avoid impunity.

Argentina places the highest importance in the
promotion and protection of the rights of girls and
boys, both in its national plans and strategies centred
on the family as the basic unit of society, as well as
through its ongoing support for and participation in all
international initiatives aimed at ensuring the
opportunity for all children to enjoy a childhood
effectively free from violence.

In that regard, we note that, in spite of the
progress made, it is necessary to strengthen the
measures for the protection of children affected by
armed conflict in the framework of an integral
approach that cannot be limited to the security aspects
and must include political, juridical and
socio-economic measures.

Regarding the implementation of resolution 1612
(2005) of the Security Council and the functioning of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
Argentina believes that progress is needed with regard
to the following.

First, the Security Council must reiterate the clear
message to all responsible parties that the international
community will not tolerate any further violation of the
rights of children in conflict. We are persuaded that the
presidential statement to be adopted by the Council at
the end of this debate will serve that purpose.

Secondly, it is necessary to deepen the political
and financial commitment of Member States in support
of the monitoring and reporting mechanism and to keep
it operational in all situations of armed conflict.

Thirdly, it is imperative to achieve the full
implementation of all monitoring and reporting
mechanisms on children affected by armed conflict of
the Working Group, as provided for in resolution 1612
(2005).

Fourthly, the Security Council must incorporate
into the mandate of the Working Group those situations
where may arise any of the six categories of grave
violations: the recruitment and use of child soldiers,
rape and other grave sexual violence, the killing and
maiming of children, abductions, attacks against
schools or hospitals, and denial of humanitarian access
to children.

Fifthly, we have confirmed the valuable
contribution that the presence of child protection
advisers can make in terms of obtaining timely and
precise information that allows for the prompt
undertaking of promotion activities and a rapid
response to diverse situations in order to protect

children affected by armed conflict, as well as
contributing to their prevention. Thus, it is necessary to
consider their incorporation into the mandates of all
relevant future peacekeeping missions and political
missions.

Sixthly, it is necessary to strengthen
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes so that victims have a real opportunity to
rejoin society with sufficient funding and practical
efficient mechanisms that produce sustainable results
in the long term.

Combating impunity and finding justice are at the
heart of any effective response to prevent and end
violations of human rights in any situation. In that
regard, we believe it is essential to explore all means of
bringing perpetrators to justice. That includes the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court in
appropriate cases.

Violations of the rights of children in situations
of conflict not only affect peace and security, they also
have dire consequences for the present and future
development of affected societies. The heightened
vulnerability of those children makes them easy targets
when it comes to increasing the number combatants, as
well as regards forced labour and sexual exploitation.
The exploitation of children, either in an armed
conflict or in any other situation is unspeakable,
inexcusable and an affront that goes to the very heart
of the common values that all our societies share.

Argentina therefore reiterates its ongoing
commitment to the protection of children from all
forms of violence. We also reiterate our readiness to
continue to cooperate with the Working Group chaired
by the delegation of France, as we did from 2005 to
2006 as an elected member of the Council and as we
reiterated recently through the submission of our 2007
national report and our support for the adoption of
concrete steps towards improving the life of children
who are being affected daily by the consequences of
conflict.

