Mr. Morales Troneoso (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): The Dominican Republic conveys
its deep appreciation to the Government of Colombia
for having organized today's meeting at this critical
juncture in Haiti's history.

The Dominican Republic fully supports the
presidential statement that the Council has just adopted
(S/PRST/2011/7). At the same time, we thank you, Sir,
for your efforts to reflect the balance of views on Haiti,
which poses one of the most pressing challenges to
peace and security in the Americas.

We welcome the report of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon (S/201l/183*) and reiterate that all measures
adopted must be in benefit of the Haitian people
themselves. The Dominican Republic also wishes to
reiterate its appreciation for the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which
has been no less effective in fulfilling its role, despite
the heavy human and financial losses it suffered in the
tragic earthquake in January 2010.

Less than two months ago, in February, the
Dominican Republic took part in another open debate,
held here and organized during the Brazilian
presidency of the Security Council (see S/PV.6479), on
the need to create a peacebuilding strategy based on the
interdependence between security and development in
all its aspects. The Dominican Republic once again
calls for a sustainable peace in Haiti that is based on
sustainable human development. We call for a
development process that ensures equal opportunities
for all Haitians in Haiti, with political stability,
harmony with the natural environment and the creation
of decentjobs for all Haitians.

Creating equal opportunities for all Haitians
requires the Government to ensure their access to basic
public services, such as water, education, electricity,
health care and security. It also means that all Haitians
living abroad will have an opportunity to return to
Haiti and enjoy the same rights and obligations
enjoyed by all Dominicans returning to their own
country, and to contribute their knowledge and
resources to the development process.

For Haitians, harmony with their natural
environment means having a non-polluting energy
infrastructure, as mentioned earlier this morning, the
duly remunerated and distributed use of non-renewable
resources, and the preservation of forests for the
enjoyment of present and future generations. Also
important is job creation that enables all business
entrepreneurs and workers to live in due dignity both
during and after their working life.

Dominican investments by Grupo M. in the border
area between Ouanaminthe and Dajabon have
generated over 8,000 jobs for Haitians in Haiti. That
was made possible through the firm support of
President Pre'val during the past five years of his
Government.

Furthermore, the disbanding of the army two
decades ago led to the emergence of criminal networks
that have been engaging in a renewed level of activity
since the earthquake. That has led to increased flows of
illicit substances and illegal weapons across Haiti, as
indicated by President Preval and the Secretary-
General in paragraph 14 of his report (S/2011/183*).

Human and financial capital has been
continuously flowing out of Haiti. We are all aware
that no country can develop without sufficient human
and financial capital. No amount of foreign aid, even
when delivered effectively and in a timely manner, can
compensate for a lack of domestic capital.

As we said in Montreal 14 months ago,
environmental degradation continues to pose the main
threat to the survival of human settlements in Haiti.
Ancestral practices of slash-and-burn agriculture have
depleted soil fertility. The burning of forests to produce
coal has left barely 2 per cent of Haitian territory with
forest cover. The result has been food and nutritional
insecurity, a greater risk of floods and environmental
migration.

Once again we call, as we did in Montreal, for all
international organizations and bilateral donors
cooperating with Haiti to increase the priority they give
to reversing the environmental problem. The
introduction of new agricultural practices and plant
varieties that can renew soil fertility requires special
attention. Haitians also urgently need alternative
sources of energy that would eliminate, once and for
all, the use of charcoal. On the other side of the border
there is an alternative to chopping down trees: the
connection of Haiti to the Dominican electrical and
natural gas distribution networks, to radically
transform the Haitian energy matrix.
With a sustainable peace ["pais" ??] in Haiti we
would have a prosperous, developing Haiti that we all
want, with equal opportunities, harmony with the
environment and jobs for all Haitians. Thus our
Binational Joint Commission - which resumed at the
end of July last year - is eager to resume its work on
the vast agenda of topics of mutual interest to our sister
Republic of Haiti and the Dominican Republic. All our
peoples, just today, have demonstrated their solidarity
in the face of disaster. President Preval, President
Santos, the Dominican Republic is ready for a
prosperous Haiti. Let us now work together as equals
in building the solid institutions required to have two
nations, two States, on the island of Hispafiola.

