I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons for the remarks. I commend you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative to invite Mr. Mohseni to brief us today and to offer a perspective of Afghanistan's dynamic and, as you heard, a vibrant civil society and media. I was really struck by his vision of a peaceful Afghanistan where the Afghan people can be free from war and are able to reach their full potential. I was also struck by the polling that he set out for us that tells us what the people of Afghanistan really want for their future. I think it is important that we in the Security Council listen to and reflect on that. I thought his vision clarified for us the objectives of the Afghan peace process, which we are all eager to support. We - the Afghan people and the international community - are not working towards an end to conflict alone, vital though that is. We are working to ensure that Afghans of all ethnicities, tribes, sexes and backgrounds can live in a country at peace where they can trust well-governed, accountable institutions, where they can enjoy the full extent of their fundamental human rights and where they can build their own future for themselves, for their families and for their communities. For that reason, it is essential that the upcoming intra-Afghan negotiations be fully inclusive and lead to a long-lasting and sustainable peace. That means ensuring effective and timely transitional justice for the victims of conflict and the protection and advancement of rights, such as the freedom of expression, as Mr. Mohseni highlighted today. It also means that groups that suffered so much under Taliban rule must be able to have confidence that their rights will be protected. That is why the United Kingdom, as co-Chair of the Group of Friends of Women of Afghanistan, has made the participation of women and girls in the peace process and the protection of their rights such a priority here in New York, as well as in Afghanistan in the work of our Embassy in Kabul. I take this opportunity to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons for her participation in the Arria Formula meeting on this issue that we co-hosted with Afghanistan, Germany and Indonesia in July. That is the vision, and today we are closer than ever before to achieving it. We were glad to hear from Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons that the intra-Afghan negotiations will start within days. Afghanistan and its people potentially stand on the threshold of a new beginning. As Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons said, we have more reason than ever to hope for an end to conflict. But we also stand at the beginning of a process that will be long and challenging. It will require the support of all of us. We commend the Afghan Government for taking the bold steps to remove obstacles that have allowed this moment to happen. We also commend the negotiating team of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan for its preparations, including outreach to women's groups and other civil society actors across the country. We note the continuing efforts to form the Cabinet and the High Council for National Reconciliation and hope both can be fully established and begin their work swiftly. However, there are two sides to this negotiation. Let me emphasize that the Taliban, too, must demonstrate that they are a credible partner for peace. That means the following. First, they must end the violence now. They cannot expect to be accepted back into Afghan society when they continue to attack and harm Afghan men, women and children. Secondly, they must fulfil the commitment to countering terrorism by completely breaking with all terrorist groups, including Al-Qaida, and condemning all acts of terrorism in Afghanistan, which continue to claim too many innocent lives. Thirdly, they must engage in good faith in the upcoming negotiations. With regard to the roles of the United Kingdom and the international community, for its part, the United Kingdom stands ready to provide its support at any stage of the upcoming peace process. We also lend our full backing to the work of Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons and the United Nations in supporting the talks. As one of the largest donors in Afghanistan, the United Kingdom is providing assistance via the United Nations Global Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID-19 and, with our partners, we are planning how we can support Afghanistan in mitigating both the immediate health impact and, critically, as Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons said, the severe socioeconomic effects. We are also working closely with Finland, the United Nations and other partners to prepare for the meetings later this year to secure Afghanistan's immediate financial stability and set out the future parameters of the international donor communities' medium-term support for Afghanistan. Yesterday in London, the United Kingdom created the new Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office. We will continue to bring the best of our diplomacy and development expertise to support the people of Afghanistan as they stand at this crucial juncture. We join Mr. Mohseni and Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons in their pragmatic and cautious optimism.
