Mr. Castro Salazar (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I would like thank the delegation of Brazil
for convening this open debate. My country commends
this initiative, which reflects Brazil's international
leadership and its relevant contributions to global
discussions. I would like to thank the representative of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the representative
of the World Bank.

I should also like to highlight the linkages between
the subject of our discussion today and the debate on
institution-building as a means of peacebuilding (see S/PV.6472), which was held on 21 January at the
initiative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

That is consistent with of our commitment to
human security. We therefore associate ourselves with
the statement to be made by Ambassador Norachit
Sinhaseni, Permanent Representative of Thailand, on
behalf of the Human Security Network.

Costa Rica is convinced that a better approach to
the challenges of development will generate greater
security, just as a more balanced and civilian-oriented
approach to security generates development.
The most urgent problems related to violence and
insecurity more easily take root, and grow especially
unmanageable, in countries and regions with a
pronounced lack of opportunities. Problems such as
piracy in various parts of the Indian Ocean and the
recruitment of young people into violent gangs linked
to drug trafficking in some Latin American countries
are, in great measure, consequences of that lack of
options.

Furthermore, the lack of solid democratic
institutions and respect for civil and political rights, the
distortion of national priorities and the lack of
connections between those who govern and those who
are governed hinder development, produce insecurity
and generate conflicts that can have global
repercussions. A consideration of the link between
development and security, including coherent actions,
should therefore also include dimensions relating to the
rule of law, improving institutions, a culture of
tolerance and democratic practices.

The problems of development and security in the
developing world are stunning, but their contributing
factors are not solely home-grown. A large number of
the weapons that kill and mutilate innocent people in
developing countries and also serve to increase
violence and generate conflict in those countries are
manufactured in developed countries, including some
with long-standing democratic institutions and
Governments characterized by a high level of integrity.
Some of those countries also serve as the main markets
for drugs and as facilitators for money laundering.
Others practice immigration policies that often
encourage human trafficking.

Having referred to those issues, it is not my
intention to fix blame. Costa Rica believes that we
ourselves are primarily responsible for our successes
and failures. However, we are convinced that
entrenching security requires that we promote
development, good governance and a comprehensive
approach to conflict - all of which require greater
coordination at the global level, better legal
instruments and more focused multilateral action. To
achieve that, the United Nations needs to take several
courses of action. I should like to refer to a few. They
are to work on both preventive diplomacy and
preventive development; to move from peace processes
towards development processes, including institutional
development; to set up integrated and multidimensional
missions; to ensure the organic involvement of civil
society and non-governmental organizations; and to
work seriously on disarmament and arms control
policies. No less important are efforts at sustainable
development, with a clear human dimension.

In some of those tasks, the Security Council has
very clear mandates and resources, and has issued very
significant statements. In others, responsibilities and
action belong to other bodies, ranging from the General
Assembly or the Secretariat to specialized
organizations. We must also bear in mind the
contribution of entities outside the framework of the
United Nations.

During the past 10 years, global military
expenditures increased by 45 per cent to the outrageous
sum of $1531 trillion in 2009. If 10 per cent of those
resources had been devoted to attaining the Millennium
Development Goals, we would be very close to their
achievement. Costa Rica therefore emphasizes efforts
such as the negotiation and adoption of an arms trade
treaty. My country's interest in international peace and
disarmament instruments stems from considerable
experience of the close interdependence between
security and development. Sixty-two years ago, when
Costa Rica abolished its army as a standing institution
and earmarked the majority of Government resources
for the well-being of its citizens, it put into practice a
security paradigm linked to development.

Our security system is founded on two basic
pillars. Domestically, it is based on social cohesion and
implicit agreement on collective adherence to
democracy, human rights, opportunities, sustainable
development and capacity-building. We have entrusted
the second, external, pillar to international law, in
particular to collective security systems and
international tribunals.

That paradigm has produced significant progress
on human development, within a context of peace and
democracy. Nothing will divert us from that path,
which is currently being severely tested. Little more
than 100 days ago, our country suffered a foreign
armed intervention. Part of our territory is still
occupied.

In the face of that serious situation, Costa Rica
has maintained its good sense and its faith in
international law and the multilateral system. We trust
in their effectiveness and in international solidarity to
protect peace and to promote the development of
Central America. If international security is not
grounded in respect for the law, it can be based only on
balancing force, which is as fragile for peace as it is
unproductive for the development and well-being of
peoples.
