Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I deliver this statement
on behalf of the African members of the Security
Council - Cote d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea and
South Africa. We would like to thank the briefers
this morning for their comprehensive briefings and
for particularly re-emphasizing the importance of
respecting international humanitarian law. We would
also like to welcome the Federal Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Germany, Mr. Heiko Maas.

Allow us to also thank Poland for organizing this
briefing on international humanitarian law on the
seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions. The
four Geneva Conventions of 1949 form the cornerstone
of international humanitarian law. They have been
complemented by the two Protocols Additional of 1977
and Protocol III Additional of2005. Their adoption in the
aftermath of the Second World War firmly established
that those who are not, or no longer, taking direct part
in hostilities - the sick and prisoners of war, including
civilians living under occupation - must be protected
and their dignity upheld without adverse distinction.

We wish underscore that all parties involved in
armed conflict are obligated to respect international
humanitarian law in all circumstances. We are
disturbed by reports of war crimes in some parts of the
world and the tremendous harm inflicted on civilian
populations and vulnerable persons, which illustrate
blatant violations of international humanitarian law.
Thousands of people continue to bear the brunt of
armed conflict, particularly women and children, and
have been forced to leave their homes, sometimes
taking extreme and dangerous routes to seek refuge
in safer countries far away. In addition, victims and
their communities must be given access to resources in
order to limit the negative effects that such crimes have
on societies.

In some armed conflicts, parties to conflict have
often resorted to the recruitment of children and have
used sexual exploitation and abuse as a method of
war. Ensuring respect for international humanitarian
law has been extremely challenging in such conflicts,
and there is a clear serious compliance deficit. The
international community has the obligation to address
the situation urgently.

We remain grateful to the International Committee

of the Red Cross (ICRC) and Mr. Peter Maurer for their
continued commitment to preserve human lives, dignity
and well-being. We commend the ICRC's outstanding
work in its quest to reach people who urgently seek
humanitarian assistance and relief. The ICRC continues
to contribute to the development and implementation
of international mechanisms and frameworks for
providing effective humanitarian assistance to people
who are negatively affected by war and armed conflict,
particularly women and children.

Conflicts have evolved in recent years. The new
emerging nature of conflicts and the resurgence in
violations of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, which compels people
to seek refuge elsewhere, is a matter of concern. We
have witnessed an upsurge in violent extremism and
terror attacks in which thousands of innocent civilians
are targeted by armed terrorist groups.

In this new era of extremism, the respect that has
existed historically for aid workers, medical personnel,
schools, hospitals and other essential civilian facilities
is no longer abided. Our historical heritage and cultural
property continue to be indiscriminately decimated.
At the same time, communities that have traditionally
lived in peace are now turning against one another
violently as they compete for access to resources.

Some armed conflicts are playing out in Africa and
delaying the achievement of peace and security as key
prerequisites for Africa's prosperity. This challenge
is becoming more alarming with the changing face of
contemporary armed conflicts. Modern technology has
brought about many positive developments but, on the
grim side, it is increasingly characterized by the use of
an array of new and lethal methods of warfare, including
remote-controlled weapons and automated systems that
contribute decisively to the dehumanization of war.
Their use and the destruction that they can cause have
serious legal, ethical, moral and practical implications
for international humanitarian law.

We underscore the need to respect international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
by all parties to armed conflict. Access to people in
distress in conflict areas by humanitarian workers
remains a serious challenge and cause for concern. As
members of the Security Council, we need to ensure
unfettered access to and the prioritization of security
for humanitarian workers in key areas. Otherwise, such
insecurity will persistently hinder efforts to provide
humanitarian assistance to people in need of relief.

The root causes of war crimes, including abject
poverty, the violation of women's rights and political
corruption, must be addressed. The best way to ensure
respect for international humanitarian law and to end
the suffering of civilians and vulnerable persons is
to prevent armed conflict. Conflict prevention and
inclusive dialogue remain critical mechanisms that
have proven to be effective in averting possible deadly
conflicts when combined with strong political will and
support from regional and international partners.

The Council has the responsibility to redouble its
efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts in its quest to
maintain international peace and stability.

We cannot overemphasize the fact that
accountability is critical to ensuring respect for
international humanitarian law. Likewise, impunity
must be eliminated. The responsibility to end impunity
by prosecuting alleged perpetrators for crimes against
humanity and war crimes lies first with States,
including through improved ways of carrying out
mutual legal assistance.

In conclusion, the Geneva Conventions and the
relevant Protocols are strongly supported. Our aim
should be for respect for international humanitarian
law to be strengthened and enhanced. We believe that
the relevance of the Geneva Conventions remains
intact in their seventieth year of existence and that
their implementation should be encouraged in order to
ensure the continued protection of civilians.

