First, I would like to welcome His Excellency Minister Heiko Maas and the honourable Ministers from France, Tunisia, Estonia, the United Kingdom and Viet Nam to this important meeting. I thank France for its successful presidency in June and congratulate Germany on having assumed the presidency of the Security Council this month. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres; the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer; and the African Union Commissioner for Social Affairs, Amira Elfadil Mohammed, for their briefings. This meeting is taking place as we are entering the so-called "new normal". As that term implies, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has touched many aspects of our lives in a profound way: the global economy is predicted to contract by 6 to 7 per cent, and the humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate. The Secretary-General has also been clear on how the COVID-19 pandemic has far-reaching impacts, including on the maintenance of peace and security. We have to come to terms with this new reality and do our utmost to prepare for the occurrence of pandemics in the future. The pandemic is raging as we celebrate 75 years of the United Nations. So the biggest question is: will we be able to emerge stronger together? I would like to outline three lessons learned. First, we must formulate a coordinated international response. The United Nations, as a multilateral body, must rise to this task. Indonesia, along with five other Members of the United Nations, took the initiative of launching the first General Assembly resolution on global solidarity to fight the coronavirus - resolution 74/270. Indonesia fully supports the Secretary-General's call for an immediate global ceasefire, which has received a great deal of support. We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) by the Security Council just yesterday in support of that call, albeit long overdue. We thank Tunisia and France as well as the others that made this possible. We must ensure that this call translates into real action by all parties to put armed conflict on lockdown. We should also support the efforts by the Secretary-General and his representatives to resolve conflict and pursue sustainable peace. We commend the efforts of the United Nations peacekeeping missions on the ground in assisting host countries during the pandemic in close consultation with the countries concerned. We underline what the Secretary-General mentioned on the importance of ensuring the safety of missions and peacekeepers. We also agree with the Secretary-General on the issue of biological conventions, as well as on the importance of resolution 1540 (2004). We have always championed community engagement and are quite happy to hear that position echoed just now by Mr. Maurer, President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, particularly with regard to the importance of building trust and ensuring effective responses. Secondly, we must manage disruptions following the pandemic. We still only have raw data, and projections are still unclear on when the pandemic will dissipate. While there is ongoing research to find a cure and develop a vaccine, the impact of COVID-19 will likely persist long after and will create disruptions in many areas. If not carefully managed, countries in conflict or post-conflict situations may see the reversal of gains due to the pandemic. In addition, the implementation of mitigation and containment strategies may have unintended results, including greater strain on the capacity of States to ensure the security of their people, and the perpetuation of conditions that could lead to insecurity and instability. That is why it is critical to effectively address likely scenarios and pressures in the coming period. Thirdly, we need a long-term comprehensive strategy. The COVID-19 pandemic has made us reluctantly aware of our fragility. Many countries that faced instability before the pandemic are aware of the myriad political, economic, social and security challenges. We must continue to equip ourselves to address and prevent such challenges by developing and implementing a long-term comprehensive strategy to alleviate the humanitarian situation, to ensure the provision of basic needs, including health-care facilities and treatment, and to improve people's socioeconomic conditions. Lastly, the main lesson we must learn the hard way is that the pandemic is a test of our solidarity and ability to reach multilateral solutions. No one is immune, and no one alone can prevail. We must work together and enhance international cooperation - not only for now but for the long haul - in order to be safe and healthy, and to find a cure, develop a vaccine and produce them for distribution. We must ensure the transfer of knowledge from vaccine producers to others in order to encourage the development of affordable vaccines and create a fair mechanism for its distribution so that countries obtain fair and equitable access to vaccines and medicines. I am glad this important point was also highlighted by Ms. Mohammed, Observer of the African Union. We must ensure that all people from every corner of the world, from remote regions to conflict areas, are given a fair chance to face these pandemic-related challenges. Only through concerted efforts can we tackle these enormous challenge in this unprecedented time. No one should be left behind. We are in this together. Multilateralism now is being tested more than ever.
