Mr. Rovensky (Czech Republic): First of all, let me
express my delegation's delight in seeing you, Sir, presiding
over today's important meeting of the Council. At the same
time, we congratulate your delegation on the assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. You have our full support and confidence. I
would also like to express our high appreciation for the
effective and business-like manner in which Ambassador
Cardenas of Argentina guided the affairs of the Council
during January.

Finally, let me welcome sincerely the Foreign Minister
of Angola and all the members of the ministerial delegation
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to the Security
Council.
The signing of the Lusaka Protocol on
20 November 1994 opened the path towards peace and
stability in Angola. The resolution which the Council has
just adopted marks a very important step forward along
this path. By authorizing the establishment of the new
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) peace-keeping operation, the international
community - and, on its behalf, the Security Council -
has firmly committed itself to aid the process of national
reconciliation in Angola.

But let me stress that even the best-drafted Security
Council resolution cannot in itself guarantee the success
of the political settlement in Angola and the return of
lasting peace and prosperity to this long-suffering African
country. It is none other than the Government of Angola
and the leaders of UNITA who bear primary
responsibility for the success or failure of the peace
process. It is up to them to make sure that the letter and
the spirit of the Lusaka agreements are scrupulously
adhered to in the months ahead. The United Nations and
its Security Council will of course support them in their
quest for lasting peace and reconciliation. However, this
role cannot but be a supporting one and should be
understood as such by the Angolan parties.

The Angolan parties also carry the primary
responsibility for the safety and freedom of movement of
United Nations and other personnel deployed under
UNAVEM. III. We hope that the intended meeting
between the President of Angola, Mr. dos Santos, and the
leader of UN ITA, Mr. Savimbi, will give new impetus to
the peace process.

The Czech Republic welcomes the first successful
steps taken by both parties in the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol. However, we are concerned by
indications that, a mere few weeks into the
implementation of the Protocol, the process is already
slipping behind schedule. It would hardly be acceptable
for this trend to continue. It is necessary for the Angolan
parties to implement the Lusaka Protocol in accordance
with the agreed timetable and even to try to accelerate the
whole process.

We believe that the OAU has an important role to
play in pushing the peace process in Angola forward.
Based on lessons from the past, the United Nations and
the OAU have to work together to bring peace, stability
and development to Angola and the region. After the
flourishing of peace and democracy in Mozambique,
successful national reconciliation and the strengthening of
democracy in Angola would represent another positive
example for Africa, which presently is the theatre of more
internal conflicts than any other part of the world.

 

Based on the Secretary-General's overall positive
evaluation of the situation in Angola, as indicated in his
report, the Czech Republic, whose military observers
actively participated in UNAVEM. II operations, fully
supports the deployment of UNAVEM. III. We expect in
particular at this stage that the cease-fire arrangements will
be meticulously implemented by both sides in good faith.

The fact that a number of countries have expressed
their readiness to contribute their personnel and material to
UNAVEM. III is an encouraging sign of confidence in the
process of national reconciliation in Angola. We are
grateful that this confidence is reflected in the language of
our resolution. We consider it important that the resolution
was drafted very carefully and that the Security Council
took into consideration all important elements needed not
only for an early launch of this new peace-keeping
operation, but also for its effective functioning and its
successful conclusion. We also underline that, in accordance
with this resolution, the Security Council will be ready to
review the role of the United Nations in Angola if the
cooperation required from the parties is not forthcoming or
is substantially delayed.

We do not forget the fact that many Angolan civilians
are in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. We urge both
parties to create, with the assistance of international
humanitarian organizations, conditions which would
facilitate the return of thousands of displaced Angolans to
their homes.

In conclusion, I should like to convey our deep
appreciation to the Secretary-General, the troika of observer
States - Portugal, the United States of America and the
Russian Federation - and the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, for having
contributed greatly to the success of the negotiating process.

