Mr. Monchotte (spoke in French): The Permanent
Representative of Malaysia asked a question as to the
progress made in connection with the judicial police.
While undeniable progress has been achieved in
capacity-building, there is still room for progress. It is
for that reason that we particularly support capacity-
building in the area of judicial intelligence, training,
crime-scene investigation and forensics.

I can give a concrete example of such progress.
Recently there was a mass jailbreak from some of
the national prisons. We carried out a large-scale
operation that, without the intelligence gathered by the
Haitian National Police, would not have been possible
to the same extent. We also used a third-dimension
observation capacity provided by our component's
recently created drone units, with a view to the partner
taking ownership.

I will now turn to the question posed by the
Permanent Representative of Uruguay on the
drawdown strategy, which is based on an assessment
of the competencies taught. While the situation is not
the same for the military component, there is a need
for in-depth consideration of what has been taken on
board by the partner. We are working regularly on this
issue, and the elaboration of the strategic development
plan accords with this. So the outlook is positive here,
but I think that we need to take the time to carry out
an evaluation in order to be able to better assess the
situation when the time comes.

The Permanent Representative of Japan asked what
successes have been achieved and what lessons have
been learned. I would refer first to the progress made
in democratic crowd control. We have put in place a
protocol that gives priority to the involvement of the
Haitian police force. Since I arrived, and even before
then, United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
forces have not been deployed on the front lines. So
the partner has taken ownership of best operating
procedures, although we still need to make progress in
that area.

The lessons learned from this include, first, those
from the ongoing contacts that we have owing to the
co-location of Haitian law-enforcement units with
specialists from our police component; and the second
lesson is the importance of the close contact I have with
the Director General, which, when there are specific
problems - I will come back to this issue later- makes
it possible to enhance our capacity to respond.

Another example that I think is a positive one is the
fact that ownership has been taken of the drafting of the
upcoming 2017-2021 strategic plan. While other plans
required substantial support, this most recent one is
currently being drawn up in a much more autonomous
way by the partner, although we are still providing
some support.

As to the question raised by the President of the
Security Council, which concerns the situation in the
south of the country, of course that event complicated
an already complex situation. It was completely
unforeseen, brutal and sudden. We had to rethink
the situation very quickly and, although we had been
involved mainly in preparations for the elections,
respond in an appropriate way. As I was saying a
moment ago, we immediately and decisively contacted
the Director General of the national police in order
to coordinate our efforts. I had to redeploy personnel
while taking account of the capacity available in terms
of resilience and of the support to be provided to
those units that were most affected by this unexpected
climatic event. That is why I redeployed the Rwandan
contingent; some of its forces were in Les Cayes, which
was slightly less affected than the town of Je're'mie,
where they were usually located.

The vacuum created by this redeployment, which
was absolutely necessary in order to support the
department affected, that of Grande Anse, was filled by
the dispatch of 65 Senegalese gendarmes, representing
a formed police unit in Port-au-Prince. Since they were
already located in Les Cayes, I preferred to use those
elements. Of course, I sent individual police officers as
reinforcements, and all of this was done in coordination
with the Haitian police.

I should like to touch for a moment on the linguistic
challenge that we face, as it is important. It is up to
the troop-contributing countries to make every effort
to ensure that on the ground, in the Mission, police
officers can benefit from all the distance training that
is available, for example, the Rosetta Stone system. We
have to recognize the efforts made by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations on this issue, and I think
that the initiative on joint coordination efforts with the
International Organization of la Francophonie is very
interesting in this regard.

