Mr. Deng (South Sudan): Since this is the first
time that my delegation addresses the Security Council
during your presidency, let me begin by congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption ofthis important role at this
critical juncture in our country's precarious situation.
We assure you of the full support and cooperation
of our delegation and Government. We very much
appreciate the strong attention that Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and the international community at large
have given to this crisis.

South Sudan has been consistently grateful for the
support that the international community and the United
Nations have extended to our nascent country before
and after our independence. That is needed particularly
now as we are experiencing a period of complex
internal conflict that is threatening large sections of
our population. The South Sudanese do not want to
fall back into the abyss of war, from which they have
suffered for over half a century. South Sudan stands in
full solidarity with the international community in the
protection of civilians and international aid workers. It
has been heartening to Witness the protection that the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
has provided to tens of thousands of civilians in their
compounds.

I would also like to express our heartfelt
condolences to the families that have lost loved ones, to
the Republic of India and, indeed, to UNMISS for the
tragic loss of peacekeepers in the Mission's compound
in Akobo this month. We express our deep regret with
regard to the troops and personnel that have been
caught in the crossfire of Government forces and rebels
in the attempt to protect civilians and conduct civilian
evacuations. I would like to assure the Council that the
Government of South Sudan is doing as much as it can,
under very difficult circumstances, to restore calm and
stability to the affected areas in the country.

Let me take this opportunity to express the
Government's deep appreciation for the proactive
response that the Secretary-General and the Security
Council are showing towards the situation that is
unfolding tragically in our country and the urgent need
to protect lives and alleviate the suffering of the people
of South Sudan, as reflected in the decision to reinforce
its Mission in South Sudan with protection forces.

Additionally, we deeply appreciate the efforts of
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development Partners Forum and the United Nations
calling on South Sudanese leaders to rise above ethnic
divisions and offer a framework of peace, unity and
reconciliation for the nation. That is indeed the spirit
that our President reflected today in his powerful
press statement, which called for an immediate end to
violence, ethnic targeting and all illegal activities, and
on Mr. Riek Machar and the forces supporting him to
rise to the challenge ofpeace, unity and nation-building.

Once again, we reiterate our deep appreciation for
the support of the United Nations. We hope that, through
our solidarity with the international community, we can
overcome the crisis that the country is going through
and reinvigorate the process of unity, nation-building
and urgently needed socioeconomic development.
We take note of the concerns raised by the Council
and we take this opportunity to assure the Secretary-
General and members of the Security Council of our
determination to rc-cstablish our sense of national and security and respect for fundamental human rights
unity and purpose and to reaffirm our deep-rooted and humanitarian principles.

commitment to the ob'ectives of international cacc .
J p The meeting rose a13.20p.m.
