Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Le Roy, Presidenthapa, the State Minister for
Humanitarian Affairs of the Sudan Mr. Mutrif Siddiq,
and the Secretary-General of the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement, Mr. Pagan Amum, for their
presence and their presentations.

Now, a few weeks before the referendum,
everything should be in place for the voting to take
place on the scheduled date. The authorities of
Khartoum and Juba, the Referendum Commission and
all stakeholders must make every possible effort so that
that vital stage in the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement can be completed.

The concern about the preparations must be
assuaged. In that regard, we welcome the commitment
made by the parties on 15 November not to return to
violence to settle their disputes. However, the
bombings by the Government of the Sudan on the
border of the states of Bahr el Ghazal and South Darfur
in recent days, which caused displacements of the
civilian populations, are of concern. We call on the
parties to maintain their mutual trust and to
immediately stop their violence.

The voting process must be fair and transparent.
The deployment to the Sudan of several election
observer missions, of the European Union in particular,
will make it possible to have indicators of the
conditions in which the referendum is taking place. It
is up to the Secretary-General's Panel on the
Referenda, led by President Mkapa - to whose work I
would like to pay tribute - to provide the international
community with a clear view of the overall referendum
proceedings.
We took note of the Panel's encouraging
statement at the end of the registration period.
However, we also noted the Panel's concerns with
regard to the people's committees in the North, which
apparently dissuaded some potential voters. We are
paying close attention to the observations and future
conclusions of Mr. Mkapa's Panel.

Preparing for the referendum is also preparing for
its aftermath. We pay tribute to the efforts of President
Mbeki and of the African Union's High-Level
Implementation Panel for holding discussions on the
issue of Abyei and the post-referendum matters.
However, we are concerned by the lack of agreement at
this stage on Abyei. We encourage the parties to
continue their efforts and to make, at the appropriate
time, the necessary concessions in order to reach an
agreement as soon as possible.

We have been informed about the admission to
hospital of Special Representative Haile Menkerios.
Allow me here once again to commend his work at the
head of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) and to wish him a good recovery. We
encourage UNMIS to continue its efforts, and we
welcome the fact that it has redeployed its staff to
strengthen its presence in areas of potential tension.

In the current context, we must not forget Darfur.
The war between the Sudanese armed forces and the
rebel groups continues, as demonstrated by the deadly
fighting in Khor Abeche on 10 and 11 December,
which caused more than 10 thousand civilians to be
displaced. A political solution is essential. In that
context, the Council must continue to provide its
support to the joint mediation efforts in Doha. It is
unacceptable for the two main rebel groups to continue
to remain outside that process. We call upon them to
rejoin the discussions without delay or preconditions.

For its part, UNAMID must continue its efforts to
protect civilians, pursuant to its mandate. We urge the
force to step up its efforts to strengthen its position and
to implement, at all levels and in all circumstances, its
strategy for protecting civilians. In that respect,
progress is still possible and necessary. Obstacles to
the force's free movement must also be lifted.

I will conclude by reminding members, a few
days after Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo's worrying
briefing to the Council, that there can be no peace
without justice in Darfur. The crimes committed there
cannot go unpunished. We therefore call for
cooperation by all States with the International

Criminal Court pursuant to Council resolution 1593
(2005).

