Mr. Grauls (Belgium): As I did at the Security
Council debate on institution-building on 21 January
(see S/PV.6472), today I also speak on behalf of the
Permanent Representatives of Brazil, Canada, Jordan
and Switzerland in our respective capacities as Chairs
of the country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission for the Central African
Republic, Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone, Liberia and
Burundi. We also associate ourselves with the remarks
of the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
Ambassador Gasana of Rwanda.

We welcome Brazil's initiative to hold an open
debate on this important topic, and would like to take
this opportunity to offer our perspective based on our
experiences. Our intervention has three elements: first,
the need for a comprehensive approach to security and
development; secondly, the unique role of the
Peacebuilding Commission; and thirdly, the need for
more coordination. History has shown time and again
that there is a mutual interdependence among peace
and security, development and human rights. Whereas
in the short term there can be no inception of
development without security, in the long term it is not
possible to maintain security and achieve sustainable
peace without development.

Therefore, a comprehensive approach to security
taken by the Security Council and the entire United
Nations system unavoidably needs to take account the
social and economic situation on the ground in order to
address the root causes of conflicts. Respect for human
rights is an integral part and precondition of such a
comprehensive approach, as there can be no real
security and development in a repressive society.

An integrated and coherent combination of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities is essential
to attaining security and development goals alike.
Closer interaction between peacekeepers and
development actors, while respecting each other's roles
and responsibilities, can certainly contribute to a more
efficient and sustainable fulfilment of the
peacebuilding-related tasks of peacekeeping
operations, as representatives of funds and programmes
are often more experienced and stay longer to deal with
such issues as institution-building, the reintegration of
communities affected by conflict, electoral support,
economic revitalization, natural resource management,
the provision of basic services and governance issues.

Peacebuilding activities can also contribute to
increasing local support for peacekeeping missions. In
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example, a
draft peace consolidation programme has been
prepared in close cooperation with the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations country
team, and it has been well received by the local
authorities. Greater efforts must therefore be made to
enhance the cooperation between peacekeepers and
development actors, allowing for joint approaches in
the interest of post-conflict countries.

The Peacebuilding Commission has a unique role
to play in that regard, as the nexus between security
and development lies at the heart of its mandate.
Peacebuilding relates to building the foundations of
society to avoid a relapse into conflict as much as to
sowing the seeds for lasting development. For that
reason, peacebuilding activities should start at the
earliest stages of United Nations engagement.

The country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission serve as a forum for
dialogue and coordination between all stakeholders in
the country concerned, including United Nations
agencies, bilateral partners, international financial
institutions and regional and subregional organizations,
both in the field and at the level of capitals. They also
provide analysis and guidance on issues at the
intersection of governance, security and development
policy and advocate and mobilize resources for the
post-conflict recovery agendas of the countries in
question.

One of the most crucial partnerships for the
country-specific configurations of the PBC has to do
with building a privileged working relationship with
the World Bank to design a coherent approach to the
peacebuilding and development needs of the countries
on its agenda, taking into account the views and needs
of local stakeholders. This can be done through the
organization of joint events such as donors'
conferences and through stimulating a convergence
between the peacebuilding and development
frameworks of the country in question.

This unique role makes the Peacebuilding
Commission and its country-specific configurations a
valuable partner for a deepened strategic dialogue with
the Security Council when designing a comprehensive
approach to security. While some steps have already
been taken in this regard, including the participation of
configuration Chairs in Security Council briefings and
interactive consultative dialogues, much more can be
done to enhance this working relationship. When
dealing with pressing peace and security issues, the
Council could also benefit from information on
development-related issues that may hinder the
implementation of its mandates.
The advice of the Peacebuilding Commission
could be sought on such issues through a flexible,
multi-tiered approach, both at the outset and when
assessing progress in these areas, including in progress
reports of the Secretary-General. As the Peacebuilding
Commission accumulates more experience and takes
on board more countries, it will gradually be in a
position to provide better and richer advice to the
Security Council, to the benefit of post-conflict
countries.

