Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like at the outset to express my appreciation
for the detailed briefing presented by Ambassador
Alexander Konuzin of the Russian Federation on
behalf of the Security Council's Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). I am pleased also to congratulate
him on his election as Chairman of the Committee, a
position he is assuming from my predecessor as
Permanent Representative of Spain, Ambassador
Inocencio Arias. I am very grateful for Ambassador
Konuzin's comments on that subject. I am sure that,
under such efficient leadership, the Committee will be
able to effectively meet the challenges facing it.

I also wish to warmly welcome the first
Executive Director of the CTC Executive Directorate,
Ambassador Javier Ruperez. Not only is he a
compatriot of mine and a colleague of many years'
standing in the Spanish foreign service, but we also
have shared ideals and aspirations in the fight for
freedom, democracy and human rights and have
worked together for peace and security in Europe and
around the world. That is why we have every
confidence in his effectiveness in his work, which will
have the full support of my delegation and myself.

Spain attaches particular importance to these
open Security Council debates as a mechanism for
strengthening transparency, with which the Counter-
Terrorism Committee has always carried out its work.
That is why we welcome the continued holding of
these debates, which provide the Committee and its
member States with a platform from which to inform
all United Nations Member States and the general
public about its work, while providing non-Council-
member States a forum in which to express to us their
viewpoints on these matters. Therefore, I shall be very
brief, precisely to expedite the exchange of views
among all of us. I take this opportunity to say that we
subscribe fully to the statement to be made shortly by
the representative of the Netherlands on behalf of the
European Union.

My delegation joins Ambassador Konuzin in
identifying three objectives, or immediate challenges,
facing the Counter-Terrorism Committee. The first is
strengthening the role played by the Committee with
regard to technical assistance to States for
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) so that it can become a true global promoter and
coordinator of such assistance. Among other things,
that should be a concrete way to overcome the current
situation, in which - as was been explained to us - as
many as 71 countries have failed to submit their
respective reports on time.

The second objective is preparing for the
Committee's first Visits to States that they deem it
necessary to visit, with the consent of their respective
Governments, to engage in direct dialogue with the
competent authorities. That will enable us to verify
effective implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) on
the ground, to evaluate the nature of the causes that
hamper such effective implementation and to identify
possible needs or offers of technical assistance.

The last objective is strengthening the
Committee's cooperation with international, regional
and subregional organizations whose experience with
and diverse approaches to counter-terrorism are an
essential contribution to ensuring that the Committee
can properly monitor the effective implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). We believe that such inter-
institutional cooperation should begin with better
interaction and coordination with other United Nations
structures involved in the fight against terrorism, first
and foremost the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban.

Precisely to assist the Committee as it faces those
immediate challenges, Spain promoted a revitalization
process that was ultimately reflected in Security
Council resolution 1535 (2004), whose main result has
been the creation of the Executive Directorate, headed
by Ambassador Ruperez. My delegation wishes to
congratulate him on the draft programme of work he
has prepared for the Executive Directorate - a
programme of work that we fully support. We hope that
its provisions can be adopted and implemented as
swiftly as possible so that the Executive Directorate
can become operational very soon and so that the
Committee's revitalization can begin to materialize.
That will be the most effective way to attain the
objectives set by the Security Council in the global
fight against all forms of terrorism, which jeopardize
international peace and security.

