Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation
welcomes this timely debate on the Middle East. We
thank the Secretary-General for his incisive briefing to
the Council.

The Middle East, the cradle of civilization, is today
the centre of conflict, terrorism and massive human
suffering. The causes are both current and historical.
During a half-century of occupation, Palestine has been
repeatedly promised statehood, but as we know these
promises never materialized, which set the stage for its
prolonged agony and tragedy. The political injustices
and human suffering of the Palestinian people have
progressively intensified.

The fires that have been ignited across the region in
recent years in Iraq, Syria, Yemen and beyond cannot
eclipse the Palestine question or render a solution for its
enduring tragedy less urgent or essential. The plight of
the Palestinian people is one of the core causes of the
rise and spread of popular anger and alienation across
the Arab and Muslim world. Extremist ideologies and
violent groups in the Middle East will be difficult to
defeat until the essence oftheir narrative -the injustices
against Muslim people, especially the Palestinians - is
justly and effectively addressed.

Recent events have reinforced the conclusion that
there will be no peace or stability in the holy land unless
Israel accommodates an independent, contiguous and
viable Palestinian State, based on the pre-1967 borders,
with Al-Quds as its capital. Unfortunately, Israel
has adopted a totally inflexible policy, including the
continued taking of more and more Palestinian land
for illegal settlements. That is increasingly rendering a
two-State solution more and more difficult to achieve.
We share the Secretary-General's profound concern at
the reports of Israel's authorization of the largest land
grab in over a year. The Security Council must mobilize
the political will to ensure the implementation of its
own binding resolutions requiring Israel's withdrawal
from occupied Palestinian and Arab territories and the
fulfilment of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including their right to a sovereign and secure
Palestinian State. Israeli leaders should realize that
a continued conflict in the occupied territories with
the Palestinians will eventually erode the very nature
of their State, and the war within will not remain
unconnected with the wars raging just across Israel's
imposed frontiers.

The wider wars across the region, while rooted in
divisions that span centuries, have been ignited by more
recent foreign interventions in Iraq and elsewhere. The
foundations of the old order in the region have been
eroded, giving way to disorder, spread by State and
non-State actors, such as Daesh, or Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS). ISIS has emerged as a rogue threat
to the entire region and the world. It must be confronted,
and it must be defeated. In order to succeed in that,
the States of the region must, with the international
community's assistance, reach the political decisions
needed to end the civil war and suffering in Syria and
build a path to peace that is responsive to the aspiration
of its people and achieve an inclusive structure for
governance. There is a need to accommodate the rights
and interests of all religious and ethnic groups and halt
the fighting in Yemen and rebuild that impoverished
and broken country.

As is evident, that will be no easy endeavour.
Success requires, first and foremost, an end to the
regional hostility and rivalry that is polarizing the
Middle East. The new and revived tensions are toxic,
not only for the countries already engulfed in the
conflict. It could encompass other regional States,
home to diverse denominations of Islam and other
religions. My country, Pakistan, is making its own
modest contribution to promoting harmony in the
region, as illustrated by the recent mediatory mission
undertaken by Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to Riyadh
and Teheran. Pakistan supports the United Nations
processes for Syria and Yemen. We are encouraged
that all the major regional and global Powers remain
committed to supporting those processes. We believe
that the delay in reconvening the Syria talks does not
imply their collapse. We also hope that the United
Nations-sponsored reconciliation will be realized in
Yemen.

Pakistan believes that a stable order should emerge
from the present chaos in West Asia and the Levant. To
that end, a consistent dialogue is essential between all
the regional States for the support of the major Powers.
Such a dialogue can be promoted under the auspices of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. It can help to
promote fair and durable solutions to the conflicts and
disputes in the region, and build consensus on collective
counter-terrorism actions based on the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the divinely ordained
unity of the world's Muslims, the ummah.

