Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would first like to thank Special Envoy
Kafando and Ambassador Lauber for their briefings
this afternoon. As Special Envoy Kafando's briefing
was his last, I would like to thank and commend him
for his efforts and the work he accomplished, which
was often carried out under difficult conditions.

I would like to take this opportunity to address
the situation in Burundi in the lead-up to its 2020
presidential, legislative and local elections. We take
note of the latest developments with respect to the
authorities' recent gestures of political outreach
towards the opposition, on the one hand, and the
measures that have been taken to prevent and combat
violence that could jeopardize the holding of a credible
electoral campaign, on the other hand. We also want
to highlight Burundi's requests to various African
partners, the East African Community and the African
Union for support and training for the forthcoming
elections. Belgium welcomes those measures and
encourages the Burundian authorities to continue down
this road in order to ensure that the elections can be
credible, inclusive, peaceful and transparent. We also
hope it will be possible to make further progress in the
following areas.

First, we continue to encourage the entire
population of Burundi to participate peacefully in the
elections. While the release of political prisoners and
the gradual opening of the political and media space
may be important factors, lifting the legal proceedings
against the political and civil-society leaders who want
to return to Burundi would be a major step forward.
Secondly, although we commend the authorities for the
recent measures taken to combat electoral violence, as I
said, we remain concerned about the violent incidents,
such as the one in Bubanza on 21 October, that have
occurred from time to time during this period in the
run-up to elections. Thirdly, it is also critical to ensure
that this pre-election period not be marred by hate
speech. Journalists, and the media generally, have
an important role to play in that regard. Their right
to information must not be limited, especially as the
elections approach.

I also want to touch on the human rights situation.
After reading the African Union's latest monitoring
report, we are concerned. The report for September
details a growing number of abductions and abuses,
some of them brutal, by law enforcement personnel and
the Imbonerakure, whose arbitrary arrests, targeting no
fewer than 27 members of the Congres national pour la
liberte', including all of the party leaders in Karuzi, are
very troubling. The party's offices have also been set
fire to multiple times.

In conclusion, we note the latest developments and
the measures taken by the Burundian authorities. At
the same time, we must recognize that the road to the
2020 elections is still a long one. We therefore believe
it is essential to ensure that the Office of the Special
Representative can continue working with direct access
to the Burundian authorities at least until the elections
take place. The Office has an essential role to play and
we have taken note of the latest report (S/2019/837),
particularly its proposals on the activities of the Office
between now and the elections.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that we remain
ready for dialogue, bilaterally or at the European level,
in order to support the Burundian authorities in holding
credible, inclusive, peaceful and transparent elections.

