Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by warmly thanking the Secretaries-
General of the United Nations, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OECD) and the
European External Action Service of the European
Union for their very enlightening briefings.

The theme of conflicts in Europe has a special
resonance for my country, which has twice been at
the heart of world conflicts, the outbreak of which
occurred on the European continent. With this
painful legacy, France is all the more attached to
the preservation of peace and security in Europe, as
well as to the instruments we have collectively put in
place to defend them and to prevent the resurgence
of the horrors of war. I am thinking in particular of
the Charter of the United Nations and its principles
concerning the peaceful resolution of conflicts and
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States; the Helsinki agreements and the recognition
by all the OECD countries of the inviolability of the
borders of Europe and the multidimensional dimension
of security; and the European Union and the building of
a common destiny among all its members.

Recent history, however, shows us that we cannot,
either today or yesterday, consider the maintenance
of peace and security in Europe as a given. The
annexation of the Crimea and the conflict in the Donbas
unfortunately illustrate the fact that the violation of the
territorial integrity ofa European State is still possible.
The persistence of so-called frozen conflicts in Nagorno
Karabakh, Transnistria and Georgia poses an ongoing
threat to the security of the countries concerned and
their regions. Recent tensions in the Balkans are a cause
for genuine concern. Finally, the lack of a settlement of
the issue of Cyrpus - a country within the European
Union - remains a source of great dissatisfaction.
Yet today we have the tools necessary to ensure
peace and security on the European continent. Above
all, in Europe as in the rest of the world, the Council
has primary responsibility for the maintenance of
peace and international security. It is important for
everyone to assume their responsibilities so that it
can fully exercise its prerogatives on European issues,
which unfortunately has not always been the case in
recent months. The Secretary-General is, we believe,
fully justified in reminding the Security Council of
its obligations and responsibilities when he deems it
necessary.

The OSCE is an active and effective organization
that has, inter alia, demonstrated its ability to rise to
the challenge by playing a central role in managing the
crisis in Ukraine. It is important to respect the mandates
that has been assigned to it.

Finally, the European Union is today an
essential player in the multipolar world and a pillar
of multilateralism, whose community of values
and interests shared with the United Nations is
comprehensive. Its leading role in stabilizing its direct
neighbourhood must be fully recognized and supported.

Strengthened by these powerful and adapted tools,
we must maintain our mobilization to make the whole
of Europe a stable, peaceful and conflict-free continent.

In Ukraine, we are tirelessly pursuing, alongside
our German partners, our mediation efforts in the
Normandy format in support of the full implementation
of the Minsk accords, which we all agree to be the sole
avenue to a peaceful resolution of the conflict. The
renewed tensions over the past few weeks, particularly
around the town of Avdiivka, are a cause of great
concern to us, particularly as a result of the resurgence
of civilian and military casualties and the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation. We also regret the
decision of the Russian authorities to recognize official

documents issued by the de facto authorities of certain
zones in the Donetsk and Lugansk regions, which runs
counter to the spirit of the Minsk accords.

The ministerial meeting in Normandy format held
on Saturday in Munich made it possible to agree on
specific commitments whose aim is to promote a rapid
improvement of the situation on the ground. These
commitments include the effective implementation of
the ceasefire and the withdrawal of heavy weapons, the
disengagement of forces andthe guarantee ofunre stricted
access to OSCE observers. The French, German,
Ukrainian and Russian Ministers also supported the
rapid exchange of prisoners and the guarantee of access
to places of detention by the International Committee
of the Red Cross. It is essential that these measures be
implemented in a comprehensive and timely manner
and we count on the support unanimous support of the
Council to that end.

Discussions are continuing within the Normandy
format to quickly adopt a road map, as foreseen by
the Heads of State and Government. Our shared
conviction with Germany remains that the only way
forward is to advance concomitantly on the security
and political aspects of the Minsk accords. We remain
more determined than ever to pursue our common
efforts within the Normandy format, because each
result obtained on the ground counts and because
today we have no alternative solution to support the
implementation of the agreements Minsk. The European
sanctions put in place at the beginning of the crisis are
linked to the full implementation of the latter. Finally, I
reiterate our commitment to defending the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. I recall that France
strongly condemns and does not recognize the illegal
annexation of the Crimea and Sevastopol.

In Georgia and Moldova, we support the search
for solutions to frozen conflicts, while respecting the
territorial integrity of those States. We are convinced
of the central role of the OSCE in preventing any
escalation on the ground and allowing for a lasting
settlement through negotiations in the framework of the
Geneva international discussions for Georgia and the
so-called 5+2 process for Moldova.

With regard to Nagorno Karabakh, France is fully
committed to the mediation of the OSCE Minsk Group.
As co-Chair of the Group, our country is resolved
to work with its Russian and American partners to
ensure respect for the ceasefire, the establishment of
confidence-building measures on the ground and the
resumption ofpolitical negotiations as soon as possible,
which is the only way to achieve a peaceful and lasting
solution to the conflict.

In the Balkans, the European Union plays a lead
role in promoting the normalization of relations among
neighbouring countries and reducing internal tensions
among communities. In Kosovo and Serbia, the
prospect of rapprochement with the European Union
and the Union-facilitated dialogue today constitutes the
main vector for the normalization of relations between
Belgrade and Pristina and the benefits that accompany
this process for the daily life of the people. The effective
implementation of the agreements concluded and the
effective mobilization of the Serb and Kosovar leaders
to that end are essential to ensuring that the important
results of recent years are not jeopardized by the recent
episodes of tensions.

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, it is also the prospect
of rapprochement with the European Union, through
the implementation of the Reform Agenda, that is today
the main factor for cohesion among communities. It is
for all these reasons that France favours the European
perspective for the Balkans, as we recalled at the Paris
summit on 4 July. That perspective is, in our view, the
main stabilizing force in the region.

In Cyprus, despite recent bottlenecks, significant
progress has been made in recent months in the conduct
of negotiations. The two sides have never gotten this far.
Much remains to be done, however, in order to arrive
at a lasting solution, the outlines of which must be in
line with Security Council resolutions, the principles
of the Charter and the community acquis. The urgent
need now is to relaunch the negotiations by maintaining
the momentum generated in recent months and by
continuing to make progress on sensitive and important
issues, including security questions.

In conclusion, Europe now has all the tools
necessary to ensure peace and security on its continent,
but it is only through the common mobilization of
the various actors that we will be able to perpetuate
the European dream born in 1945, in the aftermath
of the war, of a continent at peace at the heart of the
contemporary multilateral system, capable of promoting
peace throughout the world.

