Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
situation in Syria is intolerable. Against the backdrop
of exploding bombs, meeting after meeting, negotiation
after negotiation, resolution after resolution, human
beings are annihilated. Homes, markets, schools,
health facilities are all reduced to rubble, in violation
of all the rules of international humanitarian law. I
echo the sentiments of my President, Mr. Macky Sall,
who expressed them here on 21 September under the
presidency ofNew Zealand (see S/PV.7774). By deciding
to vote in favour of the draft resolution submitted by
France and Spain, Senegal echoed the heartfelt appeal
of the Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
for the Council to act urgently to avoid eastern Aleppo
from becoming an unprecedented tragedy.

Senegal had hoped that the time had come for
the Council, as guarantor of international peace and
security, to shoulder its responsibilities to reestablish
a ceasefire, not only in eastern Aleppo, but also across
Syria. Unfortunately the draft resolution proposed by
France and Spain was unsuccessful. Mr. De Mistura had
warned us about the risk of Aleppo being completely
destroyed in two months with thousands dead and
wounded if air strikes were to be deployed.

My delegation takes this opportunity to once
again urge the International Syria Support Group, in
particular its two co-chairs, to do whatever it takes to
reach an effective and lasting truce across Syria in order
to allow unfettered and unconditional humanitarian
assistance and the resumption of a credible process,
under the aegis of the United Nations, on the basis
of the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex) and
resolution 2254 (2015).

If we do not rally around the objectives of peace and
stability in Syria, we will run the risk of strengthening
terrorist organizations such as the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham, Jabhat Fath al-Sham and the former
Jabhat al-Nusrah, who are our common enemies
that must be fought in the framework of a shared
comprehensive strategy.

