Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itselfwith
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union. Meanwhile, I would like to make a
few points in my national capacity.

Three months ago, the Council discussed the
situation in Afghanistan (see S/PV.7771) and adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/14, in support
of the country's security, economic and development
challenges. Has it had a positive impact on the ground?
To a certain degree, it has.

First, some encouraging progress has been achieved
in countering corruption and deterring the terrorist
threat. Secondly, the Brussels Conference, held in
October, secured pledges in support of Afghanistan's
State-building and socioeconomic development.
Thirdly, a peace deal that was signed with one of
moderate armed factions, Hezb-i Islami (Gulbuddin),
became a useful contribution to the restoration of
normalcy and the reconciliation in the territories under
that group's control. Fourthly, regional cooperation was
strengthened by investment and infrastructure projects
that laid the foundation for improving Afghanistan's
trade capacities and building a business-friendly
environment. Fifthly, efforts were redoubled to counter
narcotics trafficking and production, in particular by
promoting saffron as a substitute crop for poppies.
Despite those developments, much remains to
be done. Rivalry among high-level Afghan officials
and political tensions between the parliamentary and
legislative branches, as well as another postponement
of long-awaited parliamentary elections, directly
affect the country's ability to adequately promote good
governance, the rule of law, anti-corruption measures
and human rights. We believe that it is high time for all
Afghan stakeholders to demonstrate real unity in their
efforts to achieve sustainable and comprehensive peace
and national reconciliation.

However, the prospects for those endeavours
remain dim. The repeated flat refusal of the Taliban
leaders to negotiate has undercut attempts of the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan Peace
and Reconciliation Process to create an environment
conducive to a peace process. In that regard, we see the
need for the Quadrilateral Coordination Group to find
common ground with representatives of the Taliban's
moderate wing.

In this Chamber, we have often heard statements
to the effect that the national reconciliation process
must be Afghan-owned and Afghan-led. At the same
time, we have seen continued attempts behind the back
of the Government of Afghanistan to negotiate with
the Taliban and even to grant the terrorists safe haven,
train them and provide them military assistance. In that
light, calls to lift the Security Council sanctions on the
Taliban leadership as an incentive to bring it back to the
negotiations table appear rather unconvincing, to say
the least. That is particularly revelatory when such calls
echo similar demands by the same terrorist organization.

We find it unacceptable that, six months after his
appointment, the new leader of the Taliban is still not
included on the United Nations sanctions list. In that
regard, we support the relevant call just made by the
delegation of Afghanistan. Ukraine believes that the
sanctions are an effective tool in persuading terrorists
to renounce their aggression against the Afghan
nation and earnestly participate in peace negotiations.
Their removal from the list should be possible only
when their deeds match their words. That means the
disarmament of combat units, the restoration of peace,
and non-interference in the functioning of public
institutions, as was the case with the Hezb-i Islami
(Gulbuddin).

Regional cooperation should also focus on finding
ways to effectively disrupt the Taliban and other
terrorist groups' financing by suppressing the narcotics
trade. With regard to the latter, the recent findings of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which
are contained in its Afghanistan Opium Survey 2016,
are alarming. Regardless of national and international
efforts to combat the narcotics threat, the total area
of opium poppy cultivation has further increased,
coinciding with a major decrease in activities aimed at
eradicating it. What is also extremely worrying is that,
according to reports, farmers continue to resist such
suppression operations by directly attacking eradication
teams, even within the Government-controlled areas.

The protection ofcivilians in Afghanistan continues
to be an increasingly complex challenge. Although the
Government announced a national policy to mitigate
civilian casualties, the number of collateral victims,
especially among women and children, is still growing.
And the causes, in particular the indiscriminate shelling
and bombing, are attributable to both parties in the
conflict. Beyond any doubt, fighting the terrorist threat
is a top priority. Yet it can hardly be seen as a victory
when the number of neutralized terrorists equals the

number of civilians who have lost their lives in the
course of the counter-terrorist operations concerned.

We urge the Afghan Government to ensure that
all such violations of international humanitarian law
are thoroughly investigated, with the support of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
and that the victims and their families are provided
with the appropriate remedies. The implementation
of the national action plan on women and peace and
security is also of paramount importance for ensuring
a stable future for the country through the suspension
of gender-based violence and the elevation of women
as full and equal partners. Moreover, the deteriorating
displacement crisis in Afghanistan requires urgent
attention. The Afghan authorities should address the
needs of internally displaced persons and returnees,
including by urgently scaling up humanitarian aid to
provide them access to basic services and support their
sustainable reintegration.

Without any doubt, there are numerous obstacles
that make it difficult for Afghanistan to resolve on their
own most of the challenges I have mentioned. That
is why the international community has to continue
assisting the country, which is in need. I hope that in
future debates the list of problems that I mentioned
today will be much shorter, as some of them will have
already been addressed by the Afghan Government.

