Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Madam President, let
me first of all, like other speakers, welcome you to the
chair of this discussion. It shows the importance that
you attach to this issue under discussion in the Council,
and we appreciate that very much.

In this debate almost exactly one year ago, I
spoke about helpless outrage at unimaginable atrocities
being a common feature of our age. I also mentioned
that this Council, with the powers vested in it by the
United Nations Charter, is one of the few bodies that
does not have to confine itself to helpless outrage. One
year later, we have arrived at a crucial juncture, and I
will come back to that in a moment.

But first, let me express our heartfelt thanks to
the Ambassador of France, Jean-Marc de La Sabliere,
and his delegation for their strong leadership on this
issue. No other delegation has done more to put this
issue of child protection, especially the issue of child
soldiering, high on the Council's agenda. I would like
to assure you, Mr. Ambassador, that we will again be
enthusiastic supporters of your efforts to pass a new
Council resolution that will be even stronger than
resolution 1460 (2003), a resolution that, in the words
of Olara Otunnu this morning, will, hopefully, serve as
"triggers for action".

We also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Otunnu, and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), Carol Bellamy, for their opening remarks
and the work they have done so far to advance the
protection of children associated with armed conflict.
The cooperation between UNICEF and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General was excellent
on the child protection component of the United
Nations mission to Liberia, and we hope that this will
serve as a model for future cooperation.

I would also like to state that Germany fully
associates itself with the statement to be delivered by
Ambassador Ryan of Ireland, on behalf of the
European Union, later in this discussion.

In January of last year, adopted a resolution that
was widely seen as a sign of hope for the hundreds of
thousands of child soldiers and many more children
victimized by armed conflict, because the Council had
gone further than ever before, not only in condemning
outrages against children but also in taking tangible
action against these crimes.

One year later, we feel a mixture of hope and
frustration. On the positive side, we see some
encouraging action within the United Nations system
and by non-governmental organizations to use
resolution 1460 (2003) as a strong advocacy tool. On
the other hand, we see little overall improvement on
the ground. Instances where there was some positive
development - for example, in Sri Lanka - are rare.
And there are the many instances where there was no
positive development at all, or even a worsening of the
situation, for example in northern Uganda, in Ituri in
north-eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
in Myanmar.

On a more hopeful note, we are starting to see a
positive impact from the threat of prosecution by the
International Criminal Court (ICC). In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for example, this possibility is
becoming more and more widely known. We are
convinced that the ICC is, even now, exerting its much-
desired preventive influence, and we are equally
convinced that it will play a highly important role in
ending the culture of impunity. However, this must not
stop the Council from using its own powers to hold
accountable those responsible for the gravest crimes
and human rights violations.

The Council has now arrived at a crossroads; we
now have to decide whether we want to continue to
appeal, condemn and entreat, or to act. We strongly
advocate for the latter option. We must not allow this
debate to become an annual ritual of hand-wringing
indignation without measurable effect.

Many excellent recommendations have been
made by the Secretary-General and by many non-
governmental organizations. These range from more
systematic monitoring and reporting, to curbing the
flow of small arms and the illicit exploitation of natural
resources, to more child-sensitive disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programming.

We would like to focus on the following key
issues, which should also be important elements of the
draft resolution we will hopefully adopt shortly.

First, we must reinforce the Council's message to
unresponsive parties to conflicts that they have to meet
their obligations. We should set clear time limits for
action plans for demobilization and child protection.

Secondly, we must take action that makes it
clearer who is in charge of what within the United
Nations system. United Nations action must be made
more cohesive. In concrete terms, we support the
suggestion to appoint a United Nations focal point at
the country level to make clear to all actors in the field
who is responsible. We also support changes at
Headquarters that ensure that this agenda becomes a
true joint effort. We are looking forward to the
Secretary-General's report on the United Nations
response to this issue.

Thirdly, conflict parties that do respond positively
should be rewarded with technical and other assistance.
Conflict parties that do not comply, however, should be
penalized. Such measures, both positive and negative,
must be targeted. We strongly support the Secretary-
General's recommendations, inter alia, on travel
restrictions, restrictions on the supply of arms and on
other military assistance. We know that targeted
measures are a highly complex and politically charged
issue. However, we should not continue to treat this as
a taboo subject in the Council. Otherwise, we will
never be able to arrive at a methodology that excludes
exactly those feared side-effects that lead sceptics in
the Council to oppose them in the first place. And let
me address myself to my more sceptical colleagues:
Let us not forget what we are addressing here. We are
facing some of the most vicious crimes imaginable,
committed on a large scale.

Fourthly, the Council should enhance its efforts to
integrate child-protection issues into its deliberations
on concrete conflict situations. There is no conflict that
does not affect children. Therefore, every conflict on
the Council's agenda should be examined from a child-
rights perspective. For instance, when a peace mission
is established, we should ask ourselves: What are the
requirements for child protection? Do we need child-
protection advisers? What are the requirements for
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement programmes from a child-
protection perspective? What are the special needs of
girls? The Council has been making progress here, but
our job of mainstreaming is far from complete.

Lastly, we continue to need a list of violators
annexed to the Secretary-General's report to the
Council. We also believe that the call for an extension
of this list to other egregious violations is justified. Let
me make one point to illustrate this. One of the most
shocking developments in recent conflicts is the
appalling prevalence of sexual violence, as so vividly
described by Carol Bellamy just this morning.
Systematic rape as a weapon of war, often combined
with murder and mutilation, as well as contemporary
forms of slavery - especially the abduction of
children as sex slaves - are not covered by the current
list. The vast majority of victims of these crimes are
girls. An extension of the list to other violations would
not only give us a more accurate picture, but would
also help to heighten our awareness of the gender
aspects of this issue.

Although it is not easy in this context, let me end
on a positive note. Despite all the obstacles, Germany
does believe that the Council can make a real
difference. The Council is united in its condemnation
of the illegal recruitment of children and the
unspeakable acts committed against them in armed
conflict. Very importantly, we are being supported by a
number of first-class non-governmental organizations,
in particular the Watchlist on Children and Armed
Conflict and the Coalition to Stop the Use of Child
Soldiers. In addition, we are being supported by highly
committed individuals in the United Nations system. In
short, we have reached a critical mass and can now
really move things forward. Let us seize this
opportunity together.

