Mr. Leen Gonzalez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We support the statement made by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. It is regrettable that, in the recent period, no measures have been taken to end the Israeli military aggression and occupation of the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in accordance with resolution 2334 (2016), adopted by the Council, which remains silent while Israel, with impunity, consolidates its policy of expanding illegal settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory and threatens to annex the Palestinian territories in the Jordan Valley and other parts of the West Bank and East Jerusalem. We condemn the occupation of Palestinian territory, the illegal settlement policies, practices and measures, including the construction and expansion of Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory, the punitive demolitions, the seizure of resources from Palestinian institutions, the forced displacement of hundreds of Palestinian civilians and the blockade of the Gaza Strip. We reject acts of provocation, terror, incitement and violence and the indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force against Palestinian civilians, in flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations and international humanitarian law. Due to the repeated obstruction of the United States, this organ has not even been able to condemn the escalating violence and the tragic events in the Gaza Strip since 30 March 2018. We regret the precarious situation of the United Nations Reliefand Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East as a result of the withdrawal of United States financial support. The Security Council must fulfil its primary responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance of international peace and security and demand that Israel put an immediate and complete end to the occupation of the Palestinian territories and its aggressive policies and settlement practices. We express our unwavering solidarity with the Government and people of Palestine and support for the admission of Palestine as a full Member of the United Nations. We reaffirm our unreserved support for a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the Israeli- Palestinian conflict that enables the Palestinian people to exercise their right to self-determination and to have an independent and sovereign State within the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and that ensures the right of return of refugees. Washington's aggressive, unilateral and unjustified actions in the Middle East constitute a severe violation of the legitimate interests of Arab and Islamic nations and have led to a dangerous escalation in the region. We reiterate our condemnation of the so-called deal of the century, drawn up by the current United States Government. It fails to provide for the establishment of a Palestinian State, thereby scorning the two-State solution, which has enjoyed the historical backing of the United Nations, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the League of Arab States and _ the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, among other international actors. The unilateral decision by the Government of the United States to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and establish its diplomatic representation in that city, disrespecting its historical status, as well as its decision to recognize Israel's sovereignty over the Syrian Golan, all constitute flagrant violations of the Charter of the United Nations, international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. We once again call for the complete and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from the Syrian Golan and all occupied Arab territories. We emphatically condemn the United States bombing of Baghdad airport and the targeted assassination it carried out using missiles, which constitute a clear violation of international law and the sovereignty of Iraq. Such aggressive, unilateral and unjustified actions by the United States represent a major escalation in the Middle East, where a large-scale conflict with incalculable loss of human life and grave consequences for global peace and stability is on the brink of eruption. We reiterate our full support for the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and condemn the United States withdrawal from the agreement, as well as the reimposition of unilateral sanctions and the military threats waged against the Islamic Republic of Iran.Against that backdrop, it is the duty of all States - and especially the members of the Security Council - to defend multilateralism and the purposes and principles of the Charter, in particular respect for the sovereign equality of States and their political independence, territorial unity and integrity, the peaceful resolution of disputes and refraining from the threat or use of force in international relations.
