Mr. Guehenno (Spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for this opportunity to provide an update to the
Security Council on developments in Afghanistan. I
will focus mainly on the outcome of the international
Conference just held in London, recent political events
surrounding the formation of the parliament, and the
security situation on the ground in Afghanistan.

First, with respect to the London Conference, the
Secretariat reiterates its deep thanks to the
Governments of the United Kingdom and Afghanistan
for the outstanding preparation and organization of the
Conference held on 31 January and 1 February.

The achievements of the Conference were
numerous. Above all, it served as the venue for the
solemn launching of the Afghanistan Compact, which I
will comment on in greater detail. The London
Conference also reasserted the unity of purpose and
goals that has been the hallmark of the international
community's engagement in Afghanistan. The
participation of over 60 high-level delegations -
including 23 foreign ministers and strong
representation from Afghanistan's neighbours - sent
an unmistakable signal of the international
community's continuing resolve to support Afghanistan
at this crucial stage in its transition. Finally, the
Compact and the Conference recognized the leading
role that the Afghan Government itself must play in the
next phase of its history.

The Compact itself sets out an ambitious agenda,
committing Conference participants to a sustained and
prolonged engagement in Afghanistan's future. It is a
realistic reflection of what is required to consolidate
State-building efforts in Afghanistan, and especially to
enable the nascent democratic institutions created by
the Bonn process to meet the basic needs of the
country, curb insecurity, control the narcotics industry,
stimulate the economy, enforce the law, provide basic
services to the Afghan population and protect the
human rights of the citizenry. The Compact sets forth
measurable and time-bound benchmarks in each of
those areas and establishes a results-oriented action
plan for the country's future.

The Compact recognizes, as the Bonn process
did, that a schedule is necessary and that time is of the
essence in the international community's efforts. The
window of opportunity for the rebuilding of the
country will not be open forever, and a sense of
urgency must continue to inspire the efforts of the
Afghans and the international community. That is why
the Compact's annex on timelines and benchmarks is
so important. Those are the criteria against which the
efforts of the international community and Afghanistan
will be judged.

As the Secretary-General noted in London, the
United Nations stands ready to assist the Afghan
Government and the international community as they
work together to meet those goals. As the co-chair of
the Compact's Monitoring and Coordination Board, the
United Nations special representative will fully support
the Government in bringing transparency and
coherence to the international assistance effort. Only
with the full support of the Security Council and the
international community, however, will that be
possible.

(spoke in English)

Substantive discussions took place on each of the
Compact's main themes. On security, the continuing
role of the international military presence was
welcomed. States in a position to commit new forces to
support the expansion of NATO's International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) were encouraged to
do so. It was also recognized by Conference
participants that stability cannot be achieved through
military means alone. The successful development of
functioning Afghan security forces was identified as a
primary measure of the success of the international
community.

The need for increased assistance to the justice
sector reform effort was also emphasized, as was the
importance of building legislative bodies and
strengthening public administration throughout the
country. There was also a call for international support
for the Afghan Government's transitional justice action
plan.

The Government of Afghanistan presented its
interim national development strategy, which was
endorsed by Conference participants. There was also
general recognition that donors should make a greater
effort to channel more international assistance through
the Government's budget.

Although the Conference was not intended as a
pledging event, participating countries and
organizations announced new financial assistance for
Afghanistan, amounting to a total of $10.5 billion
dollars. That generosity demonstrates a continuing
donor confidence in Afghanistan that is a credit to
President Karzai's leadership and to the clarity of
vision evident in the interim national development
strategy. As always, the full impact of those pledges
will be felt only if they are disbursed in a timely and
efficient manner.

The growing threat to stability posed by the
illegal drug trade was addressed as a cross-cutting
theme. The Government of Afghanistan launched its
new National Drug Control Strategy, and donors
announced new pledges to the Counter Narcotics Trust
Fund. Conference participants acknowledged the need
for increased international assistance in line with the
scale of the problem.

In sum, the Afghan Government committed itself
to meeting a wide range of goals over the next five
years and unveiled its strategies for doing so in a
number of sectors. In return, the international
community made strong expressions of long-term
support, coupled with financial commitments. Those
pledges must now be brought to bear on the Compact if
the promise of the London Conference is to be
fulfilled.

I would like to turn now to the workings of the
first session of the recently inaugurated national
parliament. To date, parliamentary debates have been
characterized by an inclusive and democratic
process - leading to a number of women, minority
representatives and lesser-known personalities playing
a prominent role in discussions. The upper and lower
houses have elected their administrative boards and are
reviewing the rules and procedures for the National
Assembly. While discussions on the formation of
political groups are ongoing, there are early signs that
groups may form along ethnic or regional lines. A final
decision on the mechanism for the vote of confidence
in the Cabinet has yet to be taken by parliament.

Significant attention has been devoted by
parliament to the security situation. The lower house
alone devoted four days to discussing emerging threats
to the country's stability. Despite the fact that
parliament is making efforts to address public
concerns, the Afghan media has highlighted the
pressing need for the parliament to move beyond its
internal workings and make meaningful progress on the
key issues affecting the population as a whole.

Turning to the security situation in Afghanistan,
recent weeks have seen a rising level of insurgent
attacks in the south-east and south-west, and an
escalation of factional tensions in the north-west. Some
of the fiercest fighting in recent years between anti-
Government elements and Afghan forces was reported
to have taken place in Helmand province. The largest
of these took place on 3 and February in Helmand
province, when police and Afghan National Army
soldiers were ambushed by up to 200 insurgents. In the
ensuing battle, which lasted five hours, three Afghan
National Police officers were reportedly killed and nine
wounded.

The recent publication in European newspapers
of cartoons depicting the prophet Muhammad sparked
widespread demonstrations over the past week, with
groups ranging in number from 150 to as many as
5,000. Although largely peaceful, demonstrations
turned violent in the five provinces of Baghlan, Faryab,
Laghman, Parwan and Zabul. In Maimana, Faryab
province, and in Laghman province, in particular, it is
believed that the cartoon protests provided a platform
for factional tensions and clashes linked mostly to local
dynamics preceding the cartoon issue.

On 7 February, demonstrators in Pul-i-Khumri,
Baghlan province, threw stones at the Provincial
Reconstruction Team (PRT) base, the offices of three
non-governmental organizations and the office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
smashing windows and damaging vehicles. One Dutch
soldier and two demonstrators were injured. The main
clash that day, however, occurred in Maimana, where
protestors using firearms and grenades breached the
perimeter of a Norwegian PRT compound. In ensuing
clashes with the Afghan National Police, three
individuals were killed and five Norwegian troops
were injured. ISAF redeployed its quick-reaction
forces from Mazar-e-Sharif to Maimana to provide
additional support to the PRT. United Nations staff in
Maimana were temporarily relocated to Shibergan on 7
February, and then to Mazar-e-Sharif on 8 February.

On 6 February in Laghman province,
demonstrators clashed with police and Government
officials, leaving one policeman dead. The same day, in
Parwan province, demonstrators destroyed the office of
a Turkish road construction company and looted some
equipment, and then proceeded to attack the United
States base at Bagram. Two demonstrators were killed
and six policemen injured. On 8 February in Zabul,
demonstrators clashed with the police and the Afghan
National Army, leaving two dead.

Yesterday there were clashes in Herat between
Shia and Sunni Muslims - involving hand grenades,
stone-throwing, knife attacks and fist fights - which
left at least five people dead. Fighting between the two
groups happened as Shia were marking the
commemoration of Ashura, the tenth day of Muharram.
In an effort to calm the situation, President Karzai
dispatched a delegation headed by Ismail Khan, the
former Governor of Herat and current Minister of
Energy, Water and Power, to mediate the situation. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) is closely monitoring the situation on the
ground.

Also yesterday, four Canadian soldiers were
slightly wounded in a roadside bomb attack in southern
Kandahar province. Lastly, at least six Afghan soldiers
were killed today, in two attacks by suspected Islamic
rebels in the eastern province of Nuristan. Eight troops
were also injured by explosions in two different
districts of the province, according to a spokesman of
the Defence Ministry in Kabul.

Since our last briefing to the Security Council,
there have been further incidents of suicide bombings.
On 2 February, a suicide bomber disguised as a woman
killed three Afghan National Army soldiers and five
civilians in Bak, Khost province. On 7 February, a
suicide bomber blew himself up outside Afghan
National Police headquarters in Kandahar city, killing
himself and 13 others, including civilians and police
personnel. Thirteen others were injured.

In the light of those events, I would reiterate what
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Arnault noted in his last briefing to the Council.

"The security dimension therefore remains at the
heart of the joint efforts of the Government and
the international community, both as a priority
concern that needs to be addressed through
military and non-military means and also as a
limitation on the ability of the international
community, and the United Nations in particular,
to operate throughout the country." (S/PV.5347, 
13-3)

It could not be more clear that improvements in
security are essential if the promise of the Afghanistan
Compact is to be realized.

In conclusion, I wish to inform the Security
Council that the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Tom Koenigs. will take up his new
assignment in Kabul on 16 February. As Council
members are aware, the current mandate of UNAMA
expires on 24 March. The Secretary-General will
submit recommendations on the Future role of the
United Nations in Afghanistan by the middle of March.

