I thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Executive Director Coninsx for their briefings. We welcome the eleventh report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) to international peace and security (S/2020/774). The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has highlighted the profound changes the world is undergoing and the severe challenges humankind is facing. Inequalities within and among countries have been laid bare. The ignorance, anxiety, stigma and politicization that come with the pandemic have led to hatred and xenophobia, which have been aggravated and amplified by the popular use of social media. Although the pandemic appears to have temporarily reduced the risks of terrorist attacks, the socioeconomic fallout from the crisis has the potential to exacerbate conditions conducive to terrorism. It could feed into a vicious cycle of destabilization and violence and increase the mid- to long-term threat, which ISIL and other terrorist organizations are keen to explore and exploit. According to the report of the Secretary-General, amid the COVID-19 pandemic, the world is witnessing a surge in activities by terrorist organizations, such as ISIL, in Iraq and Syria to rebuild their global operation capability. Terrorists, including ISIL, are also infiltrating into North Africa, in particular Libya, worsening regional turbulence. ISIL has also announced that it may use the virus as a biological weapon to launch terrorist attacks. Member States must remain highly vigilant to all these dangerous developments. Facing the unprecedented challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic and the common enemy of terrorism, we must bear in mind that humankind is a community with a shared future, and we should strengthen cooperation to jointly address the threat facing us. First, international counter-terrorism cooperation should follow the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and continue to leverage the central coordinating role of the United Nations and the Security Council with unified standards. In fighting terrorism, we must respect the primary responsibility of Member States and the sovereignty of the countries concerned. We should comprehensively implement relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions and the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. During and after the COVID-19 pandemic, we need to further promote multilateralism and strengthen international cooperation in a joint effort to fight terrorism. Secondly, we must adopt integrated policies to address the root causes as well as the symptoms of terrorism to eradicate its breeding grounds. The international community should push for political settlement of hot-spot issues, resolve differences peacefully, assist Member States in poverty reduction and eradication and sustainable development and encourage dialogue among civilizations and religions. We should support regional organizations, such as the African Union, in playing an important role. Assistance should be given to developing countries, especially African countries, to help build capacity for counter-terrorism and deradicalization. There is an urgent need for the international community to strengthen cooperation in fighting and overcoming COVID-19 and reduce its impact as a potential terrorist threat. Thirdly, it is important to enhance international judicial cooperation and adapt it to the new trends and features of terrorism. We should focus on the key issues, such as foreign terrorist fighters, the diversified means of terrorist financing, the misuse of the Internet and communication technologies by terrorists and the collusion of terrorist organizations with organized crime. We should attach great importance to the impact of COVID-19 on counter-terrorism and take timely measures to prevent terrorists from exploiting loopholes caused by the pandemic. Fourthly, mechanisms, such as the Office of Counter Terrorism, the Counter- Terrorism Committee and the ISIL (Da'esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee should increase coordination and fully leverage their strengths and expertise to form greater synergy. United Nations counter-terrorism mechanisms should act in strict accordance with the relevant resolutions and rules of procedure. They need to enhance communication with Member States; strengthen coordination among themselves in terrorist threat assessment, the capacity-building of Member States and the use of sanctions; maintain the authority and effectiveness of the counter-terrorism and sanctions regimes; and contribute more to international counter-terrorism efforts. These mechanisms should readjust their working methods during the pandemic and make better use of online platforms to carry out their work according to the needs of Member States. As an important player in the international fight against terrorism, China resolutely implements all the relevant United Nations resolutions. We actively participate in international and regional counter-terrorism cooperation through the United Nations, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and other forums. We work closely with other Member States in sharing intelligence and combating terrorist financing, transnational organized crime and cyberterrorism. China will work with the international community to analyse in depth the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on global terrorist activities, and will continue to have bilateral and multilateral exchanges and capacity-building cooperation with other countries, especially developing countries, including those in Africa. We will continue to provide political and financial support to United Nations counter- terrorism efforts for the maintenance of international peace and security. China firmly rejects the accusation against China by certain members of the Council. It is baseless and absurd, as usual. Terrorism is our common enemy. There is no such thing as good or bad terrorists. China is firmly opposed to politicization and double standards in counter-terrorism. The situation in Xinjiang is totally part of China's internal affairs. It is not a religion issue or a human rights issue. Rather, it is about counter-terrorism and anti-extremism. Xinjiang has suffered deeply from terrorism and violent extremism in the past. To address the threat, Xinjiang has taken a series of preventive counter-terrorism and de-radicalization measures. This is consistent with Security Council resolutions, the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the United Nations Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. These measures are widely supported by the people in Xinjiang and have yielded good results. Xinjiang has not seen a single terror incident in the past three years. Facts speak louder than words. Anyone who is fair-minded can tell right from wrong. Since late 2018, more than 70 foreign delegations have visited Xinjiang. They have seen first-hand a stable, thriving and developing Xinjiang, and agree that counter-terrorism and de-radicalization efforts have made this possible. However, it is regrettable that the United States chooses to ignore basic facts and repeat its rhetoric and keep smearing and discrediting the counter-terrorism and deradicalization efforts in Xinjiang. We urge the United States to listen to the international community, admit the facts, give up bigotry and double standards and stop using human rights as an excuse to interfere in China's internal affairs. If the United States truly cares about human rights, it should do its own job first. Please protect the human rights of the American people. Please step up effort to combat COVID-19 to safeguard lives and the health of the American people. In addition, the United Kingdom followed the United States once again in levelling unfounded charges against China in the Council. China is strongly opposed to this. The baseless remarks of the United Kingdom represent sheer hypocrisy and double standards. We urge the United Kingdom to fix its own problems and to stop interfering in China's internal affairs. Lastly, I would like to emphasize that China is determined to safeguard its sovereignty, security and development interests. No interference against China will succeed, and no one can stop China's progress.
