Mr. Ebner (Austria): We would like to thank
you, Sir, for chairing this important debate. Your
presence shows the importance that Uganda attaches to
the subject matter before us. We would also like to
welcome the Secretary-General for introducing his
report (S/2010/514) on support to African Union (AU)
peacekeeping operations authorized by the United
Nations. We also thank Commissioner Lamamra for his
statement.

Austria aligns herself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union
(EU) later in this meeting.

Austria has always underlined that efficient
United Nations support for AU peacekeeping is of
great importance. The role played by the AU in
maintaining peace and security on the African
continent is essential and complementary to the work
of the United Nations and the Security Council. We
welcome the numerous positive steps taken by the
African Union and the Secretariat to further enhance
their cooperation. The first meeting of the Joint Task
Force on Peace and Security underlines the
commitment of both organizations. We look forward to
the outcome of the next meeting in January.

The annual meetings between the AU Peace and
Security Council and the Security Council are useful
opportunities to discuss substantive issues of mutual
concern. The Secretary-General's proposal that the
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa should serve as an informal
secretariat to these meetings is a valuable idea that
should be further considered. In order to complement
such high-level meetings, we believe that working-
level exchanges should continue to be intensified. For
such efforts to be substantial, it is necessary that the
conclusions of the meetings receive appropriate
follow-up.

The establishment of the integrated United
Nations presence in Addis Ababa is highly welcome. It
reduces duplication, enables the United Nations to
make full use of the synergies that have been created
and facilitates working in a more cost-efficient manner.
We hope that the African Union will make full use of
the benefits of the Office.

Austria fully supports efforts aimed at
intensifying cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, in particular the African Union and its
regional economic commissions, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Southern
African Development Community. In addition, we
believe that intensified cooperation with the European
Union, which also cooperates closely with the African
Union in the framework of the Africa-EU Strategic
Partnership, would be an asset and bring about the
benefit of both organizations' comparative advantage.
The upcoming EU-AU summit will be an important
opportunity to strengthen this relationship.

Strengthening the institutional capacities of the
AU is a prerequisite for the AU to take on a more
significant role in the maintenance of peace and
security in Africa. We commend the African Union
Commission for its leadership in strengthening African
capabilities. It is important for all AU member States to
lend their full support to these efforts. We look forward
to the midterm review of the Ten-Year Capacity-
Building Programme. Capacity-building should be
aimed at strengthening national ownership and focus
on the most urgent needs, such as enhancing capacities
in the fields of security sector reform and the rule of
law. As the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo illustrates, these are crucial reforms for the
maintenance of peace and stability.

Austria concurs with the Secretary-General on the
challenge of adequate financing for AU-led
peacekeeping missions authorized by the United
Nations. We maintain that all existing options should
continue to be considered in that regard.

In order for operations such as the African Union
Mission in Somalia and the African Union-United

Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur to be ultimately
successful, we believe that a clear division of labour
and definition of the roles and responsibilities of each
organization are paramount. The issue of accountability
lies at the core of United Nations support to AU
peacekeeping, and we very much welcome that the AU
Commission has embarked on significant management
reform over recent years. We encourage the
Commission to continue its work to that effect.

Let me stress that, in the light of the limited
human and financial resources available for
peacekeeping, preventive diplomacy and conflict
prevention need to be given more attention by the
international community in general, and the Security
Council in particular, as well as by regional and
subregional organizations. It is indisputable that, in
terms of cost effectiveness, conflict prevention and
resolution benefit from a substantial comparative
advantage over other forms of engagement, such as
large-scale conflict intervention and post-conflict
reconstruction.

Finally, let me express my full support for the
draft presidential statement and thank Uganda for its
role in drafting it and leading the negotiations to a
successful result.

