Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): 1
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. I would also like to welcome and thank
Ms. Sellassie, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Sahel, for her briefing, which we have
studied and carefully.

In our view, Mr. Prodi's outline of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, which covers
security, governance, development, human rights and
humanitarian issues, represented a significant step
towards achieving an essential integrated approach to
the Sahel. When I talk about an integrated approach,
I also mean a sincere approach to the issue of the
Sahel, because it is that kind of approach that makes
it possible to aspire to greater effectiveness and
coherence in the context of a multitude of national,
regional and international programmes. That coherence
and coordination - which the Special Envoy has
defined as one of her goals - are indispensable,
urgent and essential if we are to continue to maintain
full attention on the Sahel region. Without such an
integrated approach and coordinated action among the
multiple players at various levels, it seems to us that we
could risk getting lost in the individual characteristics
of the various conflicts that ensnare the countries in
the region.

For example, the legitimate fight against terrorism
is essential. The primary cause will be illuminated
in the project. Humanitarian issues might be another
priority area. That is why we believe that it is essential
to understand that working on isolated aspects is
ineffective. We support the integrated approach by
which various areas - humanitarian efforts, promoting
and protecting human rights, eradicating cross-border
crime, fighting against and eradicating terrorism,
eradication of poverty - are all addressed together. I
believe that is the most concrete step we can and should
take.
With that in mind, Argentina endorses the
congratulations addressed to the countries of the
Sahel region that have clearly taken this necessity on
board, as shown by the third meeting of the ministerial
coordination platform for the Sahel, held last month in
Bamako. We welcome the specific steps taken at the
meeting to strengthen coordination, adopting the terms
of reference for the platform and the thematic groups
that have been established. We also welcome greater
coordination among the platform and the Group of Five
Sahel.

With respect to the individual issues examined
on 18 November, I wish to briefly say that Argentina
agrees with the conclusions of the platform regarding its
concerns and condemns the many attacks on the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. We therefore call on the parties to
make progress in the talks in Algeria, whose work with
the members of the mediation team we deeply value.

We also agree with the assessment of the grave
situation in Libya and the support expressed by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
that country. That situation reminds us of the need to
respond to the structural causes of conflicts. Absent
that, the various illegal networks and the threat posed
by various extremist and terrorist groups operating
in the region will continue to spread. It is also true
that they will continue to spread if we continue with
business as usual. It is not written in stone that the
Sahel, more than any other region in the world, is
condemned to be packed with weapons, perpetrators
of violence and extremist and terrorist groups. The
actions of the countries of the region and of the
international community will determine whether the
situation worsens or is transformed in the certain need
for development.

In that sense the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel is essential in reminding us that a response
focused on security alone is insufficient. There must
be a parallel concentration on development and a
dignified life, particularly in a region - as noted many
times - with one of the lowest human development
indexes in the world. In our view, not only in the Sahel
but in various parts of the world, ensuring security as
the axis of the rule of law and development has not led
to progress. We have seen the failures. Poverty cannot
be eradicated on the basis of solutions from countries
that have focused only on security. That approach only
punishes the poor; it does not eliminate poverty.

In that respect, as it is my delegation's last meeting
with Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie, I would like to
reiterate two items of importance to my country.

First, I recall that the primary responsibility for
peace and security and development in the countries of
the Sahel is that ofthe countries ofthe region themselves.
It is they who must address the deep structural roots of
their problems and conflicts and strengthen agreements
and strategies to implement programmes and policies
through short-, medium- and long-term plans to resolve
those structural problems and conflicts. However,
Argentina very much believes in the importance of
the support that the international community and the
United Nations should provide, especially taking into
account the challenges due to climate change and the
economic and financial crisis that originated in the
wealthiest countries of the world. Their effects are also
impacting on the Sahel region.

Secondly, I wish to stress that many of the problems
are, in our opinion, consequences of structural causes
that must be met with substantive information and not
palliative measures. We cannot just point a finger and
say that countries of the region need to strengthen the
rule of law and decide to move towards sustainable
human development. I believe we must also look at each
other, as the international community, and ask ourselves
whether we might also contribute to sustainable human
development in the Sahel by changing the disciplines
and structure of the functioning of the global economic
system, so that the economic and financial instruments
might serve sustainable human development, rather
than generate, again and again, injustice and inequality.

Today's meeting has meaning only insofar as

it supports the efforts of the countries of the region
and keeps the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel on the Council's agenda. However, in
considering ways to achieve a more substantive and
enriching discussion, Argentina considers it would be
useful to be able to rely on concrete measures to assess
implementation. We therefore invite the Council to
consider how to ensure that the follow-up to the issue
will be more effective.

I recall that at the Council's most recent meeting (see S/PV.7203) we said it would be important, for example,
to have detailed information of the disbursements of the
$1.5 billion that was promised for new investments in
the region by the World Bank Group. We also suggested,
with regard to all the programmes and approaches to
be presented in the reports, requiring objective data
on the accounting of all funds assigned to each of
the strategic goals and implemented programmes, as
well as assessments of the impacts. No one is against
follow-up mechanisms. Everybody recognizes that they
are necessary. To us they seem essential to be able to
maintain the dynamic that has kept attention focused on
the Sahel since 2013, and to continue making it visible
within the complex reality of the region.

The human rights of women, children, girls and
boys cannot be guaranteed by minimal or scattered
efforts. We should work through integrated action and
strategic coordination to ensure that women, children,
the youth - everyone, as Amartya Sen said - can live
without fear, hunger or discrimination. We are confident
that appropriate implementation of the integrated
strategy will enable significant progress in solving the
structural causes of conflict. That is why ensuring its
implementation is the best and most sincere response
we can provide to ensure peace and security in the
Sahel.

