Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements. My
delegation aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union.

With respect to the main issue of the peace process
in the Middle East, negotiations between the Israelis
and the Palestinians have resumed after three years.
The viability of a two-State solution, which is the only
lasting and durable solution to the conflict, is at stake.

In that context, we welcome the initiative and
commitment of United States Secretary of State John
Kerry. At the ministerial meeting of the Quartet on
27 September, representatives agreed to support the
designated goal of the negotiations, namely, to conclude
an agreement on all final status issues and to establish a
methodology based on regular meetings scheduled over
a nine-month period. Twenty years after Oslo, a new
interim agreement would serve no purpose, nor would
continued negotiations with no end in sight.

We also welcome the sense of responsibility
manifested by the leaders of the two sides, Mr. Netanyahu
and Mr. Abbas, in deciding to return to the negotiating
table and urge them to maintain that same approach
in conducting the negotiations. In order to overcome
scepticism and the temptation to withdraw, both parties
should adopt confidence measures aimed at changing
the situation on the ground and outlining a path to a just
and durable peace. They must refrain from any decision
that could hinder the progress of negotiations.
In that context, our position has been constant.
First, the continuing settlement activity contravenes
international law and calls into question the viability
of the two-State solution; in that connection,
the European Union has drawn the appropriate
consequences. Secondly, violence, in all its aspects,
must cease. Israel's security and similarly, respect
for the human rights of the Palestinians, cannot be
compromised. In that context, France regrets the loss
of life on both sides resulting from the too frequent
clashes between Israelis and Palestinians. Thirdly,
the situation of Palestinian prisoners and the issue of
administrative detention - despite recent progress on
the latter - remains of concern. We call for the release
of the second group of Palestinian prisoners, which is
a cornerstone for the resumption of the peace talks and
has been again postponed to 29 October. Fourthly, it
is equally important to ensure sustainable economic
development in Palestine in order to strengthen, on the
Palestinian side, the peace camp of President Abbas.

The Gaza blockade - which benefits
Hamas - does not help the situation, nor do the
financial difficulties of the Palestinian Authority and
the economic slowdown evident in the Palestinian
territories. We must help President Abbas with those
issues. The measures taken by Israel in recent months
to ease restrictions - especially those concerning
work permits and water access - are steps in the right
direction. They should be continued and strengthened,
including in Area C and in Gaza.

In terms of Syria, beyond the process ofdismantling
its chemical weapons, the Council must stand ready to
respond to the ongoing tragedy. Faced with evidence of
the horrifying massacre of 21 August, which resulted
from the use of chemical weapons, the Security Council
demanded an end to Syria's chemical weapons arsenal.
As France had requested, the decision allows for
monitoring by the Council and measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations in the case of
non-compliance by the Damascus regime in assuming
its international obligations.

The Council must ensure the strict implementation
of the decision. I commend the cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), which have been given
the responsibilty for dealing with the weapons, and their
courageous staff, who are already deployed in Syria. I
also express my delegation's support and confidence to
Ms. Sigrid Kaag, who was appointed by the Secretary-
General as Special Coordinator of the Joint Mission of

the OPCW and the United Nations. Nevertheless, such
progress must continue. A crucial issue is the fact that
every day, innocent civilians are being killed in attacks
carried out by the Syrian regime.

For its part, France calls for a political solution. In
that context, it supports the convening of a conference
in Geneva, "Geneva II", leading to a political solution
in Syria based on the full implementation ofthe Geneva
communique (S/2012/523, annex) of 30 June 2012.
States participating in Geneva II must fully embrace
that goal. It is important that the process be credible
and lead quickly to the establishment of a transitional
Government with full executive powers, including
presidential powers in the security, intelligence and
armed forces sectors.

The Secretary-General and the Joint Special
Representative, Mr. Brahimi, are committed to
organizing the Geneva II conference. France is fully
cooperating in those efforts, together with its partners.
The successful ministerial meeting convened by
France on the margins of the General Assembly with
Mr. Al-Jerba showed the international community's
support of the Syrian national coalition that represents
the moderate opposition to the regime of Bashar
Al-Assad and should guide the opposition's delegation
in Geneva.

Pending the Geneva II conference, the Security
Council must ensure that the presidential statement
(S/PRST/20l3/15) of 2 October, on humanitarian
access in Syria, enables real change on the ground. It
is clear that, three weeks after its adoption, there is no
improvement in the humanitarian situation in Syria.
The regime continues to refuse to grant United Nations
agencies and other humanitarian actors free, immediate
and unimpeded access to populations in need. France
supports the initiative to invite the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Ms. Valerie Amos, to present to the
Council a first evaluation of the implementation of the
presidential statement.

Lastly, I would like to say a word on Lebanon, which
is suffering the consequences of the conflict in Syria.
Lebanon is dealing with the challenges and threats it
faces because of the war in Syria. Refugees from Syria
are arriving in increasing numbers and today represent
approximately 30 per cent of the Lebanese population.
The deterioration of the security situation due to the
fallout from the Syrian crisis and the resultant worsening
of community tensions, including the two attacks of
15 and 23 August in Ruways and Tripoli respectively,
are tragic illustrations of this. There is a political and
institutional crisis, with institutions paralysed, waiting
for a new Government to be formed. There is also an
economic crisis, which weighs heavily on the country's
internal balance. Given these threats, the dissociation
policy adopted by President Sleiman must at all costs
be maintained and respected by all the Lebanese actors
who collectively adhered to it by signing the Baabda
Declaration on 11 June 2012.

Lebanon must be supported. We welcome the
launching, on the margins of the General Assembly, of
the International Support Group for Lebanon, which
enabled an unanimous expression of support for the
stability and independence of Lebanon and respect for
its sovereignty. We believe that it is now crucial that
we pursue this mobilization with the United Nations.
The Group's work is ongoing, in particular in Beirut,
with a view to demonstrating our solidarity with that
friendly country and to helping it face this sweeping
crisis, which is not only humanitarian in nature but also
affects the political and security environment.

Finally, I would like to reiterate our support for
the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. Its work has been
affected by the difficult situation facing the country,
but its role is crucial in supporting Lebanon in its
efforts to fight against impunity.

