The Secretary-General: Preventive diplomacy's
time has come once again. I am grateful to the
presidency of Lebanon and to President Sleiman for
this opportunity to take stock and chart the way
forward. I also want to thank Nigeria, which helped re-
energize and refocus our discussion on this issue
during its presidency in July 2010.

When I took office almost five years ago, it was
clear to me that we needed to raise our ability to act
early and preventively against emerging threats to an
entirely new level. Building on the ideas and
accomplishments of my predecessors, I saw significant
untapped potential for what we could help achieve
through preventive diplomacy. We have sought to
reinforce our missions abroad, strengthen our envoys
and their teams, improve our expertise, deepen our
partnerships and reshape the Department of Political
Affairs to make this vision a reality.

Today, preventive diplomacy is being conducted
by a broader array of actors, including regional and
civil society organizations, using a wider and more
innovative range of tools. There is growing global
support for prevention, coupled with the creation of
new preventive capacities in multilateral organizations
and Member States. The pace, intensity and increasing
professionalization of our preventive efforts are
beginning to pay off. We have used diplomacy to
3
ensure a peaceful referendum in the Sudan, a
democratic transition in Guinea, and an end to the
violence in Kenya and Kyrgyzstan. From Afghanistan
to the Middle East, from West Africa to the Sudan and
Somalia, our missions are carrying out preventive
diplomacy every day, helping to sustain complex
political, peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes.

However, we still have a long way to go. Violent
conflict continues to wreak a shocking toll on
individuals, societies and economies. Every day, we
can see the costs of the failure to prevent. Despite
recent advances, preventive diplomacy continues to
face long odds and numerous challenges. A critical
factor is political will. If the parties do not want peace
or are unwilling to compromise, it is extraordinarily
difficult to persuade them or impose it from the
outside.

For this and other familiar reasons, we are still
too often unable to act until a situation visibly
deteriorates. But this should not deter us from trying to
resolve underlying tensions and, when conflict does
erupt, to stop its spread and mitigate the damage it can
cause.

My report (S/2011/552) outlines several areas of
focus. First, we must prioritize early action. Too often,
we find ourselves scrambling to manage emergencies
that could have been prevented from spiralling out of
control in the first place. It is incumbent on all of us -
Member States, regional organizations and the United
Nations - to act early and decisively. The Security
Council can do much to address an emerging threat,
whether or not it is on its formal agenda, precisely to
avoid it ending up there. I or my representatives come
before this Council virtually every day to talk about
conflicts we are trying to resolve.

Secondly, we must continue to invest in and
better equip the women and men who lead our
preventive diplomacy efforts on the ground.

Thirdly, while prevention is infinitely cheaper
than cure and is one of the smartest, most cost-
effective investments we can make, it still needs
adequate investment if it is to deliver results. At the
same time, we will continue to maximize the impact of
the resources we already have.

Fourthly, we must further strengthen our strategic
partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations. In crisis situations, we must be able to
decide quickly on who can do what to help.
Sometimes, preventive diplomacy is getting the
international community to speak with one voice. The
Security Council has a key role to play in that regard.

Finally, we must continue to support national
institutions and mechanisms for mediation and
dialogue. Including civil society organizations,
especially women and youth who can lead the charge
for peaceful change, in preventive efforts is critical.

Preventive diplomacy may not be effective in all
situations. Uncertainty, risks and evolving challenges
come with the terrain. Yet I firmly believe that better
preventive diplomacy is not an option; it is a necessity.
Prevention will remain a fundamental priority in my
second term as Secretary-General. I count on the
support of Member States, regional organizations, civil
society and other partners. I know that this is what they
expect of me, and it is what people everywhere expect
of the United Nations.

