Mr. IliicheV (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia, likw many other delegations, abstained
in the voting on the Security Council draft resolution on
expanding the sanctions regime against South Sudan.
That is because there are profound concerns about the
content of the document and the work conducted on
it. We think that it is abnormal when serious work on
settling the situation in the South Sudan is undermined
by the senseless use of such sanctions. But that is
typical of the sort of geopolitical engineering that the
Western countries have been using against South Sudan
and other countries. In the past, it was used against the
united Sudan in order to dismember it into two States.

We have a question for the delegation of the United
States. How does that delegation assess United States
activities on this issue? Having been unsuccessful in
South Sudan, the United States is now attempting to use
the Security Council for its own purposes, including
through the pointless expansion of sanctions. We do
not want to share the responsibility for the disastrous
consequences of such a short-sighted policy. We are
also against the high-handed, unceremonious conduct
of the sponsors of the resolution. By putting it to a vote,
they have not just ignored the opinion of a number of
Council delegations, they have also disregarded the
decisions of regional players, which have stated that new
Security Council restrictions were counterproductive
for the peace settlement process. They were also not
bothered by the legitimate concerns of South Sudan's
troop- and police-contributing countries, which quite
rightly have misgivings about the negative impact of
new sanctions on relations between the host country
and the Blue Helmets.
The sponsors do not want to acknowledge the
progress and cooperation achieved between Juba and the
United Nations. President Kiir has categorically agreed
to receive the Regional Protection Force. There has
been serious progress in the peace settlement process,
including the successful work of the Transitional
Government of National Unity and its practical steps to
launch inclusive, national dialogue and an amnesty for
Machar's supporters. Once again, the sponsors of the
draft resolution closed their eyes to all of that.

We would also like to point out the inconsistency in
the American delegation's interpretation of the priorities
of United Nations peacekeeping. At the Security
Council meeting on 20 November 2015 on the future
of United Nations peace operations, which included a
discussion of the report of the Secretary-General on the
outcomes of the United Nations peacekeeping review
(S/2015/682), the representative of the United States
stated that,

"We agree with the Secretary-General that political
settlements that promote peaceful and inclusive
societies and help advance human rights are key
to preventing conflict and interrupting cycles of
violence. We have a vested interest in ensuring
that, in those places where we have deployed
peacekeeping missions, we are equally engaged in
advancing the political process" (S/PV. 7564, p.12).

It is doubtful that sanctioning the leaders of South
Sudan and of the opposition would facilitate the
building of a more inclusive society or the forging a
political process. On the contrary, such steps would only
exacerbate the animosity between the various ethnic
groups and the escalation of tension. We would also
like to point out that in resolution 2327 (2016), which
extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, the sponsors defined the Mission's
task to facilitate the political process as being the last
priority. They did not heed the proposal of a number of
delegations to make it at least a second priority.

In sum therefore, we would like to express our
satisfaction about the responsible position taken by a
large number of Security Council members not to allow
today's destructive draft resolution on South Sudan
to be adopted. In so doing, we managed to prevent
the emergence of new problems in the settlement
process and in relations between the host country, the
peacekeeping Mission and the international community
as a whole.

