Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the current month. I thank you for
giving us this opportunity to express the views of the
Syrian Arab Republic concerning the second report of
the International Independent Investigation
Commission. Allow me also to express our
appreciation to Mr. Andrey Denisov, Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations, and the members of his mission for their
conduct of the work of the Council last month.

I would like to join you, Sir, in welcoming the
presence of Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who is with
us today at this meeting of the Security Council.

Allow me to start by reiterating once again
Syria's condemnation of the operation that led to the
assassination of the former Prime Minister of Lebanon,
Mr. Rafik Hariri. I would also like to reiterate Syria's
condemnation of the bombing that took place in a
Beirut suburb yesterday, which took the life of
Mr. Gebrane Tueni. Syria condemns the earlier series
of bombings aimed at destabilizing Lebanon and
creating tensions in the relations between Syria and
Lebanon as well as the attempt to immediately blame
those bombings on Syria. All those actions are part of a
broader plan to destabilize the region as a whole.

Today's consideration of the second report of the
International Independent Investigation Commission
(S/2005/775) provides a further opportunity for Syria
to express its commitment to cooperating with the
Commission. I would like to reiterate that Syria is
making every possible effort to facilitate the task of the
Commission so that it can discharge its mandate in the
best possible manner.

In that context, we disagree with the imprecise
statements contained in the Commission's report,
referring to Syria's reluctance to fully cooperate with
the Commission and its work. On the contrary, Syria
has consistently and continuously communicated with
the Commission. That is documented through the
contacts and the exchanges between the two parties
that ultimately led to a mutual understanding on the
modalities for conducting the investigation in Vienna.
Contrary to the statement contained in paragraph
30 of the report, the special Syrian Judicial
Commission, since its creation, has discharged its tasks
in a professional and transparent manner. It has
assisted the International Commission with all the
investigations conducted in Syria and provided all the
records, information and lists required. The Security
Council can examine those details whenever it wishes
to do so. The International Independent Investigation
Commission's non-recognition of the Syrian Judicial
Commission led to an undesirable delay. We had hoped
that the International Commission would show interest
in cooperating with the Syrian Judicial Commission.
We would have liked to see constructive interaction
between the two bodies in order speedily to attain the
Council's objectives. The Syrian Judicial Commission
will continue its work so that information from the
International Commission can be made available to it,
enabling it to fully discharge its mandate.

The rights of the States concerned in the
investigation had to be clear, specific and consistent
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter and in conformity with the generally
recognized principles of international law. I believe
that the Commission did not maintain one of the
investigation's most important principles:
confidentiality. Its reports were consistently leaked to
the media and were handled in a distorted and
prejudiced manner. We do not believe that the members
of the Security Council, when they voted to adopt
resolution 1636 (2005), sought to encroach upon State
sovereignty or to ignore the commitment to implement
basic norms of human rights.

In order to reaffirm our desire to cooperate, we
informed the International Independent Investigation
Commission that the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Syrian Arab Republic would welcome a meeting
with the head of the Commission in Damascus or
during an official visit to Europe. The understanding
reached between the representatives of the Syrian
Foreign Ministry and the Commissioner led to the
Commission's agreement to implement the basic
guarantees contained in international human rights
conventions with respect to criminal proceedings.
However, the Commission's investigators did not
follow those principles in the interviews conducted in
Vienna. That led the appointed British lawyers to write
a letter to the Commissioner in which they cited
several irregularities in the investigation. For example,
the investigators summarized the interviewees'
statements instead of making a verbatim record; the
lawyers were not given official copies of the records;
and the interviewees were not allowed to sign their
statements in Arabic versions, but had to sign their
statements transcribed in a language that they do not
understand.

The report of the International Independent
Investigation Commission essentially reaffirms the
conclusions of the previous report, which were based
on the presumption of guilt and the making of
prejudged accusations. Therefore, the criticisms of the
previous report also apply to this one.

The task of the Commission must be to seek out
evidence and leads that will enable it to identify the
perpetrators of the crime and to build on such evidence
and leads in order to identify those who were involved
in its planning, direction and implementation. In that
regard, we would like to make the following basic
comments.

First, the witness Hussam Taher Hussam arrived
in Syria abruptly. He made some statements and
clarifications to the international media of his own free
will, recanting his previous testimony to the
International Independent Investigation Commission.
His statement was recorded by the Syrian Judicial
Commission and its content was transmitted to the
International Independent Investigation Commission.
The International Commission could have summoned
that witness to Vienna instead of continuing to rely on
his previous testimony. There is no truth whatsoever to
the report's statements that Mr. Hussam is being
manipulated or intimidated and that some of his close
relatives in Syria were threatened and arrested before
his public statement.

Secondly, we wonder why the Commission did
not investigate the nature of Zuheir Saddik's
movements between our region and certain European
countries during the past few months, despite all the
suspicions surrounding his testimony, which changed
his status from that of a witness to that of a suspect,
and despite the fact that he was arrested in France two
months ago and is still being held. There has been no
response thus far to the request for his extradition. The
Syrian Embassy in Paris received a handwritten letter
from him stating that he had been kidnapped and
coerced to give his previous testimony, upon which the
Commission continues to rely in its new report.

It is noteworthy that, as stated in paragraph 28 of
the report, the Commission determined through an
analysis of Mr. Saddik's DNA that a substantial part of
his statement was false: namely, the part related to his
purported attendance at meetings in an apartment in the
Beirut suburb of Al-Dahiyye to plan the crime.
Therefore, the Commission must conclude that the rest
of his testimony is also false and invalid.

Thirdly, in the report, the Commission has not yet
been able to determine how the Mitsubishi vehicle
carrying the explosives arrived in Lebanon. The
previous report assumed that it might have entered
Lebanon through Syria on the basis of testimony given
by witnesses who were proved to lack credibility:
Zuheir Saddik and Hussam Hussam.

Fourthly, both reports referred to the possible
presence of a third party, but the Commission did not
attach due significance to that possibility, despite the
fact that it is extremely important for the completion of
the investigation.

We have commented on some of the basic issues
covered in the report. We would like to make
additional comments and observations, but time
constraints do not allow us to do so. Here, I should like
to reiterate once again that Syria, which has cooperated
fully with the investigation during the recent period, is
prepared to continue to do so in the forthcoming
period.

Syria requests that the Council take into account
the comments made in my statement. In addition, I
would like to point out that Syria, which has fully
implemented all the relevant United Nations
resolutions, looks to the Security Council and its
members to work with the same zeal and interest to
ensure the implementation of Council resolutions
relevant to the Middle East region.

