Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in French):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
thank Assistant-Secretary-General Bintou Keita for
her briefing. Similarly, we welcome the presence of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali, Her Excellency Ms. Kamissa
Camara. We are grateful for her presence, which
signifies the support of her Government for the
peace process.

(spoke in Spanish)

We acknowledge the recent strides made in
Mali, including the establishment of provisional
administrations at the district level and the
implementation of an accelerated process of
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
integration. We also highlight the establishment of
the Ministry of National Reconciliation and Social
Cohesion. Peru believes that the full implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
should remain the priority for the Malian Government
and people, with the support of the international
community. On the basis of that progress, it is essential
that all parties pool their efforts around three core
objectives, which we believe are important to prioritize.

First, with respect to the political process, we
believe that it is necessary to work without delay on the
political and institutional reforms required to improve
governance, security and socioeconomic development,
as set forth in resolution 2423 (2018) and in the Pact for
Peace. It is also urgent to move forward with reforms
related to the constitutional review, decentralization
and upholding the rule of law. Those elements are
central to the development of peaceful, transparent
and inclusive legislative elections, as well as to lead to
greater social cohesion.

Secondly, with regard to the fight against insecurity,
we note with alarm the situation of ongoing violence and
instability in various parts of the country, especially
in central Mali, which is evidenced by a precarious
humanitarian situation. We support the efforts being
made to strengthen the Malian armed forces in order to
equip them with the technical and training capabilities
that will enable them to confront terrorist and rebel
groups, while also counting on the trust and support
of the population. It is equally important to strengthen
national control over the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons, which triggers a continuous spiral of
violence. We believe that it is also key to complement
those actions with the establishment of an independent
judicial system that can address human rights violations,
as well as contribute to the fight against impunity and for
accountability for various crimes, such as kidnapping,
sexual violence and intercommunal violence.

Thirdly, in relation to the promotion of sustainable
development, we highlight the efforts of the Malian
Government in developing the strategic framework for
economic recovery and sustainable development, and
the support provided by the Peacebuilding Commission
Fund to carry out projects aimed at building a peaceful
and inclusive society. However, we are concerned about
the inequality in economic performance between the
capital Bamako and the other regions of the country.
The attainment of sustainable peace will be possible
only through a comprehensive approach that includes
improvements in security, political dialogue and the
rule of law as essential requirements to address the root
causes of the conflict.

We also believe that it is indispensable to promote
measures that include greater participation and
empowerment of women. In that regard, we welcome
the establishment of a working group on women's
participation in the peace process, under the leadership
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). In the
same vein, we believe that the involvement of young
people in defining and building the future of their
country is crucial.

In conclusion, we would like to acknowledge the
role of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
in strengthening the regional response to terrorism and
transnational organized crime, as well as the courageous
work of the MINUSMA forces in particularly difficult
operational environments and situations. We reaffirm
our strong support for the efforts undertaken by the
Council and other regional and international actors
for sustainable peace in Mali, which will be possible
only with the decisive and firm leadership of the
Malians themselves.

