I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his detailed briefing on the situation in the Middle East. The Niger has followed with great concern the recent developments in the region, in particular the demolition by Israeli forces of structures and property belonging to the Palestinian community in Khirbet Humsa, in the West Bank. Israeli excavators and bulldozers spared no homes, animal shelters, latrines or even sanitation facilities during this large-scale operation. We should be deeply concerned about the cruel and traumatic plight suffered by these poor people, many of them children, as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to claim victims and as winter gradually sets in. The Niger deplores and condemns such acts, which, moreover, are counterproductive in the light of efforts within the Israeli-Palestinian peace process and incompatible with the obligations of the State of Israel under international humanitarian law. The demolition and destruction of private property in the occupied territory violate the provisions of the relevant United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). The lack of building permits, very often cited by the Israeli authorities to justify operations, is also dubious, since such permits are almost never issued to Palestinians who request them. We therefore call on the international community, and the Security Council in particular, not to turn a blind eye to the threat posed by Israeli policy in the occupied Palestinian territories. The demolition and expropriation of Palestinian structures must stop. The colonization established to manage these territories must also end. We call on Israel to respect the principles of international law and to refrain from any measures to the contrary that could distract us from the prospect of a resumption of peace talks towards a negotiated two-State solution, as supported by the international community. In this regard, the trend to normalize relations between Israel and its Arab neighbours in recent months and the announcement made by the Palestinian Authority yesterday of its intention to resume civil and security cooperation with Israel should serve as a springboard for resuming peace talks for a just and equitable solution to the crisis. My delegation wishes to express its great concern at the deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, particularly as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the restrictions imposed by the Israeli authorities. Since the first cases of community transmission recorded in August, the spread of the virus in Gaza has continued to worsen. There are now thousands of active cases, which the health system, suffering from a lack of medical personnel and equipment, is struggling to absorb. Long before the pandemic, the situation of the inhabitants of Gaza was already of the utmost concern due to factors such as extreme poverty, food insecurity, overpopulation, high unemployment, restrictions on gasoline imports imposed by the Israeli authorities, the precariousness of the health system and the continued blockade of the Gaza Strip, which has lasted 13 years. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East must have the means to continue providing vital services to thousands of Palestinian families in need, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic. In conclusion, the Niger welcomes the tireless efforts of Mr. Mladenov and reaffirms its full commitment to supporting the efforts of the international community towards a swift settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which has an undeniable impact on the peace, stability and security of the entire Middle East region.
