Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): France,
like others, pays tribute to former Secretary-General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who was a great leader both
of the United Nations and la francophonie. His passing
fills us with sorrow, and we extend our condolences to
his bereaved friends and family.

I thank the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea. I wish to make three
points.

On the political front, we welcome progress made
with the adoption of the Mogadishu Declaration of
16 December, as well as the agreement on the electoral
model for 2016. As underscored by the Group of
Experts, these agreements are tenuous. The electoral
reform has not been concluded. In many provinces,
local and political rivalries impede discussions on
the federal model. The recent fighting that bloodied
the city of Galkayo demonstrates the fragile nature
of progress in the protection of civilians and national
reconciliation. We must remain vigilant and continue to
work with the Somali authorities for the implementation
of these agreements and the ongoing commitment of all
in stabilizing Somalia.

On the military front, we welcome the courage
and commitment of the soldiers of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali security
forces leading the fight against Al- Shabaab. Al-Shabaab
is on the decline, economic activity is increasing, and
these are encouraging signs. However, that terrorist
group is far from being vanquished. We pay tribute to
AMISOM. soldiers and Somali citizens who lost their
lives in the latest attacks. It is worrisome to read that,
in certain places, Al-Shabaab is enjoying the support of
local populations in launching its attacks. Our shared
goal is to continue relentlessly the fight against that
terrorist group, but military action is not enough. As it
is the world over, hearts must be won to rally people on
behalf of stabilization and reconstruction projects for
Somalia, rather than the morbid objectives sought by
Al-Shabaab.

Thirdly, I wish to make a few comments on
sanctions, because the sanctions regime is a decisive tool
in supporting the political process and the fight against
Al-Shabaab. The work of the Monitoring Group is
decisive in that respect. Threats to the fragile process in
Somalia are genuine. There are many who are interested
in perpetuating war. They need to be identified and
punished. Al-Shabaab and certain other individuals
continue to finance their own activities through various
types of trafficking, helping to destroy the country a
little more every day and diverting financial resources
to their own profit. These flows and this traffic must
be identified and halted. Arms trafficking is, of
course, a major factor of destabilization. We cannot
overemphasize the importance of the arms embargo and
of the need to ensure its scrupulous implementation, as
well as the important role of the Somali Government in
following up the flow of weapons.

On all of these points - and this is hardly a
comprehensive list - France welcomes the high-
quality work undertaken by the Monitoring Group and
encourages it to continue along this path.

I wish to say a final word on Eritrea. We note the
fact that the Monitoring Group found no evidence that
Eritrea is participating in the financing or support of
armed groups in the Horn of Africa. Nevertheless, we
believe that conditions have not yet been met for the
lifting of sanctions, as requested by the authorities of
Asmara. We await frank and sincere cooperation on
their part with the sanctions committees, particularly
on the matter of Djibouti prisoners. This is the first
stage of a gradual evolution of the sanctions regime.
We do not understand what the Government in Asmara
has to hide or what is stopping it from fully cooperating
with the Monitoring Group.

The international community, the United Nations,
the African Union and the European Union have
invested much for peace and stability in Somalia. The
action of the Sanctions Committee and the Monitoring
Group is a game changer, and France guarantee its full
support as they continue their work.

