Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): The hour is late.
We will be brief. On the Middle East issue, it is clearly
very difficult to get consensus or unanimity within the
Security Council. But we believe that there is total
consensus today on one point: the situation in the
Middle East is dangerous and getting more dangerous.
No one can challenge this simple, indisputable fact.
When such major threats to international peace and
security surface, only one - we repeat, only one -
organization has been assigned the primary
responsibility to handle them. No other organ has this
constitutional responsibility. Therefore, we in the
Security Council have to seize this responsibility
because the responsibility is ours. When we do not, the
situation often gets worse. This is what we have seen
happening in the Middle East.

In the past few months, Singapore has been
deeply disturbed by the senseless loss of innocent lives
following the escalation of violence. It is truly
horrifying to wake up each morning to see more
pictures of innocent civilians being targeted and killed.
We share the Secretary-General's view that the
targeting of innocent civilians is unacceptable, and we
are pleased that in the debate, in all the statements we
have heard so far, there is complete unanimity that this
targeting of innocent civilians must be brought to an
end. The tragedy here is that these attacks are taking
place at a time when there has actually been increased
international action and attention to re-engage the
parties and to end the violence.

Our humble view is that we should not provide
the extremists with a veto on the resumption of the
peace process. All sides should be called upon to
exercise maximum restraint and not allow these
extremists to drive the agenda. All parties should
immediately rejoin the Middle East peace process.
Fortunately for the Council, the path to peace has been
comprehensively laid down by the report of the Sharm
El-Sheikh Fact-Finding Committee, the Mitchell
report. It is remarkable that this report has been
supported by both parties - indeed, by the entire
international community. Hence, we believe that
immediate steps should be taken to implement the
Mitchell report.

In the Middle East, ultimately, there is no
alternative to a negotiated peace settlement based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). In our view, now more than ever, the
international efforts of mediation and facilitation,
including those of the United States, Russia, the
European Union and the United Nations, as well as
those of other key regional players, should be
redoubled. We believe that by acting together, the
international community can best succeed in its
endeavours to fight against terrorism and to bring
peace to the Middle East. We hope that sometime soon
the international community will come together again
and speak with one voice.

