Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I would like to express my country's most
vigorous condemnation of the attack on United Nations
House in Abuja, and extend our condolences to the
families of the victims, the Government of Nigeria and
the United Nations family.

Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on the work
you have carried out in presiding over the Security
Council during the month of August and to thank you
for having convened this open debate on an issue to
which Argentina attributes great importance.

Argentina supports the development of a
transparent and democratic peacekeeping system
within the framework of the United Nations, with
consolidated multilateral institutions and mechanisms
that serve to ensure respect for international law. Since
peacekeeping operations are the essential United
Nations tool for maintaining international peace and
security, our active participation in these operations is
clear evidence of our commitment to that system,
which in our view must be progressively improved and
strengthened.

In addition to contributing to strengthening the
peacekeeping system, another fundamental reason for
our participation in peacekeeping missions is the close
link between peacekeeping and the protection of
human rights, particularly through the rebuilding of
institutions and the strengthening of democracy and the
rule of law in countries where increasingly complex
multidimensional operations are deployed. In this
regard, we believe that the move towards this type of
more complex and integrated mission, with a clear
mandate and robust rules of engagement, constitutes
one of the greatest achievements of the last decade and
one which we must preserve and improve.

Argentina is currently participating in six
peacekeeping operations with both military and police
personnel. Recently, together with Chile, we offered
the United Nations the Cruz del Sur combined joint
peacekeeping force, which, as of 2012, will be
available to the United Nations standby arrangements
system. Also in 2012, along with Peru, we expect to

11-4815]
have an engineer contingent ready to offer for
deployment to the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.

All that I have just said regarding the future of
peacekeeping operations is contingent on their having
adequate financing. In this regard, as Chair of the
Group of 77 and China, my country has just
painstakingly negotiated, in the Fifth Committee of the
General Assembly, a draft resolution that reflects the
consensus on the next measures to be adopted, given
the need for the efforts of troop- and police-
contributing countries to be met by an equivalent
commitment by those countries with higher financial
responsibilities. This is not merely a budgetary matter,
but a political one that affects the performance and
credibility of the Organization in the critical field of
peacekeeping and that must therefore be duly taken
into consideration when evaluating and planning any
future peace mission.

My country discussed this and other matters this
year in the troubled substantive session of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and in the
General Assembly, and has adopted a constructive
approach in this respect. The founding principle of our
position is respect for national participation by the
societies in which the peacekeeping missions are
deployed. On this basis, Argentina favours any
improvement to the missions' mechanisms that
contributes to the effective discharge of their mandates
and allows for better performance and conditions for
the personnel deployed on the ground. In this respect,
we believe that the creation of the Department of Field
Support and the progressive implementation of the
field support strategy are wise moves that will allow us
to optimize resources and make peacekeeping more
effective.

There is consensus among the Members of the
Organization regarding the need to improve the United
Nations capacity to carry out peacekeeping operations
by strengthening the cooperative partnership that, in
practice, comprises Security Council members -
which design the missions' mandates - the
Secretariat, the General Assembly, the host country and
the troop- and police-contributing countries, which
implement the mandate on the ground. In this regard,
my country believes that, in order to make that
partnership more efficient, it will be necessary to
continue to improve communication and coordination
among its members. In this context, we highlight the

11-4815]
importance of convening the Security Council's
informal meetings with the troop- and police-
contributing countries sufficiently in advance of the
expiration of their mandates.

Finally, I would like to point out the importance
of the groups of friends in that partnership framework.
The Group of Friends of Haiti, of which Argentina is a
member together with other members of the Council
and several countries of the region, is a clear example
of the relevant role that such an informal mechanism
can play. Through its participation in the drawing up of
the draft resolutions renewing the mandate of the
mission in Haiti, among others, the Group contributes
to maintaining Member States' support of the Mission
by ensuring a continuity of efforts and unity of
objectives.

