Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): As always, Sierra
Leone is delighted to see the United Kingdom assume
the presidency of this body, and in particular to see
you, Sir, chairing this open debate. In the same vein,
we thank you for giving the delegation of Sierra Leone
the opportunity to participate in the debate.

As the Council is aware, on 12 June 2000, the
President of the Republic of Sierra Leone, His
Excellency Alhaji Dr. Ahmad Tejan Kabbah, requested
the United Nations to establish a special court as a
means of bringing and maintaining peace and security
in Sierra Leone and, indeed, in the West African
subregion. Victims of heinous crimes in Sierra Leone,
and victims all over the world, want justice to be done.
My delegation believes they deserve it, and I am sure
that the Council agrees. They are calling on the United
Nations - especially the Security Council - to fight
impunity and to hold accountable for their crimes the
perpetrators of atrocities committed systematically and
on a massive scale.

My delegation believes it unthinkable that
peacekeepers would engage in atrocities systematically
and on a massive scale. Under the circumstances, my
delegation does not have apprehensions about future
Sierra Leonean peacekeepers falling under the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
And even if Sierra Leonean nationals engaged in future
peacekeeping activities were to commit atrocities
systematically and on a massive scale, the Sierra
Leonean judicial system would have primacy with
respect to such nationals, in conformity with the
principle of complementarity enshrined in the Statute
of the ICC.

Victims of heinous crimes all over the world are
crying out for justice, and we must give them hope that
durable peace and a prosperous future are possible
through the rule of law. Indeed, Sierra Leone is
extremely grateful for the timely assistance and support
provided by the Government and the people of the
United States, and we hope that our country will finally
recover and will be able to rebuild a free and
democratic society based on justice and accountability.

Sierra Leone signed the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court on 17 October 1998 and
ratified it on 15 September 2000, joining those who
believe that the creation of a jurisdiction capable of
complementing national systems when they are
unwilling or unable to prosecute suspects represents
one of the most effective instruments that the
international community has created to prevent future
conflicts and to provide redress for millions of victims
of outrageous violence.

Today the Security Council has been convened to
take action on a proposal regarding the maintenance of
peace. We hope that, in their deliberations, Council
members will adhere to international law, bearing in
mind that what is at stake here is not only respect for
universal norms but also, and above all, the lives and
welfare of millions of individuals.

In conclusion, I want to reaffirm Sierra Leone's
unfettered commitment to the establishment of the
International Criminal Court and to the maintenance of
the integrity of its Statute.

