Allow me to begin by thanking Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Ms. Noura Ghazi for their briefings today. The Syrian civil war has been raging for over nine years, in which thousands have been killed, injured or displaced. The conflict has been exacerbated and no doubt prolonged by the interference of outside role players, including foreign Powers and armed groups. A peaceful, stable country became a battlefield for geopolitical rivalry and the ambitions of terrorist groups. As we reach the final stages of this conflict, the Syrian parties and all international role players must commit to a peaceful settlement based on the commitments made, including the road map agreed upon in resolution 2254 (2015). In that regard, South Africa calls on the parties to work towards a permanent ceasefire that will pave the way for an environment conducive to inclusive Syrian- led dialogue aimed at achieving a lasting political solution that reflects the will of the Syrian people. As we advance that process, there is an urgent need to address instability and tension in the north of Syria. Moreover, the presence of armed groups in the east pose an imminent threat to local and regional stability. We reiterate that peace cannot be achieved as long as there is external interference and support to armed groups in Syria. That must end. The sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Syria must be respected. The continued efforts of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and his team to find a lasting solution to the conflict in Syria, despite the restrictions and challenges brought on by the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, must be supported. The Council meets monthly to receive updates from the Special Envoy on progress made in moving the parties towards peace. While we all commit in words to support the peace efforts, that must be followed up by action. We are encouraged about reports that the groups representing the Government and the opposition in the Constitutional Committee have agreed to reconvene in August 2020 at the earliest, should the COVID-19 travel restrictions be lifted. The convening of the Constitutional Committee is the resumption of a vital political process and, as Mr. Pedersen has stated, necessary for building trust and confidence among the parties engaged in this process. South Africa reiterates that the political and humanitarian tracks in Syria are interlinked. We therefore call on all stakeholders to promote progress in both tracks in order to ensure a sustainable and peaceful settlement to the conflict. The COVID-19 pandemic has affected all of us, developed and developing countries alike. However, its impact is exacerbated in countries affected by conflict. While the Security Council's inability to adopt an outcome calling for a global ceasefire in the time of the pandemic is unacceptable, we must at the very least support Special Envoy Pedersen's calls for an immediate and nationwide cessation of hostilities in Syria and the Secretary-General's call for the lifting of economic sanctions measures, so as to ensure that Syria is fully able to respond to the virus. Syria remains at high risk for the spread of the virus, and all parties - the Syrian Government, the international community, non-governmental organizations and humanitarian agencies - must all do their part to contain the spread of the virus. This includes the continued safe and unimpeded access of humanitarian aid and medical supplies to combat the virus and to ensure that all those who require assistance, wherever they are throughout Syria, receive it. All sides must be encouraged to undertake trust- and confidence-building measures, which includes making progress in the release of civilians detained, particularly those belonging to such vulnerable groups as women, children, the elderly and the disabled. As part of these confidence-building measures to promote progress, the easing of economic sanctions imposed on Syria should be considered if there is forward movement on the political front. At the very least, humanitarian exemptions must be expedited and impediments to allowing these exemptions eased in order to ensure the delivery of required supplies. In conclusion, resolution 2254 (2015) remains the road map for the political process in Syria, and we call for its full implementation and for the Council's continued support of the work of the Constitutional Committee, the Special Envoy and his Office, and the various stakeholders participating in the mediation process. As we have seen by our own experience in South Africa, the only path to a sustainable peace is through dialogue, negotiation and reconciliation. Today South Africa commemorates Youth Day, the day in 1976 in which the youth of South Africa rose up against oppression and injustice. We remember the youth of Syria and elsewhere who have suffered for far too long and who deserve the right to live in peace.
