Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We welcome
once again Mr. Carl Bildt, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Balkans. We thank him for
his thorough and engaging statement. We commend his
efforts and his initiatives for self-sustaining peace and
stability in the Balkans. We are aware of the vastness
of the task ahead of him and of the complexity of the
issues in the region.

The statement by Mr. Javier Solana, High
Representative for the European Union Common
Foreign and Security Policy, was very enriching to our
consideration ofthe item on the agenda.

The Balkans is a region where disintegrative
forces are still dominant and where the international
political equation is not always fully supportive of
cohesion or of the implementation of peace objectives.
The issues there are different in different areas, but
some common threads run through all of them. While
we need to take individual approaches to deal with
specific problems, there is also a need to view them
from a regional macro-perspective. There have been
some such initiatives, the most important being the
Stability Pact initiative of last year, sponsored by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

We note that its efforts range from economic
reconstruction to political reform and closer regional
integration. However, further regional efforts, with
firm support from the Security Council, could
contribute much to settling the long-term issues of
achieving peace in the Balkans.

The United Nations should continue to focus on a
number of areas in this region. First, the general
security situation needs improvement. The region has
been involved in war and inter-ethnic conflict for too
long. Human rights have been grossly violated, and
justice has been denied. There has been too much
violence from attacks and counter-attacks on
minorities. The situation is particularly disturbing
where there is a minority presence.

The international community has been putting up
its best efforts, and considerable progress has also been
achieved, but much more remains to be done.

Secondly, the issue of missing persons and
detainees is important, particularly in Kosovo. There
should be an early settlement of the fate of people who
remain lost or held captive. Protracting this problem
will work against attempts to build trust and confidence
between and among the different communities.

Thirdly, the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons is one of the chief concerns in the
region. In Kosovo, a large number of refugees have
returned; displaced persons are also settling into their
own places. But this is also accompanied by an outflow
of Serbs from many areas. Although large-scale return
has taken place, the refugee problem is still one of the
main concerns of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The lack of
adequate security assurance, compounded by painful
memories ofthe recent past, are problems to overcome.
We need to invest further in confidence-building
measures.

Finally, speeding up economic development and
reconstruction in the region is a key factor which can
rekindle hope among people. It will be a natural
deterrent to violence. The international community has
made a good deal of investment, but it still remains
inadequate. A massive plan of post-war economic
recovery and reconstruction is needed to give the
region a thriving economy.

We must actively seek change in the region, and
we are very encouraged by the recent initiation of the
democratic process in a number of countries in the
region. We believe it is important to seize that
democratic energy and build on it to create a region of
peace and development. Any attempts without an all-
out commitment on the part of the international
community or international political consensus will be
detrimental to the region, where peace can be achieved
and should be achieved.

We should concentrate on rising above political
differences in order to achieve peace in a region which
has long been in the grip of conflicting forces, at a
tremendous cost to the broader interests of the people
ofthe region.

