Mr. Ryan (Ireland): We, too, are particularly
pleased to welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Kamel Morjane, to the
Council today. We join our colleagues in paying tribute
to Ambassador Morjane's unstinting and courageous
work and his outstanding leadership over the past 20
months. When Ambassador Morjane commenced his
work, we could not easily have anticipated that we
would have reached the current stage of guarded
optimism. We wish him every success in his new
challenge.

We welcome the presence here today of
Secretary-General Annan, who has invested so much in
promoting peace in the Democratic Republic of Congo,
including most recently, and directly, with some of the
principal players in the process - the heads of State of
the Democratic Republic of Congo, Uganda and
Rwanda. As mentioned by Ambassador Levitte,
Belgium, as Presidency of the European Union, will
make a statement later in today's debate. Ireland
subscribes fully to the position of the European Union,
and I make the following points in my national
capacity.

While recent events had given grounds for a
measure of optimism, the military situation in the
Democratic Republic of Congo has not yet reached the
positive point of no return. It is clear that on a number
of fronts there has been tangible progress. However,
the potential for a relapse into Violence remains. In the
period ahead we must continue, as a Council, to
maintain the clear signal to all the parties of our
determination to protect, to sustain and to develop
further the achievements that have been secured thus
far.

That said, it remains the case that the future
security and prosperity of the Democratic Republic of
Congo and the wider region rest with the signatories of
the Lusaka Agreement. Only they have the central
capacity to implement the Agreement.

When the Council mission returned from the
Great Lakes region two months ago there was
reasonable optimism that the situation in the
Democratic Republic of Congo was moving in the right
direction. That is still the case, but there is some
concern at the slow pace and uneven nature of that
progress. Quite frankly, more needs to be done, and
forward movement maintained.

In particular, the parties must meet their
obligation to bring forward and implement plans for
the orderly withdrawal of all foreign troops from the
Congo. Support for the activities of armed groups must
be brought to an end. The Rassemblement congolais
pour la de'mocratie (RCD-Goma) must comply with the
Security Council's demand for the demilitarization of
Kisangani. All Congolese forces, including the Forces
armees congolaises must be deployed within accepted
disengagement lines.

The parties must take the necessary steps to
enable the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation or resettlement of armed groups, with
the assistance of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) and the international community. The
parties must ensure respect for human rights and
uphold the provisions of international humanitarian
law. Every assistance must be given to Sir Ketumile
Masire and his team in their efforts to launch the inter-
Congolese dialogue. It is crucial that this process
should not be allowed to falter and that there should be
no further delay in the holding of preparatory
consultations.
If the goodwill and commitment of the parties is
forthcoming the Council, MONUC and the wider
international community are, of course, ready to assist.
Ireland has put on record in the Council our desire to
see a joined-up approach in the United Nations, at
Headquarters and in the field, and our belief that an
entry point for the development dimension must be
ensured at all levels.

In that regard, it is disappointing that obstacles
have been put in the way of the United Nations efforts
to nominate the Humanitarian Coordinator. We
welcome the activity of MONUC in implementing
quick-impact projects, which assist the peace process
by helping address the basic needs of the people. It is
hoped that such activity can pave the way for larger
developmental activity that can take place in conditions
of peace, with the support of foreign investment.

The revival of Congolese national life will
require tolerance and reconciliation. But justice, too,
will be required. As mentioned earlier by the
Secretary-General, members of the Council had the
opportunity last week to hear from members of non-
governmental organizations, who related to us their
experiences of what they have witnessed on the
ground. What they told us confirmed what we have
been hearing for a long time. And yet, such is the
extent of the humanitarian suffering in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that what they told us what
deeply shocking. It is not enough for the various armed
forces to observe the demands to cease military
activity. They must also respect international
humanitarian standards and allow safe, unhindered and
unconditional access by humanitarian agencies to those
in need. This message must be sent in the strongest
terms to armed groups themselves and their sponsors.
Those that have committed war crimes and crimes

against humanity must be held accountable for their
wrongs.

In closing, let me pay tribute to the excellent
work carried out under Ambassador Morjane, by the
staff of MONUC and by the United Nations agencies
on the ground. I said earlier that 20 months ago, when
Ambassador Morjane took up his post, we could not
have easily anticipated that we would reach the current
stage of guarded optimism. We must not allow the
impetus that has been built up to dissipate. We will
continue to work together with a strong sense of
purpose, but also of urgency to carry out this work.

