Mr. Spokauskas (Lithuania): I thank the briefers
for their comprehensive interventions, as well as
for their dedicated selfless work in fighting the
Ebola outbreak in West Africa. I also commend the
Nigerian presidency for its initiative to convene this
timely Council meeting, as well as for its meaningful
contribution to fighting Ebola.

The outbreak has been brought under control now,
yet it continues to claim reappear in Sierra Leone
and Guinea. As Dr. Chan and numerous others noted
earlier this morning, it takes only one infection and one
delayed collective response to spark another disastrous
epidemic. There is simply no room for complacency.
As we look ahead, we must not forget the lessons that
should have been learned and the mistakes that should
not be repeated.

First of all, the epidemic has once again proven
that prevention and early action are key to making
future crises less devastating and costly. Ebola has
struck countries that have only recently come out of
conflict, impairing their hard-won path to peace and
development as their fragile health-care systems and
governance structures struggled with that new invisible
enemy. At the same time, the outbreak highlighted the
importance of national Governments' rapid initial
efforts to combat the outbreak and of an effective early
response, as well as the vital role of grass-roots and
community organizations in reducing transmission
rates and engaging in prevention efforts, such as those
that were so powerfully advocated by Dr. Fallah earlier
this morning.

The timely involvement of regional and subregional
organizations was instrumental. The rapid deployment
of trained medical and support personnel - coordinated
by the African Union support to the Ebola Outbreak in
West Africa - helped to save thousands at the peak of
the outbreak. The African Union Commission, with the
support of bilateral partners, has advanced the initiative
to establish an African centre for disease control that
has the potential to contribute to greater preparedness
and resilience in tackling similar epidemics on the
continent. These initiatives testify to the leadership and
ownership of the region, and should be encouraged.

The United Nations system, working closely with
the World Health Organization, has demonstrated its
ability to mobilize and ensure an immediate, effective
and coordinated contribution in combating the outbreak.
The United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response and the Global Ebola Response Coalition
enabled and facilitated this unprecedented response and
cooperation. The engagement of the Security Council
has also helped to focus the international community's
attention on the peace and security threats posed by
Ebola to fragile post-conflict nations. United Nations
peacekeeping and political missions in the affected
region, in particular the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, supported efforts to combat and prevent the
further spread of the epidemic. That in turn helped to
sustain the effort to bring Ebola cases down to zero
thereby supporting the post-Ebola recovery effort in the
crisis-affected countries.

The United Nations pledging conference on
Ebola in early July demonstrated the international
community's ability to maintain its attention on putting
the most affected countries on the path to recovery. The
confirmation by the World Health Organization that
the newly developed vaccine against the deadly virus
is highly effective and could help to prevent its spread
also provides hope that with the necessary mobilization,
prevention mechanisms and adequate resources an
Ebola epidemic of such scale will never happen again.

The Ebola crisis has disrupted the peacebuilding
efforts of the three West African countries, while
affecting their economies, trade and tourism, basic
health care and social services, food security and
education. It has changed livelihoods and broken
community ties with a disproportionate impact on the
most vulnerable groups, such as women, children and
the elderly. The burden of the epidemic was particularly
harsh on women because of their role as care givers,
health personnel and providers for their families.
Each of the Ebola-affected countries has seen larger
numbers of women victims of the epidemic than men.
The outbreak has also affected women through loss of
livelihoods since productivity in the agriculture, trade
and service sectors fell sharply and is yet to recover.

Therefore, besides being physically affected by the
epidemic, women have seen reversals in their economic
and social empowerment. Inevitably, effective
preventive and recovery strategies must be developed
to ensure that women have full say on all related
matters, both as beneficiaries and as decision-makers.
The epidemic's negative impact on children is also
multifaceted. Birth registrations of more than 70,000
children were disrupted during the Ebola outbreak,
thereby depriving them of their rights and leaving
them in a social no-man's land where they become
vulnerable to marginalization as non-citizens and
easy prey to human traffickers, recruiters and illegal
adoption handlers.

Ebola orphans are another highly vulnerable group.
Across the affected countries, some 30,000 children
have been orphaned by Ebola, nearly 60 per cent of
whom live in isolated rural areas. Some are shunned
and stigmatized due to baseless fears of infection.
Too many face increased risks of physical and sexual
abuse. Female orphans are particularly vulnerable
to sexual exploitation, rape and teenage pregnancy.
Post-Ebola recovery strategies must therefore include
adequate child protection measures and provide for
a viable future through reintegrating such children
into community life, empowering them to support
themselves and receive education, while also providing
guidance and psychosocial counselling.

Strengthening the resilience of Ebola-affected
countries requires ensuring that all vulnerable groups
have a say in their future. That can only be done
through strengthening institutions, rule of law, good
governance and respect of human rights, including
through multi-stakeholder dialogue and civil society
engagement. The United Nations system and the
international community must remain vigilant and
support Ebola recovery long after the crisis is no
longer front-page news. Moreover, we should ensure
that the painful lessons of the epidemic are not lost
in bolstering our preparedness and response to future
health emergencies.

