Mr. Burian: I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this very important debate. It is my pleasure
to represent the European Union (EU) at this debate
and to deliver this statement on its behalf and on
behalf of its member States. The candidate countries
the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania, and the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina, align themselves with this statement. The
European Union, being at the frontline in support of
United Nations counter-terrorism efforts, certainly has
its rightful place at this debate.

Today, as we all continue to face the imminent
threat of terrorism, a comprehensive and coordinated
approach from the whole international community is
needed more than ever before. Only together will we
be able to respond to this threat, and that is why the EU
is a convinced supporter of international and regional
cooperation on this matter.

I am pleased to note that Central Asia was among
the first regions to adopt the regional joint action plan
for implementing the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, prepared with EU funding.
This confirms that Central Asian countries share
a common will to cooperate on tackling the threat,
based on United Nations principles and approaches.
In this regard, I would like to recall and commend the
recent conferences, supported by the EU, along with
the United Nations and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), as an example of
promoting regional cooperation to address terrorism
and its financing, strengthening regional synergies and
contributing to the global efforts of the United Nations.
We welcome the spirit of cooperation and engagement
in Central Asia, as mentioned by Foreign Minister
Kamilov, as the best way to address existing challenges
together. The EU wants to fully support this.

The EU recently adopted its new strategy for
Central Asia, presenting a vision and priorities for our
relations with this region, covering multiple dimensions,
including the security aspect. It conveys a strong
message vis-a-vis the EU's commitment to developing
stronger, modern and non-exclusive partnerships,
including by enhancing cooperation in multilateral and
regional forums, with the United Nations at its core.
One of the key pillars of this strategy is promoting
resilience, with countering terrorism linked to other
important elements such as the rule of law and good
governance, inter alia.

In Central Asia, we are further strengthening our
support, including through our development assistance
programmes focusing on counter-terrorism and the
prevention of violent extremism. The Strengthening
Resilience to Violent Extremism (STRIVE) global
programme, funded by the EU and implemented by
the Hedayah International Centre of Excellence for
Countering Violent Extremism, is one of our flagship
programmes where we work in Central Asia. Another
example is the EU-United Nations joint initiative on
STRIVE Asia, for which the EU and the United Nations
are organizing a joint event here in New York tomorrow.

We share the view of previous speakers that it is
essential to address the prevention of radicalization and
focus on the root causes of terrorism. Deradicalization,
rehabilitation and reintegration must be dealt with as a
package in order to prevent the further spread of terrorist
ideology. The EU is ready to share its best practices and
lessons learned with its partners to that end. Preventing

and suppressing the financing of terrorist acts is
another priority and obligation of States as recalled by
resolution 2462 (2019) and highlighted in the outcome
declaration of the High-level International Conference
on Countering Terrorism and Preventing Violent
Extremism, held in Dushanbe. Countering terrorism
financing must be a key part of our efforts to weaken
and degrade terrorist organizations. In this regard, we
must also ensure that our efforts are effective, while
not limiting the space in which humanitarian actors can
operate in a principled manner.

Foreign terrorist fighters and the international
travel of terrorists are another topic of the global
debate with particular importance for the region. The
EU is committed to ensuring the implementation of
resolution 2396 (2017), on threats to international peace
and security caused by terrorist acts, and to working
with partners on achieving its goals. It is crucial to hold
foreign terrorist fighters accountable for their actions
and maximize the possibility of successful prosecution,
while respecting international law, in particular human
rights law.

In this regard, we would like to commend Central
Asian countries for their willingness to repatriate
and reintegrate family members of foreign terrorist
fighters, especially children. We stand ready to support
capacity-building programmes in partner countries
having to cope with returning terrorist fighters and their
family members. Both border security and information
sharing are crucial in terms of countering relocating
foreign terrorist fighters, as stressed by resolution 2396
(2017). In this context, I would like to recall EU support
for effective border management through its Border
Management Programme in Central Asia as it enters
into a new phase with a significantly enlarged budget
and also including Afghanistan.

A strong multilateral, interregional framework
remains key to building a deeper understanding of the
nature of the challenges and establishing cooperative
mechanisms across continents. The role of the United
Nations is indispensable in this regard. We also would
like to commend the OSCE for its role in the region,
contributing to capacity-building in order to help
implement United Nations commitments.

Finally, I wish to underline that the fight against
terrorism is a long-term effort that requires strong
cooperation in spite of our differences. We are
actively seeking partnerships and collaborations with
international, regional and subregional partners. In this full compliance with universally agreed human rights
regard, let me once again reaffirm the EU's keen interest and within the boundaries of the rule of law.

in working together with all partners, based on shared,

internationally agreed standards and best practices, in The meeting rose at 1.40pm.
