Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for
his briefing, and we listened with special attention
to the statement made by Mr. Ibrahim Al-Jaafari, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq.

Russia has consistently supported the advancement
of the political process in Iraq, whose legitimate
participants should include all political, ethnic and
religious groups. What matters to us is a uniform
and stable Iraq, actively involved in international and
regional affairs. As for the parameters of the internal
process, they must be must agreed on by the Iraqis
themselves, since it is they who are responsible for the
future of their country. Imposing ready-made solutions
is a futile task.

We believe that the unprecedented rise of extremist
sentiment in its bloodiest form is the main threat to the
region. Eradicating it through collective efforts should
be a priority for the international community. However,
we should not cling to ideological approaches and
double standards, dividing terrorists into bad ones who
should be destroyed, and not-very-bad ones with whom
we can supposedly work together for the sake of selfish
national interests and regime change. We will end up
in a vicious circle if we bomb fighters in one place and
protect them and prepare them for growing change in
another.

We must have the courage to learn from the
mistakes of the past and have the decency to admit to
them. After all, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) was not instantly able to bring to bear the full
potential that enabled it to bring almost almost a third
of the territory of Iraq under its control. The radical
Islamists' ambitions grew along with their progress
in neighbouring Syria, something that was looked on
with satisfaction in some capitals. But in Iraq itself a
system of social and political relationships that had
evolved over centuries was undermined by the stress
of foreign interventions that ultimately also helped
prepare fertile ground for the radicals' offensive on a
grand scale. Modern terrorism knows no boundaries
and spreads like a metastatic cancer. The extremist
network that is snaking through the planet today is
not limited to loathsome organizations such as ISIL
or Jabhat Al-Nusra that are on the Security Council's
sanctions lists. We are dealing with a unified yet many-
headed opponent, and fighting it demands the strategic
thinking and action of a genuinely united front.

In order to establish a truly broad international
coalition, any action aimed at combating the threat of
ISIL and groups like it must be carried out in accordance
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the standards ofinternational law, based on existing
anti-terrorism instruments of the United Nations, and
in close cooperation with the Governments of the
region. An international anti-terrorist operation should
be conducted either with the consent of the sovereign
Governments or sanctioned by the Security Council. We
consider other options to be unlawful and detrimental
to international and regional stability.

It is vital that we act with extreme caution and
evaluate the possible consequences for the countries
of the region and the civilian population. The publicly
expressed intentions to strike ISIL's positions on Syrian
territory without the cooperation of the Government in
Damascus are extremely disturbing. That would not
only be a gross violation of the fundamental norms
of international law, but could also have destructive
practical consequences, including for the humanitarian
situation in Syria. It is extremely dangerous to
contemplate the possibility that the fight against ISIL in
Syria could involve the so-called moderate opposition,
which is well armed. We should remember that ISIL has
achieved much of its military success thanks to seized
United States weapons that had been provided to that
country.

In order to effectively combat such a serious global
challenge and to find long-term solutions, we need to
address the underlying causes. We propose to hold in
the Security Council a brainstorming meeting to discuss
terrorism and extremism throughout the Middle East
and North Africa and to develop an appropriate format
for such an endeavour. In the meantime, all members
of the international community must ensure that they
completely eliminate all forms of foreign support to
terrorist groups, which will not survive for long on the
funds they rob from banks, or with the arms they steal
from the population. We can cut off such channels,
including the illegal oil trade, if we approach the
situation responsibly. At the same time, we need to take
steps to counter the radicalization of public opinion
and the ideology of violent extremism and terror. We
also need to step up the fight against terrorism at the
national level and establish an inter-State exchange of
relevant information.

The Security Council recently adopted a number
of useful measures, including sanctions. There is
additional capacity in the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities. All
those instruments must work as a single coherent
mechanism. The Russian Federation is actively engaged
in helping the Iraqi Government in its fight against the
terrorist threat and stands ready to be constructively
engaged in developing further measures to combat that
shared scourge.

