Mr. Bynoe (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Permit me to take this opportunity to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Jorge Arreaza Montserrat, Minister
for Popular Power of Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, and to express to him solidarity
with the people and the duly-elected Government
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela during this
difficult period.

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines fully associates
itself with the statement made by the representative
of Suriname on behalf of the mentioned Caribbean
Community countries.

It has been exactly one month since we assembled
in the Security Council and received a briefing on
the situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
from Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo (see S/PV.8452), Under-
Secretary-General for Political and Peace Building
Affairs. On that occasion, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines voiced its concern regarding the disturbing
events unfolding in Venezuela and echoed a clarion call
for adherence to the fundamental principles of respect
for sovereignty, the rule of law, non-intervention,
non-interference and respect for human rights
and democracy, as enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. Today we reaffirm our unwavering
commitment to upholding those bedrock principles and
ensuring the continued viability of all the provisions
of international law, which together form the core
of multilateralism.

During the time between the previous meeting
of the Council to address the situation in Venezuela
and today's, we have witnessed increased tension
in our region, triggered primarily by unilateral
and extraterritorial coercive measures from third
countries. Undoubtedly, economic asphyxiation and
military intervention lead only to severe humanitarian
consequences that blatantly disregard the principles
that the United Nations and all its Member States have
traditionally championed.

We cannot prematurely sacrifice the Montevideo
Mechanism in the search of a quick fix of militarism
or ill-advised unilateral action. Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines remains guardedly optimistic that the
Montevideo Mechanism can serve as a catalyst towards
a political solution for Venezuela that is crafted by
Venezuelans for all Venezuelans, once given the time
and space.

The archives ofthe Organization will reveal that the
very drafters of grandiloquent resolutions - especially
in the Council 4 have often discarded the letter and
spirit of those documents before their ink has dried, in
the frantic pursuit of military solutions to every dispute.
As a small, peace-loving nation with a tiny population,
open borders and no standing army, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines owes its continued peaceful existence
as an independent and sovereign nation to the robust
and universally accepted body of international law,
which includes the Charter of the United Nations. We
therefore cannot and will not stand aside while larger
and more powerful nations manipulate and violate
international law or the central tenets of the United
Nations Charter.

As always, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
believes that dialogue based on mutual respect and
adherence to international law is the only path to
peace and progress, however difficult that path may
be. Over the years, our good friend, the United States
of America, has demonstrated commendable restraint,
patience, global leadership and belief in diplomacy
and that is emblematic in its current admirably dogged
pursuit of dialogue in the second bilateral summit with
North Korea. We believe that the same constructive
dialogue approach should be exhibited with Venezuela
to safeguard our region of Latin America and the
Caribbean as a zone of peace and, more specifically,
to ensure the well-being of all Venezuelans. We simply
cannot and must not foreclose on dialogue in our main
Organization dedicated to multilateral diplomacy.

The people of Venezuela have threatened no one
and neither sanctions nor their deleterious side effects
will coerce the heroic people of Venezuela to surrender
their sovereignty or their right to freely choose their
destiny without foreign interference, even across
ideological divides.

