Mr. Douillet (France) (spoke in French): The
Security Council is living through a historic moment
today. We have recommended a new Member State for
admission to the membership of the United Nations,
bringing it to 193.

The independence of South Sudan is a major
event in the history of Africa. It represents a positive
conclusion to 50 years of war that brought great
suffering to all the peoples of the Sudan and led to
millions of deaths. There are now great hopes for
peace, which shows that negotiation and dialogue are
more effective than arms and military confrontation.

This new birth of an African State is the first
since the period of decolonization. It represents a
success for the Sudanese population as a whole and, of
course, for the people of South Sudan, who in January
voted unanimously for independence. It is also a
success for the Government of the North and the
Government of the South, which, despite the
difficulties encountered, have implemented the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) of 2005. And,
finally, it brings relief to the international community,
which never wavered in its support for this process and
now sees the possibility of a fresh start. I would
underscore here the outstanding contribution made by
President Mbeki and by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Menkerios.

France has invested a great deal in those efforts.
It supported the Naivasha process that led to the
signing of the CPA in 2005. It voted for the various
resolutions that accompanied its implementation, and it
never ceased to engage in dialogue with the North and
the South, especially when the pace of discussions
among the parties to the CPA had slowed. We
recognized this new State at the same time as did the
African Union and all the States members of the
European Union (EU), and we established diplomatic
relations with it on 9 July.

France will stand alongside South Sudan in
ensuring the integration of this new State into the
community of nations and within the United Nations,
as well as within its regional environment and the
multilateral financial institutions.

A number of challenges remain to be met in order
for South Sudan and the Sudan to develop and to
establish harmonious relations. The two countries must
conclude the outstanding negotiations while ensuring,
along with the authorities of South Sudan, the
protection of civilians. The United Nations Mission in
the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) will support
South Sudan in the undertaking of its responsibilities.
We fully support Ms. Johnson in that mission.

In the North, certain regions remain a source of
concern, such as Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
states. We hope that the Sudan will agree to the
presence of the international community there. In the
South, national reconciliation must take place, and the
security of all inhabitants must be ensured. We must
move from the centralized logic of the war years
towards a pluralist democracy and build the
infrastructure and institutions necessary to enable the
people to emerge from poverty.

The conflicts that are still being resolved today
by force of arms must be settled peacefully, through
democratic institutions. To that end, frameworks will
have to be established; future generations must be
groomed to manage the State; and robust institutions
must be created. The fight against impunity in the
Sudan and in South Sudan will be pivotal in order to
pacify relations among citizens and between citizens
and their authorities. France intends to support this
new State in this connection by using all of its
cooperation instruments, in coordination with the EU
and its principal partners.

We are very pleased today to welcome South
Sudan as a member of the international community.
This represents not only the conclusion of a lengthy
struggle but also the beginning of a journey during
which France, along with the rest of the international
community, will continue to provide support.

