Ms. Pulido Santana (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the Council members for allowing me
to take the floor at this meeting. We associate ourselves
with the statement made by Costa Rica at this meeting
on behalf of the Rio Group.

Nine days ago, my delegation, along with all the
other participants in the tenth session of the
Preparatory Commission for the International Criminal
Court rejoiced at the immensely significant and historic
entry into force of the Statute of the International
Criminal Court. That event was resounding proof that
international criminal law is not a theoretical fiction, or
a dream of international idealists. On the contrary, it is
now a concrete reality whose structure attests to the
resolve of States to render the actions of justice
effective in the face of the most reprehensible
international crimes, which endanger not only
international peace and security, but the very existence
of humankind.

Venezuela resolutely supported the creation of an
international criminal court, taking an active and
constructive part in negotiating its establishment. It
was one of the first Latin American countries to ratify
the Rome Statute, inspired by a deep tradition of
democracy, and respect for and promotion of human
rights, in keeping with its priority of making justice
effective, reliable and transparent, both domestically
and on the international level. My country thus sent a
message to the international community, which we now
reaffirm before the Security Council, concerning the
great significance we attach to the International
Criminal Court as an autonomous, universal,
complementary and impartial jurisdictional mechanism
with which to try and punish those responsible for the
most abominable international crimes. Creation of the
International Criminal Court is emblematic and
groundbreaking, not only because it is the first
institution associated with the United Nations created
in the new century, but, more fundamentally, by its
very nature and by the far-reaching importance of its
contribution to the building of a new international
order, whose architecture we are striving to build on
solid foundations of justice and peace, so as to permit
development of the necessary conditions for the social
and economic development of our peoples.

Our confidence and optimism concerning the
effectiveness of the International Criminal Court
remain firm. Nonetheless, we feel profound concern at
the position taken by certain countries, even when we
understand the position, not for the present to join this
endeavour of international justice. We are convinced
that universal participation must be the cornerstone of
this new institution. Universality and effectiveness are,
without doubt, inseparable concepts. Likewise, we
view with great concern the situation that has arisen
within the Council concerning the possibility through a
decision, this principal organ might weaken the Statute
of the International Criminal Court. Such a decision
could modify the scope of an international instrument
which is not simply conventional law in the strict sense
of the term, but also, to a large extent, reflects
customary law accepted by all concerning international
jurisdiction and international criminal law. A decision
by the Council to that effect would be contrary to the
very spirit and purpose of the Rome Statute, which is
essentially the eradication of impunity for the
commission of crimes falling within the jurisdiction of
the Court. That would be questionable both politically
and legally. Such a decision would exceed the
Council's competence and would disrupt the
international legal order.

At the same time, in keeping with what I have
stated, we share the Secretary-General's concern about
this and other measures of this kind, which might in the
future affect peacekeeping operations, the concept of
which is evolving towards a comprehensive vision and
whose establishment is indeed within the jurisdiction
of the Security Council.

There is no conflict between peace and
international criminal justice; on the contrary, they are
entirely complementary. Venezuela hopes that the
Security Council, acting in accordance with its
responsibilities under the Charter, will take a decision
that respects the letter and the spirit of the Rome
Statute.

