The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Uganda, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Butagira
(Uganda) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls and reaffirms
its presidential statement of 16 November 2006
(S/PRST/2006/45) on talks between the
Government of the Republic of Uganda and the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA).

"The Security Council stresses its support
for a negotiated settlement, commends the
Government of southern Sudan and others for
their efforts to further a long-term and peaceful
solution to the conflict, reiterates that those
responsible for serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law must be
brought to justice and urges that the peace
process be concluded expeditiously.

"The Security Council urges the LRA to
immediately release all women, children and
other non-combatants, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) on
children and armed conflict.

"The Security Council welcomes the
appointment of, and the efforts undertaken so far
by, His Excellency Mr. J oaquim Chissano, former
President of Mozambique, as the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy for the LRA-affected
areas, as set out in the Secretary-General's letter
of 30 November 2006 to the President of the
Security Council (S/2006/930), welcomes his
briefing to the Security Council on 22 March
2007 and looks forward to his continued
engagement on the issue.

"The Security Council welcomes the
meeting between the Government of Uganda and
the LRA on 11 March 2007, with community
representatives present, and the progress made
towards a resumption of talks. The Security
Council looks forward to further progress in the
talks and the renewal of the cessation of
hostilities agreement.

"The Security Council commends the
support provided to the talks by States in the
region, welcomes contributions to the United
Nations Juba Initiative Project and urges the
United Nations Secretariat and the countries and
regional actors involved to provide further
support, where possible, to Special Envoy
Chissano and the mediation team.

"The Security Council notes the improved
security and humanitarian situation in northern
Uganda but looks forward to further progress on
improving the living conditions for civilians there
and urges the international community and the
Government of Uganda to sustain and improve
humanitarian and development support, including
through Uganda's Emergency Action Plan as
overseen by the Joint Monitoring Committee."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2007/6.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.
07-27907

