Mr. Griffiths: One month ago, I stated to the
Security Council that we are facing a crucial moment
in the destiny of the conflict in Yemen (see S/PV.8578).
Events since then have, if anything, made this moment
even more crucial. As we have seen in Aden and
Abyan, questions regarding Yemen's future are being
posed more forcefully than before. The fragmentation
of Yemen is becoming a stronger and more pressing
threat, which of course makes our efforts in the Yemeni
peace process more urgent than ever. There is no time
to lose. The stakes are becoming too high for the
future of Yemen, the Yemeni people and, indeed, the
wider region.

I remember vividly one senior Yemeni leader
saying to me some months ago:

"What we want - all that we want - is the return
of civility in our lives, to return Yemen to the social
fabric that has nurtured its people for centuries".

He was right. The immediate tragedy of death, injury,
disease and hunger happens within a context of the
destruction of the State and of society. A civil war is
a curse upon a country's people. The conflict is fought
out in the streets and in the countryside where live the
civilians, and their lives are changed, damaged and
destroyed. This is sometimes the case for a generation,
as the time needed for that rekindling of community so
central to a living country is no small thing.

Yemen cannot wait. Since the previous briefing,
I had an opportunity to meet with representatives of
the Yemeni parties and the international community,
and the parties continue to assure me of their strong
desire for a political solution. I believe that they and the
international community also share my sense of urgency
to move forward with the discussions on a solution to
end the conflict and resume the political transition.

This sense of urgency is in painful contrast to our
efforts so far to resolve the conflict. Every single step
that we have discussed in the Security Council Chamber
these many months has been fought over, negotiated,
stressed and delayed. Nothing comes easily in Yemen.
For example, when I started this assignment, in the early
months of 2018, I was given clear assurances that the
opening of Sana'a airport was imminent. We are still
waiting. Even the mercy flights, painfully negotiated
over many months by my colleague Lise Grande and the
World Health Organization, have yet to begin. And the
Stockholm Agreement, a confidence-building measure
with a simple humanitarian purpose, has demonstrated
how vulnerable such agreements are when commitment
to a peaceful solution wavers. The list of frustrations is
long, and it must not grow longer.

Before I turn to the situation on the front lines and
in Aden, I would like to provide a few updates on the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement and other
developments in Yemen. The core of the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement is the governorate-wide ceasefire and the
humanitarian imperative of maintaining the flow of
life-saving assistance through its three ports. To this
day, eight months later, there have been no major
military operations in the city of Al-Hudaydah or in
the surrounding area, and there has been a sustained
reduction in Violence, as we have so often observed in
the Security Council. Aid continues to move through
the ports, which is, by itself, a major achievement,
that continues to benefit the civilian population in
Al-Hudaydah, first, but also elsewhere in Yemen, who
rely on that humanitarian pipeline.

Implementing the remaining parts of the
Al-Hudaydah Agreement will be an important step
on the way towards resuming the political process to
which I have just referred. I am encouraged by the
ongoing communication with both parties and their
commitment to an enhanced ceasefire mechanism
under the leadership of the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA), which
has recently been discussed in the Redeployment
Coordination Committee under auspices of UNMHA.
Together with my colleagues in the Mission, we are
continuing our efforts to drive the process for the
redeployment of forces and the establishment and
operation of a tripartite monitoring mechanism. Since
the previous briefing, we have presented a proposal to
the parties to make further progress on implementing
the first phase of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement. I expect
a final official response from both by 25 August; I am
confident that it will be forthcoming. It is clear from my
discussions with the parties that they are considering
the proposal very carefully.

I would like to add that the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement was only ever intended to be a temporary
measure to avert further conflict. It was intended to
be a humanitarian stop-gap. It was not designed, as
some might think, to set a precedent for addressing the
underlying issues of the conflict, the most central of
which, of course, is the issue of sovereignty. Following
many months of negotiations, both parties are fully
aware of what the other is able to accept, and I hope,
based on that knowledge, their responses to me by
the beginning of next week will be constructive and
practical on the way forward.

I am very encouraged that we now have an
agreement - to which I think my colleague Ursula
Mueller will also refer, and I hope there is no overlap
on this point in our briefings - on facilitating access
for a United Nations assessment mission scheduled to
be deployed, I think, on 27 August, to assess the FSO
SAFER oil tanker, the dilapidated vessel near the port of
Ras Isa, with its cargo of oil. The assessment mission,
under the auspices of the United Nations Office for
Project Services, is critical to mitigating the risk of
severe environmental consequences along the Yemeni
shore of the Red Sea, as we have discussed here in
the Chamber.

Negotiations on the implementation of the
exchanges of prisoners and detainees are ongoing.
It is a fundamentally humanitarian gesture, which
numerous civil society groups, particularly women's
groups, have vocally advocated, publicly and privately.
The parties sat for several days in Stockholm, and in
subsequent months held detailed technical discussions
here in Amman. The slow pace of those negotiations
is prolonging the suffering of the prisoners and their
families. I believe that we should be able to address the
concerns of both parties to the proposal that I have put
on the table in front of them, to which I referred before.
I hope that it receives a positive response.

Like everyone, I am frustrated that progress
on Al-Hudaydah has not been quicker, that I am not
able to announce more dramatic developments on
the Agreement and that there has been no tangible
implementation of the agreements on Taiz or on the
exchanges of prisoners and detainees to which I have
just referred. The Stockholm Agreement is a key
milestone in Yemen's peace process, and it would be
of considerable benefit to the parties and the Yemeni
people were it to be fully implemented. But it is also
clear that we must not allow the implementation of it to
override our broader imperative to bring the conflict to
an end; indeed, again, Yemen cannot wait.

Military operations have continued in several
governorates, including Sana'a, Sa'dah, Taiz, Al-Jawf,
Al-Baydah, Hajjah and Al-Dhale'e, as well as on
Yemen's border with Saudi Arabia. The continued
impact of the military operation on civilians, as I am
sure we will hear from my colleague, is horrifying,
including the attack on a market in Sa'dah, in late July,
and I also, of course, condemn the continued attacks by
Ansar Allah targeting civilian infrastructure in Saudi
Arabia, including the recent extension of that targeting
to civilian facilities in the eastern part of the country.

Further threats to civilian life, further events of this
kind and acts of military provocation only inevitably
deepen the divide between the parties, increase the
impact of the conflict beyond Yemen's borders and
postpone the attention that we all believe is required to
the efforts to bring a resolution to the conflict.

I turn now to events in Aden and Abyan. These
events show us the complexity and volatility of the
challenge that we face in achieving peace and the
dangers should we not succeed. We certainly cannot
underestimate the risks that these events pose for the
future of Yemen.

On 7 August, following attacks in Aden a few
days before, clashes broke out between presidential
protection brigades and forces affiliated with the
Southern Transitional Council. Subsequently, the
Southern Transitional Council took control of military
camps and surrounded key State institutions in Aden
by force. Last night forces affiliated with the Southern
Transitional Council also took further steps to increase
their military control in the neighbouring governorate
of Abyan. That violence has led to the deaths of dozens
of civilians and injury to hundreds more. I am alarmed
by that violence, as, I am sure, will be the members
of the Security Council. I condemn the unacceptable
efforts by the Southern Transitional Council to take
control of State institutions by force.

I also deplore the harassment of Yemenis of northern
origin in Aden that preceded these recent events, such
as through physical Violence, forced displacement and
denial of freedom of movement, including the targeting
of Government officials and their supporters.

Simply stated, a continuation of this current
situation is simply untenable. The functioning of State
institutions will almost certainly break down further,
and daily life for the people will become even more
difficult than is already the case. There is indeed a grave
and present risk of further damage to Yemen's social
fabric and of the spread of violence to other southern
governorates. At this time, it is frankly difficult to
know where these events will lead us.

I am grateful to all those Member States, including
members of the Council, that have called for restraint
and dialogue. In particular, I welcome the efforts of the
coalition to restore calm and the efforts exerted by the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, in particular to convene a
dialogue in Jeddah to discuss the situation and resolve
its difficulties.

I believe it essential that that meeting take place
in the very near future so as to prevent a further
deterioration of the security and safety of Yemen's
citizens in the south and to ensure the continuity of
governance, security and basic service provision in
Aden and other relevant areas, under the exclusive
authority of the State.

In this context, and with these events in mind, we
must also be alive to the danger of the resurgence of
the activities of violent extremist groups. The Council
will recall that Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula has
taken control of the capitals of Abyan and Hadramaut
for significant periods of time in recent years. During
the past month alone, we have seen attacks by Al-Qaida
and by the so-called Islamic State in Aden, Abyan and
Al-Baydah governorates. The further fragmentation
of the security situation in Aden and other areas
almost certainly will allow those activities to expand
and gather momentum once again, as we have seen
before, with a terrible impact on the civilian population
and on prospects for future stability in this key
strategic location.

The situation on the ground is changing with great
speed. We need to seize any opportunities for progress,
and the United Nations remains committed to inclusive
dialogue to resolve differences and to address the
legitimate concerns of all Yemenis, including southern
groups, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, and the
outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference.

As recent events remind us, long-term questions
about Yemen's future remain unresolved. I believe that
these can be resolved only through peaceful political
means. That is why I have always talked with numerous
groups from southern governorates as well as elsewhere
in Yemen and have long advocated for their inclusion
in the peace process. There is a range of views to be
taken into account in any dialogue on the future of
Yemen, and we need all of its citizens to assist us in
making sure that future is stable and secure. This is of
vital importance to the efforts to end the conflict and
to ensure the resumption of the political transition that
has been interrupted in recent years.

I hope that all Yemeni stakeholders from all parts of
the country take the events in Aden as a clear sign that
the current conflict must be brought to an end swiftly
and peacefully and in a manner that addresses the needs
of Yemenis across the country. The implementation of
the Stockholm Agreement is politically significant and
has had tangible benefit on the ground, but surely that
cannot be a precondition for achieving peace in all of
Yemen. Every additional day of this conflict adds to the
tragedy and the misery; no country can tolerate these
stresses and the stresses of internal conflict indefinitely.

And, finally, Yemen cannot wait.
