Mr. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): The many-sided complexities, contradictions and challenges manifest in the global political economy and system of international relations conspire to demand, more than ever, a United Nations fit for the purpose of ensuring a multilateral, rules-based international order of peace, security, prosperity and sustainable development for all of humankind. Indeed, we in a country like Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, an exemplar of small-island exceptionalism, awash as it is with a historical bundle of debilitating and uplifting legacies and the contemporary encumbrances and possibilities of our Caribbean civilization, see the necessity and desirability of a vibrant and well- functioning United Nations as a matter of the highest priority. We signal that with my presence. The foundation stone, known as the Charter of the United Nations, was shaped and laid, by outstanding visionaries and realists, to meet the immediate exigencies of the post-world war global condition and the foreseeable prospect of an evolving comity of nations to dwell together, if not always in unity, but cooperatively in the pursuit of peace, security and prosperity. Each generation, in humankind's quest for a better life, is always faced with inherited and fresh challenges. Accordingly, each generation is both blessed and burdened with a mission of continuity and change, as the circumstances admit. At the dawn of the second decade of the twenty-first century, and in the seventy- fifth year of existence of the United Nations, it is justifiable and wise to remind ourselves of the enduring core purposes and principles of the United Nations, recommit to them and sensibly reshape and reform our United Nations in appropriate ways to better execute its mandates in a rapidly changing global order. But what we must not do is to reject or dismantle the foundation stone, which the original builders so carefully put in place and which their esteemed continuators have so painstakingly maintained or fortified. In that regard, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commends Viet Nam for spearheading the initiative to hold today's debate. We endorse the presidential statement (S/PRST/2020/1) just adopted. I adopt and call as my own the words of the Secretary-General and the Chair of The Elders. Fundamentally, the Charter of the United Nations codified and developed an efficacious international legal framework to regulate relations among sovereign States, in a rational and principled way, so as to maintain and promote international order in the interests of all humankind. The international legal framework is, by its very nature, multilateral. It is axiomatic that there cannot be a unilateral United Nations - that is an oxymoron. Its very essence must be multilateral. In holding aloft international law of a deepening multilateralism, the founding fathers drew upon right reason and experience and proceeded to codify and elaborate the requisite statutes, rules, settled customs and norms for authoritative decision-making. Every Member of the United Nations knows fully well that which is plainly acceptable or unacceptable within the terms of the Charter and international law. To be sure, there are always spheres of genuine contention and disputatious conversations derived from national interests or technical interpretation. However, too often there is an inclination by too many Member States to present what is plainly wrong as right, and vice versa. We all know that it is unacceptable for one State or a group of like-minded States to drive a horse and chariot through the bedrock principles of sovereignty, independence, the equality of States, non-interference, non-intervention and the peaceful settlement of disputes. Similarly, we all know that it is plainly wrong for any State or group of States to be in quest of hegemony or to be engaged in the unilateralist weaponizing of international trade, commerce, finance or banking. We all know that the treasured right to self-defence cannot be exercised disproportionately or outside the boundaries of international law. We all know, too, that it is unacceptable to support or harbour terrorists and international criminals, to facilitate the spread and use of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons or to deny people basic fundamental human rights. Yet, in the hallowed halls of our United Nations, there is a daily diet of justification for that which is plainly wrong or unacceptable. We ought to resolve, in this new year, to desist from such justification. One of the essential contributions to be made by small States like ours is the tireless advocacy of the timeless principles enshrined in international law. With no ideological or geostrategic axes to grind, we consider it our solemn obligation not only to articulate these principles but also to ensure that they are applied consistently and upheld in the international community as universal truths, rather than selective, uneven and unpredictable tools to further hegemonic power or Great Power ambitions. The Charter of the United Nations also promises us development and economic well-being, which bear upon international peace and security. Accordingly, our best collective efforts require the fixing of underdevelopment, economic insecurity and vulnerability to external shocks so as to lmit unnecessary conflict and discord. Similarly, we must acknowledge and act upon the security consequences of climate change, the misuse and abuse of the Earth's resources, including the seabed, and the weaponizing of outer space. As I conclude, I want to say a few simple, straightforward things. The arrogance of power, however derived, too often imbues human beings and nation States with a sense that restraints on them are impermissible. This corrupting power is ignoble and slowly, even imperceptibly, deprives the powerful of much of the virtue that they possess. Powerlessness, too, can be, and often is, debilitating. Powerlessness invites cowardice and the opportunism of the meek; it is also a strong stimulus for solidarity. In the end, the absence of virtue, a tendency to ignobility, irresponsibility and rank hypocrisy are clear and present dangers that attend both the powerful and the powerless, although not in equal measure. The metaphoric cards are stacked in favour of the powerful; accordingly, from those to whom much is given, much more is rightly expected. On behalf of the proverbial least of those among us, let us be steadfast in our commitment to the core principles and values of our United Nations and be a conscience in this unruly and chaotic world of much promise. Hopefully, a renewed grace in our United Nations may take us to a better, more peaceful, secure and prosperous place for humankind's abode.
