Mr. Sharma: It is a pleasure to appear before the
Security Council, particularly as I feel I am among old
friends.

In the Secretary-General's first report to the
Council on Timor-Leste (S/2002/1223), which is before
members, we look to the prospects of the new State
with positive expectation and optimism. The report is
divided into six sections, highlighting, following an
introductory section, the activities of the national
authorities since independence; the contributions of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) in the three major programme areas set
out in the report contained in document S/2002/432;
the role being played by the wider United Nations
system and other partners; and financial aspects. In
conclusion, the report makes some observations and
recommendations. I trust that the report will provide a
useful basis for the deliberations of the Council on this
issue.

Timor-Leste has many favourable features which
should assist in securing its future. It is a compact
country of 15,000 square kilometres, with considerable
ethnic and social cohesion, which has been further
intensified by the common experience of history, both
distant and recent, which has sharpened that identity.
That compactness is both geographical and
demographic. It has a population of about 820,000. Put
another way, assuming an average size of a family of
five, it is a country of about 165,000 families.

That culturally cohesive population is endowed
with significant resources to safeguard its economic
future. Two gas and oil fields, ready for exploitation,
have enormous potential for revenue, and there is
evidence of on-shore hydrocarbon potential as well. A
study has indicated the presence of six metallic ores in
commercial quantities, which is remarkable in relation
to the size of the country. The coastline of more than
700 kilometres, large in relation to the size of the
country, is commercially exploitable for fisheries.
While the terrain is generally hilly, the soil offers
considerable agricultural potential in a variety of crops
through modernized inputs and techniques. There are
interesting prospects particularly for eco-tourism and
adventure tourism. The country is, therefore,
considerably well endowed in its resource base.

There is also the factor of a favourable locational
advantage. Although one of the least developed
countries - indeed, according to current human
development indicators, it is now among the poorest
group of countries in the world - Timor-Leste is not
part of a depressed, but rather of a prosperous,
neighbourhood. In this, it does not have the
disadvantage of many others among the group of least
developed countries. Countries to the east and west of
Timor-Leste are either developed or represent a very
dynamic economic region. Timor-Leste can, therefore,
be buoyed by that region, rich in both human and
trading resources, by pursuing the right policies.

Another significant asset is the leadership of
Timor-Leste, which enjoys international goodwill and
recognition to an exceptional degree. President Xanana
Gusmao, Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri and Senior
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs Jose Ramos-
Horta enjoy respect and esteem in world capitals,
which has assisted in the creation of a prominent
international profile for the country and has prepared
favourable ground for a wide network of international
cooperation, from which the nascent State can derive
benefit in a variety of ways.

It is true that expectations from the leadership,
which faces expressions of impatience and expectation
in a variety of areas, run high within the population. In
a new democracy, that in itself is a healthy
phenomenon, given the fact that Timor-Leste has
committed itself to the highest expected standards of a
responsive and participative democratic polity and to
the independence of various fundamental organs of the
State and has made a commitment to unfettered
standards of human rights, core freedoms and a free
press. The population of Timor-Leste shows itself to be
zealous in protecting those rights, and the growth of
opposition voices is a natural fruition of the democratic
political process.

A key ingredient in the country's political and
economic environment is its evolving relationship with
Indonesia. That has been among the most positive
lines, with political commitment and goodwill
demonstrated at the highest political levels on both
sides. The first meeting of the Joint Ministerial
Commission for Bilateral Cooperation established
between Timor-Leste and Indonesia has provided the
impulse for the growth of the relationship along a wide
front, and cooperation between the two countries on the
question of the return of refugees from West Timor has
been exemplary. The success of that collaboration in
the repatriation of what constituted nearly a quarter of
the population of Timor-Leste, with the assistance of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, is an accomplishment that has perhaps
not received as much public attention as it merits.

Lastly, Timor-Leste enjoys exceptional
engagement and participation by the world community
in offering partnership to this new entrant to the comity
of nations as it builds its future. The nature of the
involvement of the United Nations has been unique and
long-standing, both through the missions established by
the Council and through the active presence of United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes. The
participation and constructive engagement of
international financial institutions, development banks,
the multilateral and bilateral donor community,
neighbouring countries and civil society generate
confidence that the third successive United Nations
mission can anticipate the successful termination of its
mandate in mid-2004 confident that, thereafter, Timor-
Leste will advance securely on its own towards an
increasingly prosperous and stable future.

The balance of accomplishment and challenge is
reflected in the report of the Secretary-General
presented to the Council. I would like to indicate
briefly what I consider are the principal challenges
before the State, in a perspective that is largely shared
by the Government of Timor-Leste.

Effective policies to demonstrate and secure the
rule of law, particularly in the context of the country's
historical experience, is a core challenge. As President
Xanana Gusmao observed in his address after 100 days
of independence: "If justice in Timor is going badly,
then everything else will go less well".

Together with the rule of law, I consider
expansion of employment opportunity, particularly for
the youth, of which 90 per cent are reportedly
unemployed, as the principal independence dividend
for the people of Timor-Leste, to advance which a
variety of channels should be created. The goal should
be to assist the society in becoming one ofjob creators,

and not merely job seekers.

Particular stress needs to be placed on the mental
and professional orientation of young people and on
helping expose them to the contemporary knowledge
industry and services. The idea of an interactive
science park is being pursued through the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization. Prospects of a livelihood and technology
resource centre, professional and financial assistance
and basic business education are also being explored.

Regarding development, the National
Development Plan, with external partnership, needs to
show consistent gains in the social agenda of nutrition,
health, literacy and gender equality, hand in hand with
infrastructure rehabilitation and income growth.

Regarding democratic culture in depth,
participative and transparent democratic processes need
to be strengthened at decentralized levels; this is
receiving attention. This would also contribute to
bridging the rural-urban divide, which is another
significant challenge.

With regard to institution building, the quality of
all institutions being built and their public-spiritedness,
professionalism, neutrality and transparency will be the
key to the quality of governance provided by the State.
The subservience of military and police authorities to
civilian democratic control must be safeguarded.
Certain incidents that have occurred are being dealt
with firmly and in a decisive manner in this spirit.

Concerning aid absorption, Timor-Leste has been
a beneficiary of significant international assistance.
While this needs to be continued and enhanced in
specific sectors, the absorptive capacity must also be
strengthened so that the impact of the assistance
available is maximized.

Members may be wondering when I will make a
reference to the specific mandate from the Council. I
have deliberately stressed the nation-building aspect of
the mandate across a broad front as UNMISET plays
the role of both enabler and facilitator of meeting
larger political, social and economic goals and
implements the precise mandate in external and
internal security and support to various branches of
public administration. The goal of UNMISET at the
end of its mission, and of the larger body of well-
wishers to Timor-Leste, is to enable Timor-Leste to
emerge as a State in full possession of the all attributes
of sovereignty - a State that is stable and increasingly
prosperous and that is making steady advances in
continuing partnership with external institutions,
friendly Governments and civil society.

The specific aspects of UNMISET's mandate
have received, and will continue to be accorded, our
concentrated attention. In a situation where capacity in
public administration has to be built across the board
from the ground up, the situation will remain
challenging for a long time to come. However, I
believe that a satisfactory start has been made, with 86
of the 100 stability positions filled and the rest in the
pipeline. Earlier this month, a special interactive
seminar was arranged in which the Prime Minister and
a large number of ministers participated to review and
strengthen the contribution to self-reliance of those
stability posts. However, the filling of the 228
"development" posts, which is being coordinated by
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
remains to be accelerated, as only about a quarter have
been filled. We appeal to partner countries for a
renewed support effort. The policy of having the
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General act as UNDP Resident Coordinator has been
successful, as Mr. Hasegawa, who brings long
experience to his task, is playing a central role in
supporting the governance and development agenda of
Timor-Leste.

In the area of internal security, 4 out of 13
districts have already been handed over to the Timor-
Leste Police Service, and the schedule to hand over
complete territorial responsibility by January 2004, and
thereafter headquarters functions by the end of the
UNMISET mandate, is on course. I have confidence in
the motivation and dedication of the 2,830-strong
police force, of which all but about 300 have been
recruited and nearly 80 per cent, or 2,285, have been
trained. It is worth noting that about 20 per cent of the
force will be comprised of women, which is an
exceptionally high number and represents an important
factor in gender sensitivity in the police force, which is
an important requirement in Timor-Leste. It will be
necessary to maintain the integrity and pride of these
forces, which will be a pillar of the State.

On handing over external security responsibility
to the defence forces of Timor Leste, we also expect to
maintain the drawdown schedule and complete the
transfer by the middle of 2004. The eastern-most
district of Lautem has already been handed over. With
the bilateral decisions recently taken by Timor-Leste
and Indonesia at the Joint Commission meeting in
October 2002 and the timetable established by the two
sides to agree on a line that constitutes the land
border - in accordance with which the land border can
be demarcated unequivocally - together with
processes under way for bilaterally establishing a
cooperative border regime in its trading, customs,
immigration and security aspects, the groundwork for a
stable and friendly external environment has been well
prepared.
In that connection, I would like to express my
appreciation for the services of Ambassador Lakhan
Mehrotra, Director of the UNMISET Office in Jakarta,
whose term with UNMISET is drawing to a close. Both
the Government of Timor-Leste and the Government of
Indonesia have lavishly acknowledged his exceptional
contribution.

A new shadow has fallen over the region that
adds to the security challenge. That shadow is
terrorism, which constitutes more than a passing threat.
The terrorist outrage in Bali, and audio tapes made by
terrorists, further point towards the need for the
enhanced vigilance and improved capacities of Timor-
Leste to effectively deal with this emerging challenge.
There is also a need to put in place protective and
institutional measures to reduce vulnerability, without
causing public alarm or insecurity. In that regard, the
assistance of external expertise should be made
available, if requested.

I value this opportunity for an interchange with
members of the Council, and look forward to receiving
their guidance.

