Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
for the painful briefing he delivered, which echoes what
many among us have repeated time and again in this
very Chamber - that the situation in the Gaza Strip
remains on the brink of another potential destructive
conflict.

There is international consensus that we need to
strengthen multilateralism and the role of the United
Nations, while reaffirming its role in preventing a third
world war, especially in the light of the great losses in
lives and property during the first two. We renew our
commitment to supporting multilateral mechanisms in
the face of the pressures to which they have recently
been subjected. We support the Secretary-General's
statement to the effect that the Security Council has
dealt with the Middle East peace process in a way that
has helped to diminish people's trust in the international
community's ability to provide solutions. That is
especially true given the fact that the Charter of the
United Nations confers the authority and responsibility
to deal with such crises upon the Security Council,
which has allowed Israel, the occupying Power, to
continue to violate international law and disregard the
Council's resolutions with impunity.

Jointly with Bolivia, last Tuesday we submitted
a request for the convening of a meeting under the
agenda item "Other business", given the situation on
the ground and its dangerous escalation, which equals
in intensity the events of the 2014 conflict, when the
Israeli special forces pushed three kilometres into the
Gaza Strip. That was a blatant Violation and evinced
a total disregard for the safety of civilians in order to
commit a crime in violation of international law and
international humanitarian law. The incursion led to
the deaths of 14 people. Israel did not stop at that point.
After it began another cycle of violence on Sunday,
Israel launched widespread air strikes for two full days
against various areas in the Gaza Strip, which killed
unarmed Palestinian civilians and damaged civilian
infrastructure.

The Israeli approach is known to all. Israel's
ongoing targeting of civilians in the Gaza Strip did
not begin on Sunday and will not end on Tuesday,
but regrettably it is clearly escalating. Since March,
the Israeli occupying forces have continued to use
excessive, disproportionate and arbitrary force to target
civilian demonstrators with live ammunition. Since
the beginning of the Great March of Return, a total of
228 have been martyred, including 41 children, and the
number of injured has exceeded 24,000 individuals,
many of whom have suffered permanent disabilities.
Israel's actions constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity, in accordance with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.

In that regard, we reiterate our condemnation of
the targeting of innocent civilians by anyone, anywhere
and at any time. We hold Israel, the occupying
Power, fully responsible for the acts of violence it
has committed and the escalation it has caused. We
call on the Security Council to implement its relevant
resolutions on the protection of Palestinian civilians,
especially resolutions 605 (1987) and 904 (1994), on
the need to implement the Fourth Geneva Convention
in the occupied Palestinian territory. Israel would not
have continued to act that way - similar to what we
witnessed over the past few days, with its provocative
acts against the Palestinian people - if the Security
Council had stood firm and united against such acts.

Once again, we reaffirm the importance of the
Council's playing a complementary role to the United
Nations efforts led by Mr. Mladenov. We highly
value his role and that of Egypt in putting an end to
those aggressive acts. We hope that those efforts will
bear fruit and lead to a sustainable ceasefire and the
protection of civilians in the Gaza Strip.
It is unfortunate that not only does the dangerous
security situation facing civilians in the Gaza Strip
threaten their safety and security, but also that the
blockade imposed on the Gaza Strip, now entering
its eleventh year, has led to the deterioration of
the humanitarian, economic, security and political
situations there. As expressed clearly in the warnings
issued by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, the situation in Gaza
will lead to an explosion. Half of the population in the
Gaza Strip is living below the line of poverty. That is
why he calls on the international community to take
decisive action to address that deteriorating situation.
Israel is legally and materially responsible for the
crimes that it is perpetrating. We call on Israel to lift
the unjust blockade against the Gaza Strip, which has
led to this unprecedented and dangerous deterioration
in the humanitarian situation and living conditions
of Palestinian civilians. We call on the international
community and international organizations to bring
pressure to bear on Israel to lift its blockade ofthe Gaza
Strip and open the crossings under its control.

Israel unfortunately continues its violations
against religious sites in East Jerusalem. Every day,
it organizes two rounds in which heavily armed
Israeli soldiers protect Jewish settlers who break into
the Al-Aqsa Mosque yards and hold religious rites.
Moreover, on 25 October Israeli forces assaulted and
arrested Coptic priests at the entrance of the Church of
the Holy Sepulchre in East Jerusalem. We renew our
rejection and condemnation of all Israel's violations
concerning the holy sites, especially its attempts to
change the historic and legal status of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and to divide it spatially and temporally, as
well as to undermine the freedom of the religious rights
of Muslims there.

On Wednesday, the State of Kuwait gave its
donation of $42 million to the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), represented by Mr. Peter Mulrean in
New York. The State of Kuwait has provided UNRWA
with a total of $50 million in assistance this year in
order to enable it to provide basic services in its areas of
operations with a view to alleviating the humanitarian
and economic suffering of the Palestinian people. That
will help guarantee the dignity of about 5.3 million
Palestinian refugees and assist over 500,000 Palestinian
refugee students.

In conclusion, we emphasize our principled and
steadfast position on achieving a comprehensive and
just solution of the Palestinian question in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions, the
principle of land for peace, the Quartet road map and
the Arab Peace Initiative adopted by all Arab States
at the Beirut summit in 2002. That solution would be
based on the withdrawal of Israel from all occupied
Palestinian territories to the borders of4 June 1967 and
on the resolution of all final-status issues.

The leadership, the Government and the people of
the State of Kuwait fully support the Palestinian people.
We pay tribute to their steadfastness and support their
legitimate struggle against the Israeli occupation to
acquire all their legitimate political rights, including
the right to self-determination and to establish their
independent State on their land with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

