Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): I would like
to express our appreciation to you, Mr. President, as
well as to the other ministers and heads of delegation
who have honoured us with their active participation in
this meeting of the Security Council. I would also like
to take this opportunity to convey the regret of your
brother, Mamdi Conde, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Guinea, who could not be here owing to reasons
beyond his control. We are also grateful to the
delegation of Argentina for the effectiveness with
which it guided the Council's work during January.
Allow me also to congratulate Mr. Olara Otunnu for his
outstanding introduction of the report (S/2005/72) of
the Secretary-General, as well as for the devotion and
competence he has demonstrated in the execution of
his duties. I also wish to thank Ms. Rima Salah, Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF, and Mr. Ibrahima
Diouf, Special Adviser on Child Protection to the
Executive Secretary of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), for the conciseness
and usefulness of the presentations they made this
morning.

Located at the heart of a subregion long torn
apart by conflict, Guinea is encouraged by the peace
and stabilization process in the countries of the Mano
River Union and attaches great importance to the issue
of children in armed conflict. We would like to express
our gratitude to our sister republic Benin for having
placed this item on this month's agenda of the Security
Council. In that connection, my delegation is pleased
to note that the Council has taken this matter up
frequently since 1999. This is an important issue, in
terms of the need to ensure the full implementation of
the relevant recommendations and to enhance the steps
to be taken at every level so as to ensure that we
eradicate the scourge of child soldiers.

We note that success has been made in terms of
implementing regulatory and operational instruments
on the protection of children in armed conflict. As the
body responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, we encourage the Council to
continue to ensure that that issue is monitored closely.
With regard to honouring the commitments undertaken
and the progress made to halt the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflict and other violations
against children, my delegation welcomes the results of
the consultations that led to the preparation of the
report under consideration.

While we acknowledge the continuing difficulties
with regard to access to information and to children in
areas of conflict, my delegation welcomes the efforts
that are under way, particularly the establishment and
strengthening of national mechanisms and the
coordination between United Nations country teams
and national actors to bring about a better
understanding of the situation of children in every
crisis and conflict situation.

With regard to the serious and shocking problem
of sexual misbehaviour and exploitation by United
Nations peacekeeping personnel, my delegation
unreservedly supports the efforts now under way. We
also once again emphasize the importance of the
Secretary-General's bulletin (ST/SGB/2003/13) on
special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse. We believe that this
bulletin should be used by all actors as a manual.

My delegation endorses and supports the
development of the plan of action to create a
systematic and comprehensive monitoring and
reporting mechanism, pursuant to the Security
Council's request in resolution 1539 (2004). We
believe that important measures and specific initiatives
have been developed to ensure the protection of
children in armed conflict and that a systematic
campaign to promote the implementation phase of the
plan of action could contribute to rectifying
dysfunctions and to ending the impunity of the
perpetrators of atrocities against children.

We therefore approve the flow chart for
monitoring and reporting on children and armed
conflict, but we feel that its relevance will depend on
the effective commitment of the various actors, their
respective mandates and their resolve to take the
measures appropriate to each situation. Furthermore,
my delegation supports the establishment by the Sub-
Commission on the Promotion and Protection of
Human Rights of a standing working group on children
and armed conflict in order to fulfil the objectives set
out in paragraph 132 of the report.

With respect to the incorporation of best practices
in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) programmes for children, my delegation is
encouraged by the efforts and initiatives under way and
hopes that the finalization of the module on children
and disarmament, as part of the initiative entitled
"Towards a United Nations approach to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in a peacekeeping
environment", will contribute further to strengthening
the efforts already engaged.

It should be noted, however, that the complexity
and difficulties of DDR programmes require the will of
leaders and other regional and local actors, as well as
the cooperation of donors, the private sector and civil
society, with a View to ensuring the enhanced
implementation of those programmes. In that context,
the measures proposed in the report to promote
international and regional cooperation to prevent and
combat illegal cross-border activities that harm
children deserve urgent attention.

My delegation welcomes the establishment of
various lists, which will keep us better informed on the
development of child-related issues in various
situations of armed conflict. However, it should be
noted that, even where the Council is not directly
seized of certain cases, it ought nevertheless to focus
due attention thereupon. In that respect, a regular
updating of the lists is essential. It is only through
access to information that the international community
can assume its responsibilities.

My delegation reiterates its belief that the peoples
and children of the world, particularly in Africa, can
only enjoy a common destiny in an environment of
peace. Peace, in turn, is possible only if development is
guaranteed, especially in the countries of Africa,
through the establishment of a minimum level of
justice, inter alia, in the management of their debts, an
opening of the markets of the North to their products,
appropriate redistribution of wealth, and increased
official development assistance.

All of that requires coordination between, on the
one hand, the various United Nations bodies and the
institutions committed to the well-being of children,
and, on the other, between the Organization and the
regional, subregional and national entities.

While we appreciate the efforts now under way,
my country hopes that the Security Council, together
with other organs and institutions concerned, will take
the measures necessary to finding appropriate and
lasting solutions to the problem of children and armed
conflict. We will spare no effort in making its
contribution to the collective effort to ensure the
success of this meeting of the Security Council.

