Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Like my
colleague from the United Kingdom, I am also going
to shorten my statement. The full version will be
available on the website of the Permanent Mission of
New Zealand.

Let me begin by thanking Senegal for convening
this important discussion, and our briefers for the
information and analysis they have provided us today.

Others have covered the more general challenge
posed to peacekeepers in the dangerous and complex
environments in which many peacekeeping operations
take place. I want to highlight three aspects that we
consider warrant particular attention to try to ensure
that peacekeepers in such environments can operate as
safely and as effectively as possible.

First, it is vital that we provide peace operations
with clear and realistic mandates and that those
mandates be backed by appropriate concepts of
operations, clear rules of engagement and adequate
contingency planning. Peacekeepers must have clarity
about what role they should - and should not - be
playing in addressing the asymmetrical threats present
in their environment. I agree with others who say
that peacekeepers should not be involved in proactive
counter-terrorism or counter-insurgency activities. But
they will be required on occasion to take pre-emptive
steps to address imminent threats and to respond in
situations when United Nations personnel come under
attack. We have witnessed several examples in recent
years, perhaps most dramatically in the Golan Heights
in 2014, of what can happen when peacekeepers do
not have clear guidance on how to respond in such
situations. To ensure their readiness, we also see merit
in missions establishing processes to regularly test and
rehearse such scenarios.

Secondly, where asymmetrical threats are present,
we must ensure that peacekeepers are adequately
trained and equipped, and that missions are provided
with the necessary capabilities. Too often, that does not
happen. We must ensure that United Nations missions
are provided the necessary intelligence, logistics and
force-protection capabilities to ensure the safety and
security of their personnel. The use of intelligence and
surveillance capabilities assumes particular importance
in such environments, and are vital enablers for
peacekeepers in detecting and preventing threats to
both United Nations personnel and the civilians under
their protection. Such capabilities save lives, and we
need to move beyond the politics that currently restrict
their use.

Thirdly, the Security Council needs to provide
more meaningful oversight for those peacekeepers
deployed to environments where asymmetrical
threats are present. That need for more active Council
monitoring and management of situations of risk or
high or emerging risk led New Zealand to support the
establishment of regular situation-awareness briefings.
It is our hope that, by ensuring that Council members
are briefed on emerging threats to peacekeepers and the
civilians they are mandated to protect, those risks can
be more effectively managed.

The work of the Council and the peace operations
it mandates does not exist in a vacuum. In that regard,
it is important that the Security Council coordinate
its work with other United Nations and international
entities active in counter-terrorism efforts, to ensure
complementarity of effort and avoid duplication.
Strengthened cooperation among the relevant agencies
to improve the ability of peace operations to function
more effectively is essential.

We also support the Secretary-General's Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, which emphasizes
the need for a holistic approach to address the root causes
of violent extremism effectively. In that regard, we
support the Secretary-General's intention to integrate
the prevention of violent extremism into the relevant
activities of United Nations peacekeeping operations.

As the nature of peacekeeping evolves, the Council
needs to adapt to new realities. Peacekeepers are
increasingly caught between armed actors and the
civilians they are required to protect. It is important
that the Council continue to adapt to new forms of
conflict, to ensure its peacekeepers carry out their roles
safely and effectively.

