Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Over the past few months, the situation in Darfur has
gradually improved and it is now moving in the right
direction, thanks to: the joint efforts of all the parties,
in particular the African Union; the joint communique
between the Sudanese Government and the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, signed on 3 July; and,
especially, the signing in early August of the Plan of
Action by the Sudanese Foreign Minister and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. The
Sudanese Government has shown its sincerity in trying
to resolve the problem, and has adopted many
measures accordingly. That objective reality cannot be
denied.

Under those circumstances, and given the
complexity of the Darfur issue, the Security Council
and the international community should focus on
encouraging the Sudanese Government to continue to
cooperate, rather than doing the opposite. We should
fully support the African Union in its mediation efforts,
rather than increase its difficulties. We should help
bring about an early agreement with a view to the
achievement of a political solution between the
Sudanese Government and the rebels, rather than send
the wrong signal and make negotiations more difficult.
We should increase humanitarian assistance to Darfur,
rather than create a situation that could lead to the
closing of the door to relief and assistance.

For those reasons, the Chinese delegation has
serious reservations about the resolution just adopted.
We are concerned that it will not contribute to the
solution of the problem. Nevertheless, since a key
element of the Council's work at present is support for
the African Union in extending its deployment in
Darfur - reflecting the wishes of the African Union
and of the Secretary-General, as well as the broad
consensus view - the Chinese delegation refrained
from blocking the adoption of the draft resolution.

The Chinese Government greatly appreciates the
enormous, valuable efforts being made by the African
Union in seeking a solution to this issue. We support
expanding the African Union's deployment in Darfur,
and we call on the international community to offer all
possible assistance to that end. We continue to believe
that only a political settlement, achieved through
negotiation, will lead to a final resolution of the Darfur
crisis. We therefore hope that the Government of the
Sudan and the rebel groups will accelerate their
political talks in order to achieve a comprehensive
agreement at an early date.

The international community should make
vigorous efforts to create favourable conditions for the
talks. At the same time, the international community
must urge the Sudanese Government not only to
improve the security situation in Darfur, but also to
promptly fulfil all its commitments with regard to
assistance. Those donor countries with the capacity to
do so, in particular, should offer all the assistance that
they can. That is the only way in which we can
effectively save lives and provide help to those who
need it.

Finally, we have noted that the sponsors have
repeatedly stated that the threat of sanctions will not be
automatically carried out. I wish to reiterate the fact
that China's position against sanctions remains
unchanged. It has been our consistent view that, instead
of helping to solve complicated problems, sanctions
may make them even more complicated.

