Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing on his visit to the Middle East, as well as for
his efforts towards a ceasefire in Gaza. We wish him
all the best.

The Security Council is meeting today at a time
when the Middle East has witnessed grave developments
and setbacks that have caused an unprecedented level
of deterioration in the tragic situation in the region. For
years now, the unjustified and unacceptable escalation
by Israel targeting unarmed civilians in Gaza has led
only to more hatred and more violence, with grave
consequences that undermine all of the efforts that have
been made so far to push the peace process forward.

The Kingdom of Morocco denounces and deplores
this Israeli military escalation against the Palestinian
people, which violates all international conventions.
We call on the international community to fully
shoulder its responsibilities and to urgently intervene to
bring about an immediate cessation of this aggression
targeting unarmed civilians; protect the Palestinian
people and preserve their rights; and call on Israel to
respect international legitimacy.

Hundreds of victims have fallen since the beginning
of the aggression, including many children, women and
elderly persons. Their homes were demolished over
their heads, their families dispersed and their property
destroyed. This represents a grave deterioration of the
already terrible humanitarian situation, caused by the
premeditated actions carried out by Israel against the
Palestinian people.

His Highness King Mohammed VI has provided
urgent humanitarian assistance to the people of Gaza
and to the victims of Israeli aggression. They will
receive medical assistance in Moroccan hospitals.
His Majesty, as Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee,
who is keenly following the situation in Palestine,
spoke with His Excellency the President of Palestine,
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas Abu Mazen, in order to follow
up the unprecedented situation resulting from the
indiscriminate Israeli aggression against the unarmed
Palestinian people. His Royal Majesty expressed his
sincere condolences to the familites of Palestinian
martyrs and his sympathy with the wounded. He
denounced once again the premeditated Israeli attacks
against the Palestinian people, their land and their
property, and expressed the full solidarity of Morocco
with those people.
The continuing military operations will lead only to
further bloodshed among innocents. It will complicate
the situation and will lead to more violence and enmity.
We therefore call for an immediate end to the aggression
against Gaza. Morocco supports all of the efforts under
way to bring about an immediate ceasefire, which
are being undertaken by a number of Arab and other
countries as well as the Secretary-General.

We support the Secretary-General's call on
both parties to immediately cease fire. We also urge
the international community to fully shoulder its
responsibilities and provide the necessary humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian people to overcome this
crisis and provide all forms of assistance and protection
in order to enable the Palestinians to exercise their right
to self-determination.

The only way to resolve the Palestinian question
is not by war or bloodshed or the killing of innocent
civilians. It is through a return to negotiations towards
a two-State solution, where two peoples can live side
by side in peace and security. We will remain fully
supportive of the peace negotiations, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the two-State solution, with a State
of Palestine within the 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

