Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
In the first hour of 20 May 2002, the flag of the United
Nations will be lowered in East Timor and the flag of a
new nation raised as a new country attains
independence. That ceremony of transition will be the
culmination of a tremendous effort carried out by the
people of East Timor and by the international
community.

This has been a successful experience, and it is
cause for rejoicing on the part of the United Nations. In
the difficult times now facing the international
community, when violence and unyielding opposition
in other regions are posing tremendous challenges for
the United Nations - challenges that it must overcome
in order to maintain its credibility - world public
opinion views East Timor as a success story that has
brought to life the goals and aspirations embodied in
the Charter of the United Nations.

My delegations would like to welcome the
President-elect of East Timor, Mr. Xanana Gusmao,
and Chief Minister Mari Alkatiri. In doing so, my
country would like to pay tribute to the people of East
Timor for the broad participation and smooth conduct
of the presidential elections held on 14 April last,
which represented the last stage before the declaration
of independence. I would also like to express my
country's support for the new authorities in discharging
all of the tasks that still remain before them.

The path that has been travelled was beset with
anguish; at times it was bloody, but ultimately our
efforts were crowned with success. Nevertheless, the
task remaining is an even greater one - the
construction of an independent nation that will be a
viable member of the international community. The
task remains to consolidate the public administration
and to train the staff in the judiciary, so as to ensure
justice and the rule of law for the inhabitants and
citizens of East Timor. Land ownership will also have
to be regulated, for this will make economic activity
much easier, and, equally important, it will also attract
foreign investment to promote social development.

The reintegration of the former combatants is also
an important element. Their access to public assistance
programmes must be facilitated. My country attaches
equal importance to the return of refugees and to their
resettlement, to the regulation of commercial activity in
the border areas, to transport agreements between Dili
and Oecussi and between D111 and the island of Atauro,
as well as to the establishment of a framework for
cooperation in different fields that will redound to the
benefit of the friendship between East Timor and other
peoples.

My country would like to express its gratitude to
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) for the important role it played
throughout the process of achieving independence. I
would also like to convey special thanks and tribute to
the head of the mission, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for
his efforts as leader. We wish him success in his new
endeavours.

The inclusion in the new mission of civil, police
and military components that will be reduced as the
goals and objectives are attained properly reflects the
vision expressed on many occasions with regard to
designing appropriate exit strategies, and it includes
the concept of strategic association between all United
Nations bodies and the new authorities of East Timor.
As we have said before, we fully support the mandate
and structure proposed by the Secretariat, including
extending assistance to East Timor to consolidate the
country's stability and the viability of its public
administration. We fully support also the establishment
of a law-enforcement body, which will conduct its
activities in keeping with international human rights
standards, and contributions to maintaining internal
and external security. These are fundamental tasks that
will be taken over by the East Timor Defence Force in
June 2004.

Similarly, I would like to wish success to the new
head of the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET), Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, whose
well-known ability leads us to have full confidence in
the success of his mission.
To the recently elected authorities of East Timor,
I would like to convey Mexico's commitment to
continue to support efforts to consolidate the new
State. Several Mexicans have already worked with the
Independent Electoral Commission to train personnel.
That Commission is now ready to take charge of future
elections. Mexico's Federal Electoral Institute also
provided some material assistance to the electoral
process through the United Nations.

Mexico will continue to explore ways of
cooperating with the authorities of East Timor and will
support the efforts of the United Nations. We undertake
this commitment so that my country's experience in
various development areas may help achieve the
aspiration of the inhabitants of East Timor to an
independent, free and prosperous country. The donors'
meeting to be held shortly will be attended by a
representative of Mexico and will be an excellent
opportunity to remind the international community of
the need to support economic and social development,
reduce poverty, and guarantee the independence and
self-determination of East Timor. We hope to be
present on 20 May to celebrate the proclamation of
independence with the people of East Timor.

