Mr. Kouchner (spoke in French): Seventeen
months ago the Council gave us the mandate of setting
Kosovo on its way, administering it and establishing
democratic institutions until it could assume the
substantial autonomy called for in resolution 1244
(1999). We have made a great deal of progress,
important progress, in that direction, but not only
progress; there have been failures as well, and many
challenges remain to be met.

I do not intend to overwhelm the Council with
technical details of that progress, because I am sure
that it has available a paper that summarizes the current
status. I would like to take this opportunity to review
some of the most important advances we have made in
order to fulfil the mandate conferred upon us in June
1999 by resolution 1244 (1999), and to indicate the
direction that I believe should now be taken.

The municipal elections in Kosovo were
universally recognized as a technical success, but also,
I am convinced, as a victory for the burgeoning
democracy in Kosovo. To truly appreciate the success
of 28 October, we need to take into account the context
in which the elections took place and everything that
has occurred over the past 17 months, a very short time
compared with other peace missions that the Security
Council proposes, creates and monitors. Seventeen
months is indeed a short time.

Last Saturday I presided over the ceremony in
which the new Pristina municipal council took the oath
of office. There were present 60 men and women
chosen by the people of Kosovo in what was, for them,
the first democratic and free election.

As I have said, I will not overwhelm the members
of the Council with figures, but I would recall that
5,000 candidates came forward. One third were
women, which is not a negligible figure. For other
countries that would be a very significant result. There
were 5,000 candidates on 18 official lists of political
parties, with many individual lists and many lists of
local interests. Last Saturday there were ceremonies at
the same time in all 30 of Kosovo's municipalities.

Most of those elected to the municipal council of
the biggest city of the region, Pristina, are men and
women who represent the two main Albanian political
parties in Kosovo: the Democratic League of Kosovo
(LDK), headed by Mr. Ibrahim Rugova, and the
Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK), headed by Mr.
Hashim Thaci. In addition, we find - and I emphasize
this - Bosnians, Turks and Ashkalis. For the moment,
unfortunately, there are no Serbs in Pristina, but there
are Serbs in other municipalities, and this situation is
due to change in Pristina quite quickly, I think and I am
sure.

After my statement on the democratic future of
Kosovo, the ceremony was courteously interrupted by a
young man in a suit and tie, a Mr. Fatmir Limaj. He is
the head of the Party for Democratic Progress of
Kosovo (PDK), the party of Mr. Thaci, in Pristina. He
simply wanted to tell us how significant the solemn
commitment - the oath he was going to take - was to
him and his colleagues. He insisted that everyone take
this oath in front of the flags of all the communities
represented in the municipal council. I learned that he
was making this request and I granted it - although
the issue of flags in Kosovo is extremely sensitive. We
brought the various flags of the various communities.
And when there are Serbs, there will also be their flag.
This has been accepted by the party representatives at
Pristina.

I also recommended to the participants that they
not put their future at risk by seeking only grounds for
dispute, even if there are indeed solid grounds. Rather,
I recommended that they work together for democracy,
peace and the good of the city of Pristina, whose
elected officials they were. The taking of the oath took
place, and this week the council met for the first time
to elect a President and draft a programme of work.

I have told the Security Council members this
anecdote - which I do not consider particularly
important - simply to explain that 18 months ago, Mr.
Fatmir Limaj, the member of the PDK, was in the
mountains, leading a division of the Kosovo Liberation
Army. He was a soldier. I know that it has not been
easy for him-nor for the others-to re-adapt to
civilian life. However, today here he is - a municipal
elected official, after an electoral campaign that was
decent, non-violent and democratic.

The party he represents was not as successful at
the polls as Mr. Rugova's party, the Democratic League
of Kosovo (LDK). In giving close to 58 per cent of the
votes to Mr. Ibrahim Rugova, the people of Kosovo
showed that in this particular election they preferred
moderation and experience- in sum, tolerance. This
did not stop Mr. Limaj and many of his fellow former
combatants from being elected. The PDK of Hashim
Thaci and the Alliance of Mr. Ramush Haradinaj -
two parties that have grown out of the former Kosovo
Liberation Army- together got 35 per cent of the
votes. And everyone has made a commitment to
working together to achieve a unified administration. I
think that this represents a notable success.
I ask Security Council members, are you aware of
instances from the history of Latin America, Central
America, Africa or Asia - or even from the history of
Europe - are you aware of "guerrillas" thus converted
into a democratic party and standing for election only a
year and a half after the fighting? When have we ever
witnessed such a transformation of a party- that was
called "terrorist", "revolutionary" and other such
adjectives - into a responsible political party standing
for election, a transformation that in this case appears
to be successful, even if some doubts remain?

Yes, last month's municipal elections were a great
success, because technically speaking the task taken on
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE)-which should be congratulated on
the success - and UNMIK was not a simple one, and
above all because these elections were the result of a
real political transformation. And right after Mr. Fatmir
Limaj asked the question regarding the flags, and with
the same courteousness, the representative of Mr.
Rugova's party, the LDK, said, "I am in complete
agreement with the position taken by the representative
of the opposition." Already, and on such a delicate
subject, the opposition and the majority were engaged
in the democratic process.

Council members know perfectly well what the
situation in Kosovo was when we arrived in 1999: a
society in collapse, without infrastructure, lacking
institutions, in a state of crisis; a population
traumatized by 40 years of communism and 10 years of
apartheid; eight hundred thousand refugees in camps
beyond the borders; endemic violence- even if one
considers this violence as part of a tradition, as being
rooted in tradition. Of course this violence must be
denounced when it is used against the Serbs, but this
violence has long existed and is rooted in past
centuries. And last year, at the beginning of the year,
there were no leaders capable of organizing in the way
they have now, thanks to the particular efforts that we
and the international community have made on the
ground. There were no Kosovar Albanian leaders
capable of engaging in dialogue. Those who sought
power, let us remember, were leading three separate,
parallel governments. There was a parliament and a
President that did not agree and hindered our efforts to
establish a single, legitimate administrative authority.
At the end oflast year, after months of negotiations and
efforts, we were able to convince these people to
dissolve these structures-to dissolve them-and
since then we have not heard a word about these
structures. The Kosovar Albanians and the other
minorities have been true to their words. When they
decided, in an agreement signed on 15 December 1999,
to unify the temporary multiple administrative
structures, this was successful. Since then we have not
heard a word of the Government of Mr. Rugova, the
Government of Mr. Thaci, of the parliament or the
President.

Here again I ask Council members, do you know
of examples of peacekeeping missions that were
considered impossible and that then succeeded, at least
in getting the people, the various political factions -
often in conflict, at times in fratricidal conflict- to
come together for the greater interest of a region?

As regards the elections, I must also emphasize
that we are very proud - let me say first of all that I
am very proud, and perhaps I will not have another
opportunity to tell the Council this -I am very proud
of the work that has been done by the team that I have
had the honour to lead. Members of the Security
Council, this is your team, the United Nations team
certainly, and also the team of the European Union, the
team of the OSCE, the team ofthe Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees - all those
who made up the framework, the four pillars, as they
have been called, of this very special and very
productive mission, UNMIK. These are people who
worked night and day, seven days a week, some of
them for the past two years. And now, tired but happy,
I believe, they are beginning to leave us.

Before all the veterans leave us, I would like to
tell you how very much I have appreciated not only
their dedication, their success and their perseverance,
but also the friendship and the spirit that prevailed
among each of the somewhat disparate elements, given
the completely separate structures in UNMIK. I would
not want these words of satisfaction to be separated
from what I would say to the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO). Of course, I was not able to
meet all of the troops involved-45,000 Kosovo
Force (KFOR) troops-but I do want to associate
them and their commanders with these words of thanks
and appreciation. Without them this success would not
have taken place, and certainly the elections would not
have occurred.

We are very proud that in the electoral campaign
there was virtually no fraud, very little manipulation
and, above all, very little violence. In fact, KFOR and
the UNMIK police stated that 28 October was the least
violent day since the arrival of the mission last year.
Participation was also very high; 721,000 people, 79
per cent of those registered, voted. When I think of
what happens in certain democracies, I can say once
again how proud I am of the team that it was my
honour to head. Of the valid votes, fewer than 5 per
cent of the ballots were declared null and void, and
fewer than 2 per cent ofthe voters were not on the final
electoral list.

You will recall that we had a great deal of
discussion right here about these elections. At the
beginning not everyone was convinced, but these
elections were a remarkable technical success, and the
United Nations, with its OSCE partners, launched a
registration process on the electoral lists, starting from
zero in a place where there had not been even one
voters' list and where the population had had no real
experience in democratic processes, nor did they have
identity papers to any great extent. I would say that
after the 10 years under Mr. Milosevic neither personal
identity nor even community identity remained. On
election day, of course there were some organizational
difficulties, and we are in the process of drawing
lessons and taking that into account in the preparation
of general elections. In accordance with resolution
1244 (1999), we would want to organize those
elections next year, and personally, it is my hope that
they will be organized as ofthe spring.

Ten days ago, I certified the results of the
elections for all of the 30 municipalities of Kosovo,
with the exception of three municipalities in the
north-Leposavic, Zvecan and Zubin Potok,
essentially Serb municipalities. Unfortunately, the
participation rate was too low for the results to be
considered valid. I would recall once again that the
members of the Serb community who at the time of
registration wanted to register were physically
prevented from doing so by Mr. Milosevic's partisans.
That is not the case right now. The four Serb
formations want to participate, and they will
participate.
I am preparing to appoint, in the next few days,
the members of those three municipal councils that I
have not certified and to appoint Serbs and members of
other minorities in all the places, in all the
municipalities where that will be necessary. It is my
plan to hold early elections next year in those
municipalities, where the Kosovo Serbs will be able to
join the municipal structures and be full-fledged
participants on equal footing. I would add that the
members of the minorities in the communities where I
will be making appointments will be full members, and
they will be participating in the vote. They will simply
have been prevented at the beginning from voting for
the presidency of those municipalities, but they will be
members, just like the others.

Since I am talking about the Serb leaders of
Kosovo, I would like to tell you that those who
followed Mr. Milosevic, like the others, all met
together, the four formations, for the first time last
week in my office, and they are prepared to participate
in the new administrative structures. Indeed, they are
even calling for it. Of course they have conditions, but
that is normal. The discussions are beginning. Those
Serb officials have been strengthened by the fortunate
changes that took place in Belgrade. They are more
open now to participation, as I have just said, but
obviously, they need a bit more time in order to adapt
their attitudes to those of the new democratic leaders in
Belgrade. I understand this perfectly.

I repeat: I will be appointing additional members
in other municipal councils so that all of the
communities - of course, it is not only the Serbs to
whom I am referring, but also the Turks, the Bosniacs,
the Goranis and the Ashkalijas - all of them will be
represented if they are not now represented at a high
enough level. More than a dozen smaller parties and
their candidates also obtained seats in the municipal
councils, thanks to the system of proportional
representation. I am very pleased that many of those
elected officials are women.

At the present time, now that the results are
known, we need to proceed rapidly to implement them.
We have agreed on a programme for the main
activities, and we want to establish the basic structures
for all the municipalities by Christmas. Every month,
and more often if it proves necessary, I will preside
over a meeting of the presidents of the municipal
councils of Kosovo. The leaders of all the political
parties have committed themselves to accepting the
results, and now they will begin to deal with the
institutional transfer of responsibilities. In most of the
municipalities, this will mean that the parties that had
taken on posts a year and a half ago will have to yield
those posts to their elected successors. This will be a
true test of political maturity. Real democracy in
Kosovo should begin right there at the local level.

Once again, I wonder if you know of any other
examples where there has been a transformation from
an imposed authority to an elected authority a year and
a half after the end of a bitter conflict, like the war in
Kosovo. I would be pleased to benefit from the
experience of other such examples.

I am convinced that the Kosovars are determined
to prove their aptitude for democracy. I cannot
emphasize strongly enough that they also benefit
greatly from the fortunate events in Belgrade, which
have led to democratic, positive exchanges between
Belgrade and Pristina. In fact, there have been
wonderful consequences in Kosovo of the events in
Belgrade. The Albanians of Kosovo, leaders and all,
welcomed the events as a contribution to regional
stability, even though - let us not conceal the facts -
these changes have not brought about an end to the
desire for independence. From the extremists to the
moderates - from those that one cannot call the left to
those that one cannot call the right - all the Kosovars
affirm their determination never again to submit, as in
the past, to domination by Belgrade.

But everything is contained in that phrase "as in
the past". What resolution 1244 (1999) guarantees to
them - and that resolution has become the cornerstone
of all building for the future - and what Mr. Kostunica
has accepted, as have all the leaders in Kosovo, has
nothing to do with the situation that prevailed in the
past. There will be some discussions, but what was
difficult to apply in the dark is now, in the light of
acceptances becoming the vital need to apply
resolution 1244 (1999) itself, which is the very
foundation of our initiatives.

So that the necessary discussions can take place.
So that the Kosovars, who have shown so much
democratic maturity, can benefit, it is my hope, as I
have said, that we can hold general elections as soon as
possible. They are essential, and that is no surprise,
because they are the logical follow-up to the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).
Since I am addressing the facts, let me say that
the Kosovars, having benefited from worldwide
support, are concerned by one major fact. They are
concerned by the attention and priorities of the
international community, which have now turned to
Belgrade. They feel that this could leave them in a state
of neglect. I am not saying that that is the reality. I
could cite some examples of the danger from an
economic point of view, but I am saying that
psychologically, sociologically, politically and
historically, the Kosovars are concerned about the way
in which visits are being undertaken to Belgrade but
not to Kosovo. That does not apply to everyone and we
thank those who have visited, but there is a concern
that must be taken into account from a political
standpoint.

The Kosovars also remain sceptical about the
building of democracy in Serbia. Of course, they
welcome the leaders and are waiting, but they have
doubts, which they have expressed, about President
Kostunica's will to make radical changes in Belgrade's
policy towards Kosovo. I would recall that UNMIK's
contacts with Belgrade have been ongoing since the
very beginning and have proven to be very productive.
Yesterday, for instance, a delegation from Belgrade
visited Pristina and discussed at length the problem of
prisoners. A certain number of decisions were taken,
not only about the facilitation of access to Albanian
prisoners in Serb jails, but also on guarantees -
extended to all Serbs - of a future vote on a law of
amnesty. Obviously, such initiation of discussions
between Belgrade and Pristina holds many lessons and
great promise for the years ahead.

I have tried to convince the inhabitants of Kosovo
of the express goodwill of leaders in Belgrade. I also
understand, however, that Mr. Kostunica needs time. I
simply want us here not to forget that the suffering is
not in the distant past; in historical terms, 18 months
are nothing. We must forget neither how recent the
suffering is, nor who suffered. It is the Kosovo
Albanians who largely suffered in recent years. Let us
welcome democracy in Belgrade, but let us not forget
too quickly the months and years that have just gone
by.

It is my fervent hope, and that of the Kosovars,
that the Albanian Kosovar detainees in prisons will
rapidly benefit from the law of amnesty. I believe that
we are working in the right direction. I am confident
that relations will thus improve considerably between
the two communities, even if these concerns remain
very strong. I would recall that there was a
demonstration in Pristina only yesterday that was
attended by 100,000 people. Every day for the past
eight, the wives and children of detainees have slept in
the street before the national theatre. The concern is
strong because, as members are aware, there have been
riots in Serb prisons and because those who took power
in the two prisons concerned were Serbian common
criminals. These concerns are acute and have not been
dispelled. Day and night, Kosovars demonstrate in
front of our offices.

I reiterate that events in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia have renewed the confidence of the Serb
leaders in Kosovo, making them more open to
cooperation. The Albanian leaders, too, are confident.
This will be true of all the communities in the future. I
am sure that constructive dialogue will begin, first and
foremost, between UNMIK and Belgrade - indeed, it
already has - and between Belgrade and the leaders of
the Kosovar communities. Economic and judicial
issues, for instance, have already been the subjects of
fruitful meetings.

I cannot overemphasize that all UNMIK policy is
based on resolution 1244 (1999), but, as I explained to
the General Affairs Council of the European Union on
9 October, we must all recall that the situation in
Kosovo has not been radically changed by the advent
of democratic leaders in Belgrade. For the time being,
this has not led to change in daily life in Kosovo. The
confrontation between communities that has endured
for 12 centuries has not disappeared; it would be rather
childish to imagine that it might. It is a very specific
type of confrontation. I may be using the wrong word,
but this is undoubtedly one of the few places in the
world where several communities have been able to
live side by side without ever really interacting,
speaking or intermingling. That has not disappeared.

I have waited so long for the Serb people to have
democratic leadership and I am delighted that they now
do. That does not, however, erase the problems
overnight. It certainly cannot erase the profound
feelings of the inhabitants of the Balkans, in particular
Kosovo, based on their own history and family
relationships and on the circumstances of their loved
ones who have disappeared, languish in prison or have
never been able to build a decent future for themselves.

In spite of all this progress, Kosovo remains a
society in crisis. I cannot recall anything grimmer than
the brutal murders last week of four Ashkalis, who had
returned only two days earlier to their destroyed homes
in a region of Albanian majority. It was a horrible
killing. Together with General Cabigiosu, Commander
of the Kosovo Force, we will be doing everything to
track down the perpetrators. We read these dreadful
murders as a very negative omen for the legitimate
return of all communities to their regions of origin.
These four Ashkalis felt safe enough to return without
protection, but no one in Kosovo can now feel safe,
despite all the progress that has been made. Extremists
continue to seek to destroy the chances of democracy.
They are still on the lookout, so we must remain
equally vigilant and retain our military presence and
economic commitments for some time to come.

What will tomorrow bring? The last time I spoke
here, I discussed a political plan for substantial
autonomy. I called it a pact between UNMIK and
Kosovar society. All of our partners in Pristina and
Belgrade agree. Resolution 1244 (1999) is, I repeat,
our basis for future work. I will keep reiterating that,
but there is another element at work. Every Albanian
wants independence. That paradox means that seeking
immediately to resolve the question of the definitive
status of Kosovo could very rapidly lead to another
conflict. There will be no stability in the Balkans
without stability in Kosovo. The stability of Kosovo
cannot be limited to Kosovo alone; it must evolve
throughout the region.

Thus, we must now hasten the process of defining
that substantial autonomy and develop institutions of
self-government - as set down explicitly in resolution
1244 (1999) - in which the Kosovars will share ever
more responsibility for the administration of Kosovo.
This is all the more urgent following the municipal
elections that led democratically chosen local
representatives to opt for moderation. I affirm that we
must act rapidly to organize elections throughout
Kosovo, most likely to elect a Parliament. I propose
that those general elections be held at the beginning of
the year, if possible in spring. A working group,
involving the Group of 8, the United Nations and the
Contact Group, has been established on the basis of
work already done by these institutions for the
consideration of a possible provisional constitution.

Let me say a word about elections in general. So
far, no one has asked us to organize the elections to the
Serb parliament that are scheduled for 23 December
2000. As Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, I affirm here today that in no event can
UNMIK organize such elections. Indeed, the OSCE
teams that were so effective in the October elections
have left Kosovo; some members went to Bosnia to
help organize the elections there. At present, vast
security problems remain. To organize such elections,
NATO troops would need to be reinforced, and I would
recall that such troops have been unequivocally
rejected by the most moderate of Kosovo's leaders, and
by all others as well.

How can we be asked to organize those elections?
No international or indeed European regulations apply,
and in fact there are no electoral rolls that include
Kosovo Serbs, because they were prevented from
registering. That lack of electoral rolls is one of the
reasons we did not agree to organize the September
elections. No official request was addressed to us, and
here I do not want to mention any of the great number
of other legal, political or psychological elements
involved. But I want to say to the Council that,
technically speaking, it is impossible.

Much, then, remains to be done. We cannot rest
on our laurels. In the Mission I have had the honour to
lead, no one had any thoughts of personal recognition,
medals or glory - that way, none of us could be
disappointed. The intensive work that was done
culminated in elections which I believe to have been a
success. The Council asked us to do this, even though
it had doubts about whether it could actually be done.
We did it on behalf of the Security Council. Now, we
must move to the next phase, which will pose an equal
if not a larger challenge for the international presence
in Kosovo and, in the end, for the departure of that
presence.

I would like every member of the Council to join
me in thinking about the members of the international
Mission who lost their lives on the rugged ground of
Kosovo. They believed in their international
commitment; they believed in the democratic future of
the region; they believed in the power of their presence
and of their work. I think of them today, just as I think
of all those whose death, whose murder, we could not
prevent, in particular members of minority
communities and the Serb community. Each of those
murders, which kept me, and my friends and my
marvellous deputy Jock Covey, awake at night, was a
blow to us - a failure.

The Mission achieved many unexpected
successes. There was great dedication on the part ofthe
representatives of Council members. But at the same
time, unfortunately, there were many failures of the
kind I have mentioned. In historical terms, these will
not count: like the Brahimi report, this peacekeeping
mission will prove to be one step forward, along with
what is being done by my friend Sergio Vieira de Mello
in Timor.
We did not merely try to impose peace; we were
trying to build up a region from nothing. It was a
region without an administration, without technology,
without resources, without a police force, without law,
without justice. But it has been an exciting adventure,
and I hope that the hundreds of people who participated
will be remembered gratefully, people whose future in
one or another United Nations mission is by no means
a secure one. My thoughts go to them.

