Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes Mr. Jose' Luis
Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, to the
Council and thanks him for his statement. We
congratulate Ms. Ameerah Haq on her assumption of
the post of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Timor-Leste and thank her for her
comprehensive briefing on the recent situation on the
ground.

We are pleased to see that, over the past few
months, the overall situation in Timor-Leste has
remained stable. The momentum of the political
dialogue among various parties has been maintained
and the principle of seeking to resolve differences
through consultation has been respected. Certain
progress has been achieved in economic and social
reconstruction. The Government attaches importance to
investment in education and health and to the provision
of basic services to the population. This has produced
positive results in the improvement of people's lives.

With the assistance of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste and the international
community, the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) has enhanced its law enforcement capacity and
is gradually taking over responsibility for ensuring law
and order.

At the same time, we should recognize that
Timor-Leste still faces formidable challenges in
economic development and the improvement of
people's livelihoods. Problems such as slow
agricultural development, youth underemployment and
lack of human resources are hampering the recovery

and reconstruction process and having a fundamental
effect on the social stability of Timor-Leste. We
support the Timor-Leste Government in its continuing
efforts to increase input into infrastructure
development, education, health and vocational training,
and we call on the international community to provide
more assistance to the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste in the relevant fields.

We note that in his report (S/2010/85) the
Secretary-General has put forward recommendations
on the drawdown of UNMIT police. We are of the view
that UNMIT is fulfilling an important mission in
Timor-Leste and that its police component is playing a
particularly important role in helping maintain social
order and in increasing the law enforcement capacity of
the PNTL. It is our hope that, in its approach to the
drawdown of UNMIT, the Secretariat will keep in mind
the process of peace and reconstruction in Timor-Leste
and will ensure the security and stability of Timor-
Leste while implementing the drawdown plan.

We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation to extend the mandate of UNMIT for
a further year, and we hope that Special Representative
Haq and UNMIT will continue to play an active role in
helping the Timor-Leste Government to increase its
administrative capacity and in coordinating the
assistance efforts of the international community.

