Mr. Sun Xiaobo (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Guatemala for presiding over today's meeting. I would
also like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Fernandez Amunategui, for his
briefing.

Haiti has made some progress in the areas of
stability and development recently. The swearing-in
of a new Government, the publication of constitutional
amendments and the establishment of the Superior
Council of the Judiciary are positive achievements by
the Haitian Government in its efforts to strengthen
its democratic and rule-of-law institutions, and China
welcomes them. At the same time, we also note that
Haiti faces colossal challenges in its political, economic
and humanitarian situations. It has a long way to go
in its process of rebuilding and reestablishing peace,
and it needs the continuing support and advice of the
international community.

I would like to emphasize three points. First,
ensuring political stability is an important prerequisite
for maintaining Haiti's security and development.
China welcomes the compromise reached through
political consultation by the relevant parties, and hopes
that the establishment of the new Government in Haiti
will help facilitate the democratic process and political
reconciliation there. We hope that all the relevant parties
will take the opportunity to unite in order to enhance
mutual trust and consolidate hard-won achievements.

Secondly, the chief issue that must be urgently
addressed is the speeding-up of the economic recovery
and reconstruction. Haiti's slow progress in those areas
has meant that many refugees from the earthquake
are still surviving on assistance. The country faces
major difficulties in the areas of reconstruction,
attracting investment, creating jobs and promoting
sustainable development. The international community
must devote serious attention to those problems. The
Haitian Government should redouble its efforts to
deal with unemployment and poverty, strengthen
institution-building and improve its capacity to govern.
We also hope that the international community will
honour its pledges to Haiti, increase the effectiveness
of its aid and provide constructive support for Haiti's
rebuilding and development.

Thirdly, the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) plays an indispensable role
there. China commends the Special Representative,
Mr. Fernandez Amunategui, and MINUSTAH as a
whole for its efforts and contribution to maintaining
peace and stability in Haiti. We welcome the Secretary-
General's proposal for MINUSTAH's consolidation
plan and the extension of its mandate for one year.
We hope that MINUSTAH will continue to implement
the Council's mandate, help Haiti maintain peace and
stability, facilitate its political process and strengthen
capacity-building for its rule-of-law and Government
institutions.

