Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the convening of this meeting, which marks four years
since the signing of the Minsk agreements. We thank
the Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Miroslav Jenca,
for his informative briefing. His words remind us that
this anniversary, far from being a date to celebrate,
must motivate the parties to renew their commitment
to implementing the agreements. We would also like
to express our appreciation for the participation of
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller and
Ambassadors Ertugrul Apakan and Martin Sajdik,
representatives of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.

Peru believes that the Minsk agreements constitute
the legal basis for achieving a political solution to put
an end to the conflict in the eastern part of Ukraine.
In that regard, we support the package of measures for
their full implementation, which the Council backed in
February 2015. We encourage the stakeholders involved
to uphold fully these commitments.

In this regard, and in line with the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes, we wish to welcome
the efforts made under the Normandy format and in the
Trilateral Contact Group to facilitate dialogue between
the parties and to contribute to restoring peace in
Ukraine and regional stability.

We deem vital adherence to the ceasefire agreed
on by the parties and backed by the Council, as is
the withdrawal of heavy artillery, which is very
often located near populated areas. In this regard,
we acknowledge the critical role played by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission, which its representatives
have recalled here today. It is alarming that in January
alone the mission registered more than 16,000 ceasefire
violations, many with weapons that should have been
withdrawn and that are prohibited under international
law, such as anti-personnel mines.

We are also concerned about the serious
consequences of that situation for the country's
governance and development, notably the devastating
impact on its civilian population, especially those living
on either side of the line of contact. In just five years,
the conflict has claimed the lives of more than 3,300
civilians and injured more than 9,000 people. Another
4.4 million people, including 1.6 million internally
displaced persons, have had to leave their homes and are
in dire need of humanitarian assistance. We therefore
reiterate the need to ensure that this aid is delivered
unhindered and under international supervision.
In that regard, we commend the work of the
international community, and of the United Nations in
particular, in supporting the efforts of the Ukrainian
authorities to alleviate the suffering of the civilian
population affected by the conflict. Similarly, we
echo the call for the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to provide
assistance to the 2.3 million people living in extremely
vulnerable conditions.

In reiterating our commitment to the independence,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine, in line
with the Charter of the United Nations and the Minsk
agreements, we underscore the importance of restoring
the control of the Ukrainian Government over the entire
conflict zone, and as a result, resume the essential
social and economic ties aimed at ensuring the well-
being of its people.

