Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in Portuguese; interpretation provided by the delegation):
I welcome the President of the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste, His Excellency Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta,
Head of State of one of our brother countries, and the
members of the Government of Timor-Leste. I also
thank him for his inspiring words and the heartfelt
references he made to my country. I also must present
my sincere condolences upon his bereavement. I
appreciate his presence in these difficult circumstances.

I would also like to especially welcome the
delegations of Angola, which will take the floor in its
capacity the current Chair of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, and Brazil. I want to
thank the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT), represented by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and to
reiterate Portugal's full support for the Mission's work.
Through Ms. Ameerah Haq, I would also like to praise
the personnel of the Mission for their important work.

The year 2012 will undoubtedly be a decisive
year for Timor-Leste. The presidential and
parliamentary elections will set the pace for the
country's political life for the coming term. At the
same time, Timor-Leste is preparing to complete the
transition from UNMIT's mandate to a future United
Nations presence, which must be reassessed and
adapted to the new realities in Timor-Leste. Finally, it
will be the year in which we will commemorate 10
years of an independent, free and democratic Timor-
Leste.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2012/43)
rightly highlights the progress that Timor-Leste has
achieved during the reporting period. We believe it is
clear, from the available data and from the will shown
by the Timorese people and institutions, that Timor-
Leste is a success story in defending and promoting
democracy, human rights and social and economic
development. Timor-Leste is truly a successful case in
the history of transition from conflict to stability and
development. That success is based on the leadership
and ownership of the authorities; on the depth of
strategic planning for the economy and for the
transition beyond peacekeeping; and on the
implementation of key national policies and on
effective coordination with the United Nations and
bilateral partners.

I would now like to underline several elements
that will shape success in the coming months. The
elections will serve as the defining moment for
consolidation of Timorese institutions. We are certain
that the elections will take place in a climate of peace
and transparency and in accordance with international
norms. We are also confident that they will be
characterized by statesmanship on the part of the
political parties and a sense of duty on the part of the
population.

The role to be played by the National Police
Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL) during the elections will
be one of its greatest challenges since it assumed
responsibility for security throughout the country in
March 2011. It is therefore a positive sign that the
PNTL has been preparing for months in order to ensure
public order during the elections and to address any
other challenges that may arise during the electoral
period. In that context, the support of UNMIT police

will be important. I would like to emphasize the
admirable work undertaken by UNMIT in the justice
and security sectors.

With respect to the transition process, Portugal
supports the renewal of UNMIT's mandate until
31 December 2012, as proposed by the Secretary-
General in his report. The draft resolution to be
adopted tomorrow will form a good basis for the
remaining work of UNMIT and the transition itself.

I would like to highlight the excellent
cooperation between the Timorese authorities and the
United Nations that resulted in the signing of the Joint
Transition Plan in September 2011 as the road map for
the transfer of responsibilities and capacities from
UNMIT to the Timorese authorities. It is a remarkable
document within the sphere of United Nations
peacekeeping.

The Timorese Government has already expressed
interest in the United Nations remaining in the country
after UNMIT withdraws. That matter is currently
subject to active assessment in Timor-Leste and will
certainly undergo deeper analysis in the second half of
the year, based on the request of the Timorese
Government, assessments by the authorities and the
contributions of civil society and United Nations
entities.

The relevant political developments throughout
2012, preparations for transition to a new format of
United Nations presence in the country, and
recognition of the achievements in transitioning to
peace and democracy and in building and strengthening
institutional capacities fully justify, from Portugal's
perspective, a Security Council mission to Timor-
Leste. I hereby thank the President for his invitation
for such a visit.

Timor-Leste has worked actively to achieve
significant social and economic progress. Economic
planning in Timor-Leste has been noteworthy, as
shown by the adoption of the Timor-Leste Strategic
Development Plan for 2011-2030 and the investment in
developing a non-oil economy, which will be essential
to ensuring sustainable development. Improvements
have also been made in governance and administration.

Portugal remains committed to bilateral
cooperation with Timor-Leste, with a particular focus
on strategic areas including justice, security and
education. I am extremely pleased to note the recent
signing of a cooperation protocol between the
Ministries of Education of Portugal and Timor-Leste
for the training of 7,000 Timorese teachers at all levels
of schooling for a total population of 300,000 students.

The participation of Timorese troops in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, within the
Portuguese contingent of that Mission, is a particular
example of Timor-Leste's commitment to international
peace and security. We salute President Ramos-Horta
for his role in the realization of that project.

Timor-Leste still has work ahead in meeting its
people's aspirations for economic development and the
strengthening of national institutions. The consistent
support of the international community remains a
crucial element in strengthening capacities and in
social and economic development. Portugal is
optimistic about this year's decisive developments in
Timor-Leste. President Ramos-Horta can count on our
bilateral and multilateral support for Timor-Leste in the
present and in future.

