Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Thank you, Sir, for
giving me the opportunity to add my voice to the
debate on this vexed subject. Also, allow me to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
for the month of April. My appreciation goes also to
the delegation of Gabon for having presided over the
work of the Security Council during the month of
March.

Like previous speakers, let me also take this
opportunity to extend my condolences to the Chinese
delegation following the sad disaster of a devastating
earthquake.

In Louis Fischer's book entitled The Essential
Gandhi: An Anthology of His Writings on His Life,
Work, and Ideas, Mohandas Mahatma Gandhi ventured
into the question of Israel and Palestine with a mixed
sense of foreboding. He went on to express his
sympathy for the ages-long persecution of the Jewish
community, with whom he had developed a rapport and
affinity while in exile in South Africa. However, he
also observed that the call for a national home for the
Jews in the Middle East and the fact that the Arabs
sought to call Palestine their home were equally
compelling.

What is evident therefore is that neither party was
more qualified to impose their will on the other.
Gandhi would later say, in 1938, "What is going on in
Palestine today cannot be justified by any moral code
of conduct". But for generations now, that Middle East
region has known no peace, and success in the
international community's efforts to resolve the
conflict has been elusive.

More than 60 years down the line, we are still
struggling with finding a durable solution to the
situation in the Middle East, including progress on the
question of Palestine. It is inconceivable that people
who were born in the same place, as we could be led to
understand, and who also have so much in common
cannot agree to live peacefully side by side.

As Botswana has stated before on this subject in
various forums, there is merit in the two-State solution.
We believe that Israel and Palestine must coexist as
two sovereign States that share not only a border, but
also a common desire for peace, security and
prosperity.

We therefore urge the people of the Middle East
to summon the necessary will and courage to recognize
the folly of war and accept the virtue of dialogue. They
should start building a common future for generations
that will know no violence or conflict, but will instead
recognize the virtues of tolerance, accommodation and
concord.

In the interest of peace and the protection of
innocent civilian lives, it is necessary that all the
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions be given full effect and respect, alongside
the strict observance of basic humanitarian principles,
international law and international humanitarian law by
all parties to the conflict.

Over the years, international diplomatic efforts
have intensified with a view to creating an atmosphere
conducive to negotiations which are aimed at mutual
recognition and achievement of a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in the Middle East. We therefore
wish to echo the call of the international community
for both parties to fulfil their obligations under various
international instruments and to refrain from any steps
that could undermine the momentum of the
negotiations process.

The continuing campaign of violence as well as
the unending annexation of new territories in the area
are the most undesirable of the ingredients that should
be avoided in this delicate procedure of remoulding a
peaceful accord. Those who employ such unsavoury
tactics risk compromising their own credibility and
integrity as genuine and committed partners in the
quest for solutions to the Situation in the Middle East
and settlement of the question of Palestine.

The responsibility for bringing about
transformative change in the Middle East would be the
greatest reward, and it is a moral imperative, in
contrast with carrying out provocative actions,
demolitions and invasions and outdoing one another in
the theatre of war. Such change should be brought
about so that, for the first time in living memory, the
children of that region can also realize their dreams
rather than face constant confrontation and difficulty,
so that they too, like all children in other parts of the
world, can live the dignified lives experienced by their
counterparts elsewhere in the world.

