I thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his detailed briefing. I welcome the participation at today's meeting of the Security Council of His Excellency Mr. Ivica Da¢ie, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and of Mr. Glauk Konjufca. I would like to recall that this month seven years ago, Serbia and Kosovo concluded a historic agreement, the Brussels Agreement, also known as the First Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations between Serbia and Kosovo. Since then, step by step, various accords in key areas have been signed. My delegation is also encouraged to learn that two months ago, transportation links were created, with the resumption of direct flights between Belgrade and Pristina. We also welcome the recent high-level meeting. However, despite these positive developments, there remain reasons to worry about a number of issues. Various agreements were signed, but we have seen almost no implementation thereof. We have also witnessed less constructive behaviours and attitudes of one side towards the other side, among other things. These obstacles are not helpful to they are to overcome their remaining differences. We urge Serbia and Kosovo to remove all remaining obstacles. We call on the parties to engage in good-faith dialogue and peaceful negotiation to resolve their differences. We support the parties concerned in achieving a durable and comprehensive solution that is in line with the fundamental principles of international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999). In this process, we applaud the support of the international community, the United Nations and regional and individual actors for peace and stability, not only in Kosovo but also in the rest of the Balkans, in Europe and throughout the world. We are pleased to note that, in November 2019, UNMIK became the first peacekeeping operation to attain the International Organization for Standardization quality-management standard for end-to-end mission-support field operations. We commend UNMIK's efforts in engaging with all communities in Kosovo and conducting various activities during the reporting period to facilitate cooperation between Belgrade and Pristina. We continue to support the critical role of UNMIK in Kosovo. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has also spread to Kosovo, with hundreds of confirmed cases. We express our serious concern about the pandemic's devastating impact on socioeconomic developments and the well-being of the people in Kosovo. In this regard, we support UNMIK in implementing four key objectives for peacekeeping operations in the fight against COVID-19, which were addressed to the Security Council by the Secretary-General on 9 April. At the same time, we urge all Mission personnel to stay safe.
