Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
Since this is my first opportunity to congratulate you
upon assuming the presidency, Madam President, I
would like to do so at this time. I also thank Staffan for
his briefing.

Last week the world witnessed a new and extremely
dangerous escalation in Syria. It should not surprise
anyone on the Security Council that Iran was responsible.
Iranian forces operating from Syrian territory launched
a rocket attack against Israeli citizens - citizens of
a sovereign State Member of the United Nations. The
United States strongly supports Israel's right to act in
self-defence. Iran's reckless and provocative acts last
week prove what we have been saying: wherever Iran
shows up in the Middle East, chaos follows. Last week's
rocket attack against Israel is the latest in a pattern
of destabilizing behaviour that is a dire threat to the
region's stability.

Iran's rocket attack against Israel shows something
else too. It puts to bed any myths about why Iran is
present in Syria, or what its true objectives might be.
The fact is that Iran has installed offensive rocket
and missile systems in Syria aimed at Israel. Iran has
introduced those threats that were not present in Syria
before the conflict; they are now. Iran, together with
Hizbullah and other militias, is taking advantage of
Syrian territory to establish bases and training camps.
They are moving ever closer to Israel. The United States
calls on Iran, Hizbullah and their other proxies to take
no further provocative steps. If they do, Iran will bear
full responsibility for its actions.

It is also important to emphasize that Iran's actions
do not serve the interests of the Iranian or the Syrian
people. The Syrian people get no say in whether Iran
threatens war against Syria's neighbours, but it is they
who have to live with the consequences.

All ofus on the Security Council have an important
choice to make: we can stay quiet and watch as Iran
builds up the infrastructure to create another Hizbullah
in Syria, or we can speak up and take steps to put
real pressure on Iran to stop. For our part, the United
States refuses to stay quiet. Russia in particular has a
special responsibility here. Its troops are on the ground,
sometimes alongside Iran's. Russia must know that
Iran's provocative actions do nothing to help resolve
the war in Syria. Russia must know that Iran's actions
do just the opposite. They only inflame, prolong and
widen the conflict.

We heard once again from Staffan today that there
has been very little progress on the political track. There
has been no progress at all in Geneva, or following
Russia's own conferences in Astana and Sochi. Since
January, the United Nations was supposed assemble a
new constitution drafting committee that would help
kick off a new round of talks. The United Nations was
supposed to have the ability to choose which people
would serve on the committee, and the United Nations
was supposed to be empowered to facilitate those talks.
Instead, the Al-Assad regime has backtracked, stalled
and then refused to cooperate.

At the same time, the Syrian regime escalated its
brutal military campaign. It seized eastern Ghouta, at
the cost of thousands of lives and tens of thousands
displaced. It used chemical weapons in Douma. Just
yesterday, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons Fact-finding Mission released
a report determining that chlorine was used during
attacks on 4 February in Saraqib.

As reported by the Fact-finding Mission, the facts
of that chemical-weapons attack bear the hallmarks
of similar attacks conducted by the Al-Assad regime.
As we have said before, the United States assesses
that the Syrian regime has used chemical weapons
well over 50 times since the start of the civil war. The
Al-Assad regime, with Iran's and Russia's full support,
is choosing to pursue a military solution instead of a
political solution, and that goes against everything we
should stand for as the Security Council.

In the aftermath of eastern Ghouta, the need for a
real ceasefire could not be more obvious. Already, we
see the Al-Assad regime launching new attacks in Idlib
and the south-west. As Staffan noted, a Ghouta scenario
in Idlib would be six times worse than the horror we saw
in recent months in Ghouta. Air strikes in the south-
west have tripled in the last month, even though that
area is part ofa de-escalation zone. Russia is supposed
to be a sponsor of that zone. It must urgently meet its
commitments to prevent the regime from carrying out
attacks and stop Iranian militias from expanding their
foothold in the south.

Members of the Security Council - all of
us - must push the political process forward. There
is Council unity behind that goal. There is a clear
blueprint for a political solution in resolution 2254
(2015), which we adopted unanimously. We have to
send a clear message to the Al-Assad regime and its
backers: the end of the conflict can be reached only via
the United Nations-led political process. There must be
constitutional reform and free and fair elections under
United Nations supervision. If the Al-Assad regime
does not comply, we need to be prepared to impose real
costs on it for its years of defiance and the devastation
it has wrought in Syria. If we take those steps, we can
start to change the calculus of the Al-Assad regime
and its allies in Syria. We can show them that further
conflict is not in their interests and that it is time for
them to genuinely commit to a political solution. But
as we saw last week, the longer we wait, the greater the
risk of confrontation. Now is the time to act to reduce
tensions and address Iran's designs in Syria. That is
how we can prevent further escalation and even worse
suffering. There is no time to waste.

