I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to present the latest report of the Secretary-General on Colombia (S/2020/239). I acknowledge the participation of Foreign Minister Claudia Blum de Barberi and Presidential Counsellor Emilio Archila, whose continued support for the work of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia is greatly appreciated. I also welcome Mr. Santiago Cano's participation in this meeting as a show of the Council's interest in and support for the role that Colombian youth are playing in the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. As in every other country, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is having a profound impact on Colombia, and the peace process will undoubtedly feel its effects. However, it is encouraging to see Colombians finding creative responses to this crisis and responding positively to calls for unity, as authorities at all levels take measures to contain the spread of the pandemic. The implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace depends on constant engagement between the parties as well as key State institutions, civil-society organizations, partners from the international community and others. This engagement is no doubt more challenging in the context of the nationwide quarantine in place since 24 March and targeted actions such as the restrictions on access to the former territorial areas for training and reintegration. Nevertheless, the parties and other actors are adapting to this changing scenario to continue implementing the peace agreement and ensure follow-up on peace-related matters. On 8 April, for instance, the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement met by videoconference to discuss the status of peace implementation, including the positive results of the work of the tripartite working group on accreditations, a mechanism that is constituted by the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace, the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comtin (FARC) and the Mission. Importantly, the Commission agreed to institutionalize periodic meetings with the Special Forum on Gender and the Special High-level Forum of Ethnic Peoples. Also, the working groups of National Reintegration Council have continued to work through virtual sessions, and a dedicated working group on COVID-19 was recently created. The Technical Working Group on Health - which includes FARC, the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, the Ministry of Health and the Mission - has taken measures at the national level to prevent the spread of the virus from affecting former combatants and defined a protocol to respond to eventual cases. Yesterday, 13 April, the Senate resumed its official sessions virtually, and the Chamber of Representatives is scheduled to do so later today. On 2 April, I participated in the first session of the Senate Peace Commission's high-level mechanism to follow up on attacks against former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia- Ejercito del Pueblo members and social leaders and monitor prevention measures. The virtual session brought together senators from parties across the political spectrum, including FARC, as well as Ministers of Government, the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation and other high-level Government officials and representatives of State institutions, to analyse the violence affecting social leaders and former combatants and measures to stop it. Also on that date, during a virtual session the National Reintegration Council approved three additional collective productive projects, bringing the total to 52. One of the approved projects is a textiles cooperative led by 11 men and 11 women former combatants, which has begun to produce protective face masks for the coronavirus response. Eight additional former combatants' cooperatives in other departments have also initiated efforts to produce face masks. As for the Mission, we have also taken measures in line with our business continuity and contingency plans and maintaining our verification tasks in the field in line with the decisions from the national authorities. The country team is also developing programmatic support to the Government in its response to the pandemic. On this we have to be clear. COVID-19 is and will continue affecting the implementation of the peace agreement and the Mission's verification activities. However, we have a collective obligation to continue to ensure progress in its implementation. Peace in Colombia cannot and should not be a casualty of this pandemic. In this sense, it is important to continue moving forward with the full implementation of the peace agreement, including on the three priorities that the Secretary-General highlights in his report. The first priority is to adopt all necessary measures to protect social leaders, human rights defenders and former combatants. Violence against them continues unabated despite the national quarantine. Since the issuance of the report, three more social leaders and three more former combatants have been killed, for a total of 195 former combatants since the signing of the final peace agreement. I am particularly concerned by the situation in Putumayo department, including that of women social leaders, crop-substitution leaders and former combatants. On 19 March, prominent social leader Marco Rivadeneira was killed after he was taken from a meeting he was leading regarding coca-substitution efforts in Puerto Asis municipality. Two weeks later, on 8 April, social leader Yuri Quintero was threatened, presumably by the same illegal armed group that killed Rivadeneira, and another female social leader, Jani Silva, whom I met last October, continues to be the victim of continual threats. On 27 March, former combatant Juan Carlos Castillo, who lived in the former territorial area for training and reintegration in that same municipality, was found killed. In a welcome development in the midst of this worrisome situation, on 9 April the Police captured Abel Antonio Loaiza Quifionez, also known as "Azul", whom the Attorney-General's Office holds responsible for the killing and forced displacement of 11 social leaders and former combatants in this area. I am also particularly concerned that over the past two days, illegal armed groups in Argelia, Cauca department, are threatening the population, including former combatants. Just as Colombian actors are uniting to confront the pandemic, it is imperative for all actors to unite to end the epidemic of violence against social leaders, human rights defenders and former combatants. In particular, it is fundamental to enhance the effectiveness of the mechanisms created by the peace agreement, including the National Commission on Security Guarantees, which should make substantial advances in the design and implementation of a public policy to dismantle illegal armed groups; the National Protection Unit, which should advance in reviewing more than 400 pending requests for close-protection schemes; and the Special Investigation Unit, which requires increased support from all entities in order to fulfil its mandate of bringing the perpetrators of these attacks to justice, including intellectual authors. It is also key to improve security for close to 9,500 former combatants residing outside of former territorial areas for training and reintegration, including those 3/31 4/31 living in collective reintegration areas. The prompt implementation of the action plan of the Comprehensive Programme of Safeguards for Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders is key to ensuring protection for women leaders. The second priority is to strengthen the foundations for the longer-term reintegration process and ensure that the benefits of reintegration reach all former combatants, regardless of where they live. The consequences of the pandemic make it even more crucial to pay particular attention to ex-combatants living outside former territorial areas for training and reintegration, as they have more precarious access to basic services such as clean water and sanitation. I also encourage the parties to work within the National Reintegration Council to specifically support collective productive projects that are more vulnerable to the economic consequences of the pandemic. These projects can help reactivate local economies, especially in remote rural areas that may be particularly affected. It is also important to ensure that the reintegration road map is implemented in a collaborative manner between both parties, including the design of specific individual and collective road maps. Finally, a third priority should be to ensure that communities, including especially victims, remain at the centre of peacebuilding efforts. In particular, the current context is an opportunity to undertake planning and consultations to operationalize the comprehensive security and protection programme for communities and organizations in the territories, an important part of section 3.4 of the peace agreement that, if implemented, can make an important difference on the ground. As the Secretary-General highlights in paragraph 92 of his report, "The sustained and integrated presence of State institutions is necessary and remains the most effective means of ensuring peace and stability in the territories." (S/2020/239, para. 92) In this sense, I am encouraged that Presidential Counsellor Archila has continued to coordinate arrangements so that the implementation of the development programmes with a territorial focus is not affected by the current crisis. I hope that similar measures are being taken in other aspects of the implementation of the comprehensive rural reform and the peace agreement more broadly. Echoing the Secretary-General's appeal for a worldwide ceasefire in view of the COVID-19 pandemic and joining numerous voices from Colombian civil society in recent weeks, I called upon all armed actors in the country to put life above any other consideration and focus on preventing the spread of the virus. The Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional responded by declaring a one-month unilateral ceasefire during the month of April. However, armed clashes continue between illegal armed groups in several departments, including Cauca, Choco and Norte de Santander. At a time when all efforts must be focused on fighting the pandemic, we urge all illegal armed actors in Colombia to desist from continuing to perpetrate violence upon vulnerable communities, including indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities. In conclusion, in his Nobel Prize in Literature acceptance speech, Colombian author Gabriel Garcia Marquez said, "Neither floods nor plagues, famines nor cataclysms, nor even the eternal wars of century upon century, have been able to subdue the persistent advantage of life over death." The resilience he invoked with those words has been seen in the way Colombians continue forging peace in their country after decades of conflict and in the way they have come together during the last few weeks in the face of the pandemic. I trust that this commitment will continue beyond the pandemic so that the efforts to bring peace and development to conflict-affected communities are strengthened and reinvigorated as a result of the crisis. I am certain that through the constructive dialogue and dedicated efforts of the parties, public institutions, leaders at all levels and of Colombian society more broadly, we can celebrate in the end the triumph of hope over fear, unity over division and, as Garcia Marquez said, of life over death.
