Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by thanking Baroness Ashton for her briefing,
which underscored the many and various contributions
of the European Union in cooperation with the United
Nations to the promotion of peace and development
throughout the world.

Togo welcomes the organization of today's briefing,
in the context of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. It is being held, I would recall, after
the sixth consultative meeting on cooperation on peace
and security between the United Nations and the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union, which took
place on 13 June 2012 in New York.

In my country's view, those types ofmeetings show
the need to further tighten the bonds between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
allowing those organizations to share, with the Security
Council in particular, their experiences and lessons
learned as regional stakeholders with real knowledge of
the reality on the ground.

There are many examples of the cooperation
between the European Union and the United Nations,
which is one of the major development strategies of
the Common European Security and Defence Policy,
whose principles were set by the European Council
in Nice in 2000. We recall that, at the operational
level, since the success of Operation Artemis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which was carried
out in accordance with resolution 1484 (2003) during
the deployment of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
many other military and civilian operations have been
developed by the European Union in collaboration with
United Nations missions on practically all continents.

With regard to security sector reform, we welcome
the European Union's support in working with the
United Nations in countries such as Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Guinea Bissau.

In terms of counter-piracy efforts, Operation
Atalanta, which was led by the European Union pursuant
to resolutions 1814 (2008), 1816 (2008), 1838 (2008) and
1846 (2008) off the shores of Somalia, helped protect
World Food Programme vessels that were sending
humanitarian assistance to Somalia. Togo hopes that
that type of cooperation will also lead to determined
action to assist the countries and organizations of the
Gulf of Guinea, which are still suffering from the
effects of piracy. We hope therefore that the upcoming
summit on piracy in the Gulf, which will be held in
April, will provide an opportunity to establish the areas
of that cooperation.

The involvement of the European Union in
promoting the objectives of the United Nations is
not only operational. Indeed, the comprehensive
approach adopted by the European Union aimed at
preventing and managing crises by combining the
diplomatic and political dimensions and the element of
cooperation in development with operational measures
is commendable.

With regard to financing, as Baroness Ashton just
recalled, the European Union contributes almost half
of the resources of the United Nations Development
Programme and 80 per cent of those of the
Peacebuilding Fund and is one of the major contributors
to peacekeeping operations. In that regard, we welcome
the announcement of financial support in the amount
of €50 million through the African Peace Facility to
support the deployment of the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA) and the European
Union training mission for the Malian army and its
logistical support for the Mission. We hope that in
AFISMA's transition to a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, the European Union is planning to play an
important role in mobilizing the necessary finances
and logistical resources.

With regard to preventive diplomacy, my country
especially welcomes the efforts of the European Union
in a number of areas, including the Iranian nuclear issue
and the rapprochement between Kosovo and Serbia.

In conclusion, I would like to say that, while the
cooperation between the European Union and the
United Nations has been dynamic, thanks to the daily
exchanges between the two Secretariats, we hope that
the close cooperation will continue to grow and become
more significant.

Moreover, the fact that the European Union
occasionally does not speak with one voice on
some major international issues hinders vigorous
cooperation with the United Nations. A comprehensive
diplomatic strategy, both for defence and all global
issues, would make the European Union a better partner
in the resolution of the major crises that are shaking
our world, in particular in the Middle East and North
Africa, regions that are so close to Europe.
Finally, in order to prevent the actions of the two
Organizations from overlapping in some areas, it is
important that both Organizations bear in mind what
the other is doing before making a new commitment.
In that regard, it is important that due account be
taken, in developing a comprehensive United Nations
strategy for the Sahel, of the European Union's strategy
on the Sahel, which has the advantage of showing the
inextricable link between security and development.

