Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): We would
like to associate ourselves with previous speakers in
warmly welcoming the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta. We would like
also to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guehenno for his outstanding introduction of the report
of the Secretary-General on the commendable work of
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET).

The Council thus has before it an unvarnished
picture of the achievements and the difficulties that
characterize the daunting task undertaken in Timor-
Leste by the United Nations. Thanks to the unswerving
commitment of the United Nations standing by their
side, the people of Timor-Leste have, ex nihilo,
achieved indisputable progress in all areas under
consideration. Such progress is a valuable asset, and
we encourage all political players in Timor-Leste to
maintain the current dynamic.

We are fully aware of the major challenges that
must still be met by the authorities of the youngest
State in the world in establishing solid and lasting
democratic institutions that guarantee peace, security
and stability in the country.

We are also fully aware of the determination of
the authorities of Timor-Leste to do everything in their
power to build a nation that is at peace with itself and
which has good relations with its neighbours - a
nation fully committed to struggling against poverty
and for a better future. To achieve that major objective,
the problems noted must be dealt with all due attention,
and all necessary human and material resources must
be made available.

The Government of Timor-Leste, which has our
full confidence, deserves resolute support in order that
it may continue its work and undertake the necessary
measures. Here it is of critical importance to strengthen
the capacity of the Administration and the judiciary by
resorting, when necessary, to external technical
assistance. The Security Council should consider ways
and means of helping to speed up the processing of
cases involving serious crimes, in the framework of the
combat against impunity, since the overwhelming
majority of indicted individuals are outside the country.

From another point of view, we believe that the
problem of defining the respective roles of the national
police and armed forces of Timor-Leste in the
maintenance of internal security is crucial and that a
solution to that problem is decisive for maintaining the
democratic nature of the political system in Timor-
Leste.

The circumstances of the birth of the State of
Timor-Leste require it to have a national army with
sufficient resources to ward off external threats,
whatever their provenance. It is with real satisfaction
that we note the efforts being made jointly by the
authorities of Timor-Leste and Indonesia to establish
active bilateral cooperation based on good-
neighbourliness, mutual respect and mutual benefit.

My delegation sees here an outstanding example
of post-conflict reconciliation. In that respect, we note
that the Secretary-General has called for close
cooperation between the forces of Timor-Leste and of
Indonesia in order to ensure the security of border
regions. That concern reflects the situation in the
region resulting from the existence of reactionary and
uncontrollable armed groups. Given that situation and
that threat, a diversification of support for the armed
forces of Timor-Leste is fully indicated.

It is fortunate that the Secretary-General has been
able to provide in his report a specific idea of the needs
to be met within a rather tight, yet energizing
timetable. We support such relevant recommendations
advocating an extension and modification of
UNMISET's mandate to ensure an international
presence for an additional one-year period, as
requested by the Government of Timor-Leste.

Regarding recovery, reconstruction and economic
and social development, Timor-Leste now falls into the
category of least developed country. This fact was duly
consecrated by the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 58/112 of 17 December 2003. We believe
that this shows an awareness of how much work
remains in the economic and social development of the
country. We are confident that the advantages deriving
from least-developed-country status can allow Timor-
Leste to enjoy increased support from the international
community in the areas of international trade,
development financing and technical cooperation in a
well-defined framework with regular follow-up.

The progress registered and the clear
determination of the authorities of Timor-Leste to
establish democracy and justice form a solid basis for
creating a strong partnership with all development
partners. We are convinced that peace, political
stability, security and economic development are
inextricably interlinked, as we have often said and as
bears reiterating in the specific case of Timor-Leste.

It is true that the people and Government of
Timor-Leste are primarily responsible for building
viable and democratic institutions. My delegation is
convinced, however, that the international community
must resolutely pursue the task begun two years ago in
Timor-Leste and stand beside the people of that
country in its steadfast march towards social progress
and sustainable development.

