Judge Byron: It is a great honour for me to
address the members of the Security Council as the
new President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR). I am particularly pleased to appear
before you, Mr. President, as your country has
consistently supported the work of the Tribunal.

My statement today will present an updated
version of the ICTR completion strategy submitted to
the Security Council by my predecessor, Judge Erik
Mose, on 23 May 2007. After a concise overview of
the judicial work of the Tribunal for the past six
months, my intention today is to outline for the
Security Council key issues and challenges in
connection with the completion strategy of the
Tribunal.

Let me start with a brief overview of the judicial
work since the most recent report, given to the Security
Council in December 2006. The total number of cases
completed in first instance is now 27, involving 33
accused. Since the previous report to the Council, one

final judgement on a guilty plea has been issued in the
case of Joseph Nzabirinda. In addition, one case has
been transferred to the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Two other cases are at the judgement-writing phase,
including the Military I case, which involves four
co-accused.

The ongoing trials at first instance involve 22
accused in nine different cases that are at a very
advanced stage in the proceedings, as the Tribunal
continues to operate at maximum capacity. Of those
ongoing trials, it is expected that the five single-
accused cases will be completed by the end of this
year, with respective judgements to be rendered in
2008. Our major challenge in terms of ongoing trials
remains four multi-accused cases, involving 17
accused.

In the Butare trial, the fifth of the six accused
will begin his case in the next few weeks. The
presentation of evidence will be completed in 2007 or
early 2008. In the Government trial, the second of the
four defendants has completed his case. With two
remaining accused to present their defence cases, the
presentation of evidence will be completed in early
2008, with the judgement expected in 2008.

The prosecution case in the Military II trial
closed in December 2006, and the defence case of the
first of the four accused commenced on 16 April 2007.
As such, the presentation of evidence is expected to be
completed in 2008.

In the Karemera case, which involves three co-
accused, the trial resumed last week, after a break of
five months due to the withdrawal of a judge. The Trial
Chamber is taking steps to ensure that the prosecution
completes its case this year and that the trial stage
concludes during 2008. However, due to the particular
complexity of the procedural history of this case, it
may roll into 2009.

At the Appeals Chamber, two judgements were
recently delivered - in the cases of Emmanuel
Ndindabahizi and Mika Muhimana. Four cases,
concerning six individuals, are also pending appeal.

As the Council may have noted, in view of the
elements to which I have referred and which were more
fully substantiated fully in the recent completion
strategy report (S/2007/323), there has been a high
level of productivity in the four courtrooms of the
Tribunal over the past six months. The result of those
achievements is an ever-diminishing case load.
Indications suggest that the next six months will be
even more productive.

The completion of the five single-accused cases
this year will allow the Tribunal to commence the trial
phase for the remaining single accused in the second
half of 2007 and early 2008, as soon as Trial Chamber
and courtroom capacity permits. One of them, the case
of Hormisdas Nsengimana, is scheduled to commence
later this month, on 22 June 2007.

Let me now turn to another challenge that I
would like to address this morning, namely, the
apprehension of the 18 accused persons at large and the
transfer of cases to national jurisdictions. Concerning
those issues, the Tribunal and, in particular, the
Prosecutor have developed specific steps on the path to
completion. Last week, the Prosecutor requested the
referral of the cases of three fugitives to Rwanda and to
France. However, it is clear that, in view of the
Tribunal's mandate as defined by the Security Council,
some of the remaining fugitives should be considered
candidates for trial at the Tribunal itself.

As the Prosecutor will set out in detail in a few
minutes, his Office also intends to ask for the transfer
of a maximum of three of the eight accused currently
detained in Arusha to national jurisdictions for trial.
Those steps, however, will be successful only if
Member States provide support to the Tribunal in that
regard. That is a crucial component of the completion
strategy. I have no doubt that my visit here to the
United Nations will be an opportunity to discuss this
matter with Member States and to consolidate their
continuous support with respect to the arrest and
transfer of indictees. The purpose of the establishment
of the Tribunal, to contribute to the restoration and
maintenance of peace as well as to contribute to
international justice, will be seriously impaired if the
remaining indictees are not brought to justice. If those
fugitives are not arrested and transferred in time for
their trials to be completed by the end of 2008, a
solution must be discussed that will allow the Tribunal
or another mechanism to proceed with such cases
beyond the end of 2008.

Please let me emphasize the issue of State
cooperation as one of the cornerstones of the success of
the Tribunal. As I have just explained, the assistance of
States is critical for the arrest and transfer of indictees.
That assistance is also crucial in connection with the
situation of acquitted persons, the relocation of
convicted persons who have served their sentences and
the serving of sentences by convicted persons.

Acquittals are a natural consequence of fair trials
and the application of the rule of law. This matter has
been raised at various times before the Council. Yet, to
date, progress has not been as advanced as had been
hoped. As of today, only two of the five persons
acquitted by the Tribunal have been accepted by a
Member State - France. I would like to express our
gratitude to France for its support. The other three
acquitted persons are under the protection of the
Tribunal in Arusha, two since February 2004 and one
since September 2006. The Registry has made many
attempts to find a country for them. On behalf of the
Tribunal, I reiterate the appeal for the assistance of
Member States in that regard as well.

The situation of released persons who have
completed their sentences is another of the issues that
must be urgently addressed as the Tribunal moves
forward. It must be determined where those individuals
will be transferred after they have served their
sentences.

Concerning convicted persons, six of them are
currently incarcerated in the Republic of Mali, while
the other convicted persons remain at the detention
facility in Arusha. In addition, the Tribunal has
concluded enforcement-of-sentence agreements with
the Republic of Benin, the Kingdom of Swaziland, the
French Republic, the Republic of Italy and the
Kingdom of Sweden. The Tribunal is grateful for the
support of those six countries and their willingness to
enter into enforcement of sentence agreements, and
remains confident that other States will provide their
support with respect to the location of convicted
persons.

The significant results of the Tribunal over the
past six months are indisputably due to an
improvement in the working methods of the three
branches of the Tribunal. There is also no doubt that
the recent successes are the result of the assistance of
this Council in fostering continuity at the Tribunal,
notably by extending the term of office of all
permanent and ad litem judges until 31 December
2008. The Tribunal has increasingly relied on ad litem
judges for realizing the completion strategy
objectives- a contribution that has surpassed what
was envisaged.
The efficient completion of trials at the Tribunal
also continues to be possible thanks to the highly
dedicated work of staff. In the face of the lack of
sufficient resources in key departments, the staff has
evinced its commitment to the completion strategy of
the Tribunal by absorbing the resulting increased
workloads.

There is no doubt that retention of experienced
staff constitutes one of the major success criteria of our
completion strategy. The knowledge and past
experience of staff serve the prompt and efficient
achievement of the Tribunal's work. Many highly
competent staff members, however, continue to leave
our institution. That situation is aggravated by the
difficulties the Tribunal foresees in recruiting new staff
as it moves closer to completion. It is essential that I
draw the Council's attention to the fact that the
Tribunal will be able to achieve its goal only if it
obtains the necessary resources, among other things, by
developing the capability to retain its experienced staff
with institutional knowledge.

Before I conclude my address, please let me now
turn to the Tribunal's contribution to Rwanda.

The strengthening of the Rwandan judicial
system and the improvement of its capacity to
prosecute cases transferred from the Tribunal is also a
goal and expected achievement, as identified by the
Security Council in its resolution 1503 (2003). The
Tribunal provides support to the local judiciary and
prosecutors in the region, as further described in the
completion strategy. Those efforts are made possible
thanks to current and future donor and technical
assistance from Member States. Moreover, with respect
to increasing outreach, the Tribunal is actively working
through various initiatives: the ICTR outreach
programme, programmes on awareness-raising within
Rwanda, strengthening relations with academic
institutions in Rwanda, developing media, and the
continuation of active cooperation and assistance to
Rwandan civil society organizations. With respect to
the relationship with academic institutions, the
Tribunal is fostering a number of initiatives, such as
continuing with the Special Fellowship Programme for
Rwandan Law Students and internship and legal
researcher programmes. A number of those
programmes are funded through the Tribunal's
voluntary contributions trust fund, which is currently
depleted. Any further contributions from Member
States will be greatly appreciated.
I am also pleased to reiterate that Rwanda has
continued to cooperate with the Tribunal by facilitating
the flow of witnesses and by providing documents to
the prosecution and the defence.

As with my predecessors, my objective and
mandate continue to be to lead the Tribunal to the
completion of its work while upholding the highest
standards of due process and fair trial. The
aforementioned projections suggest that 65 to 70
persons will have judgments rendered in their cases by
the end of 2008.

However, as indicated, despite the successes and
positive projections, challenges remain due to external
factors outside the control of the Tribunal that could be
remedied with the support and assistance of this
Council and of Member States. With the possibility
that one multi-accused case will continue after 2008, as
well as the issue of fugitives, some trials, as well as the
drafting of judgments in some cases, may in fact run
into 2009. The cooperation of Member States with the
Tribunal is paramount if the Tribunal is to successfully
to complete that work. The projections will also
depend on sufficient resources being made available by
the Member States through the completion of the
Tribunal's work.

The Tribunal, as we move towards the completion
of our work, will also continue to prioritize the
contribution to building the capacity of the Rwandan
judicial system. The achievements of the Tribunal and
the commitment to bringing to justice those persons
who were most responsible for genocide and violations
of international humanitarian law that were committed
in Rwanda in 1994 are unwavering. The Tribunal's
work will not be completed until we meet the challenge
given to us by this honourable Council to establish the
guilt or innocence of the accused, bring justice to
victims of the massive crimes that were committed,
and establish a record of facts that can aid
reconciliation in Rwanda. In the process, the Tribunal
will leave a legacy of international jurisprudence that
can guide future courts, deter potential perpetrators,
and prevent impunity for those grave crimes.

On behalf of the Tribunal, allow me to express
appreciation to the Council for its support of the
Tribunal's mission. That support continues to have a
direct impact on the work of the Tribunal.

Let me conclude by thanking the members of the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the Member
States for their steadfast support. We look forward to
continuing the Tribunal's work with them all in the
final years of our mandate.

