The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its support for
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
as they begin a new period in their history. The
Council respects the legitimate national aspirations of
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to achieve peace, national reconciliation and progress
in the political, economic and social fields to the
benefit of all, and opposes any interference in its
internal affairs.

"The Security Council recalls its resolution 1097
(1997) of 18 February 1997 which endorses the
United Nations five-point peace plan.

"The Security Council welcomes the end of the
fighting and expresses its satisfaction that stability has
begun to return to the country.

"The Security Council reaffirms the national
sovereignty and the territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and calls for the
withdrawal of all external forces, including
mercenaries.

"The Security Council, in accordance with the
United Nations five-point peace plan, calls for the
rapid and peaceful settlement of the crisis through
dialogue and the convening of an international
conference on peace, security and development in the
Great Lakes region. The Council also reaffirms the
statement of its President of 30 April 1997
(S/PRST/ 1997/24) calling for rapid agreement on
peaceful transitional arrangements leading to the
holding of democratic and free elections with the
participation of all parties.
"The Security Council believes that the
convening of an international conference on peace,
security and development in the Great Lakes region
under the auspices of the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity will be essential in
promoting regional peace and stability.

"The Security Council, in accordance with the
United Nations five-point peace plan, calls for
protection and security for all refugees and displaced
persons and facilitation of access to humanitarian
assistance. It reiterates its call for full respect for the
rights of refugees and displaced persons, and for
access and safety for humanitarian relief workers. It
also reiterates in the strongest terms its call for
complete cooperation with the United Nations
mission investigating reports of massacres, other
atrocities and violations of international humanitarian
law in the country, including to provide it full and
immediate access and to ensure its security. It is
particularly concerned by reports that refugees in the
east of the country are being systematically killed. It
calls for an immediate end to the violence against
refugees in the country.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
appreciation to the Secretaries-General of the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity and
their Special Representative, to the Government of
South Africa, and to all those inside and outside the
region for their efforts to facilitate a peaceful
solution to the crisis in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1997/31.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.
