Mr. Berruga (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to wish all success to Argentina as it
begins its mandate on the Security Council and
assumes the presidency for the month of January.

The question of Haiti has particular relevance in
the foreign policy of Mexico. For that reason, my
Government considers this debate, wisely convened by
the Argentine presidency, to be a good opportunity to
share some of the guiding ideas of our policy on that
Caribbean country.

Mexico supports the efforts of the international
community, in particular those of our continent, to
restore peace and security in Haiti and to reconstruct
its democratic institutions. Moreover, we express our
firmest support for the activities of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), whose
principal civil and military component is of Latin
American origin. In particular, Mexico expresses its
support for the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti and Head of
MINUSTAH, Ambassador Juan Gabriel Valdes.

Mexico agrees with Secretary-General Kofi
Annan that the international community's
commitments towards Haiti should be of a
comprehensive and long-term nature, with the goal of
resolving the structural problems that that brotherly
country continues to face.

We believe that the priority for 2005 should be to
promote political dialogue among all groups of actors
in Haiti, without exclusion, with a view to preparing
and holding the local and presidential elections, which
should be participatory, representative and legitimate.

At the same time, it is necessary to maintain a
medium- and long-term plan for the reconstruction of
solid institutions for Haitian society, especially in the
areas of justice administration and prosecution, human
rights, the fight against poverty, the creation of
infrastructure and the development of high-quality
health, education and other services.

The participation and support of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) in the resolution of the
Haitian crisis are fundamental. For that reason, the
initiatives taken in the framework of the United
Nations, the Organization of American States, other
regional groupings and financial organizations should
be coordinated with the Caribbean countries.

In the various forums and mechanisms concerned
with the Haitian crisis, Mexico will continue to offer
its support, especially in the reconstruction of the
country's civilian institutions. As well, we will
continue to provide timely humanitarian assistance as
we have been doing so far.

Allow me to give a brief account of the actions of
cooperation taken by Mexico at the bilateral and
regional levels. During 2004, the Government of
Mexico sent emergency humanitarian aid to Haiti on
four occasions. In April, Mexico responded to the
appeal of the interim President, Mr. Boniface
Alexandre, and we sent 1,012 tons of aid, in particular
food and medicines. On 5 June, Mexico sent 19 tons of
food and medicine in response to the crisis caused by
the heavy rains that devastated Haitian communities
along the border with the Dominican Republic. On
11 and 12 October, the Government of Mexico sent to
Haiti two Hercules C-130 aeroplanes of the Mexican
air force with 25 tons of aid to alleviate the damage
caused by Tropical Storm Jeanne. That assistance
included a group of 16 experts, medical material,
various kinds of equipment and food. Finally, on
17 November, a Mexican navy ship arrived at Port-au-
Prince transporting specialized medical personnel and
civilian engineers as well as a helicopter and an
ambulance. During its stay, the team of medical
specialists carried out many surgical operations and
gave medical assistance to more than 1,000 persons.

In the regional context, we note Mexico's
cooperation in electoral assistance through the Federal
Electoral Institute of Mexico. In response to the
request of the Organization of American States (OAS),
the Electoral Institute is currently providing technical
support in the organization, administration and
development of the process for the elections to take
place in Haiti this year. To that end, from 22 to
27 November, the members of the Haitian Provisional
Electoral Council participated in an international
workshop in Mexico on electoral administration
organized with the support of the United Nations
Development Programme and the OAS.
Representatives of electoral organizations from the
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Panama and
Venezuela also participated. As well, the Institute has
named two Mexican officials to participate in the OAS
Special Mission in Haiti. In the second quarter of 2005,
Mexico will make a voluntary contribution of $20,000
to the OAS Special Mission.

In the framework of the last July's donors
conference for Haiti organized by the Inter-American
Development Bank, Mexico pledged $40,000 worth of
cooperation in the technical-scientific and cultural-
educational areas; those resources will be used to
facilitate the movement of experts and technicians
between the two countries. The modalities for
cooperation include capacity-building and assessments
in areas such as agriculture, drinking water, training in
HIV/AIDS prevention and medical attention,
diplomatic training, drainage engineering and the
production and quality-control of seeds.

At the subregional level, Mexico is exploring
various areas of cooperation within the Group of
Three, comprising Mexico, Venezuela and Colombia,
and within the Rio Group.

Finally, at the bilateral level, last October,
Mexican officials, including our Under-Secretary of
Foreign Affairs for Latin America and the Caribbean,
made a working visit to Haiti to evaluate possible areas
of cooperation. The following were identified.

In the area of the reconstruction of highways,
Mexico committed itself to study contributing to
financing the reconstruction of sections of the highway
between Saint-Marc and Gonai'ves.

In the area of reforestation, the Secretariat of the
Environment of Mexico and the Ministry of
Environment of Haiti signed a preliminary agreement
on cooperation on two specific projects: the ongoing
evaluation of natural resources in the arid ecosystem of
north-west Haiti and the administration of La Visite
National Park.

In the educational realm, Mexico has offered a
package of 40 scholarships for high school students
who wish to study in our country beginning in the 2005
school year. Likewise, it has been agreed to create the
Gerard Pierre Charles chair at the State University of
Haiti in recognition of the work of that distinguished
intellectual and politician of Haiti who lived in Mexico
for more than 20 years.

To date, those have been Mexico's most relevant
contributions to the pacification and stabilization of
Haiti.

