Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It is
well known that, owing to its sense of responsibility
with respect to the Palestinian cause, Qatar submitted a
balanced draft resolution (S/2006/878) reflecting the
views of the majority of Security Council members. In
the draft resolution we took account of comments from
all States, but the Security Council was nonetheless
unable to adopt that balanced text, for reasons with
which we are all familiar. We will leave it to peace-
loving peoples and States to assess the objectivity that
this reflects.

On many occasions we have done nothing to
protect Palestinian civilians, who desperately need
assistance and support from the international
community. A halfhearted response from the Security
Council gives the impression that we are shirking our
humanitarian responsibility to protect lives, in
particular the lives of innocent children and women
and of others who are vulnerable. The image of
innocent unarmed civilians killed mercilessly at Beit
Hanoun will remain etched in our memories and in the
memories of all peace-loving peoples.

We must put an end to these massive and flagrant
violations of humanitarian law. The Security Council's
failure today to do its duty with respect to the
deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories by putting an end to Israeli aggression will
lead to the continuation of Israel's aggression and of

the cycle of violence. The Council's inability to
intervene and put an end to the already grave situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories will not only
result in an escalation of this long-standing conflict but
will call into question the credibility of the Security
Council with regard to the implementation of the
provisions of international law.

Peace-loving, innocent people and victims of war
continue to hope that the Security Council will
shoulder its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Will the day come
when the Security Council and the countries concerned
take a firm stand in the face of aggression and
oppression against the Palestinian people?

I wish in conclusion to thank all the Council
members that voted in favour of the draft resolution.

