Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I should like, on behalf of the Chinese
Government, to offer condolences to our friendly
neighbours, India and Pakistan, for the tragic
earthquake that struck their two countries.

I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today's important meeting. I should also like
to welcome to the Security Council Mr. Jose Ramos-
Horta, member of the Transitional Cabinet of East
Timor responsible for foreign affairs; Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General; Mr. Harri Holkeri, President of the General
Assembly; and the representatives of the World Bank,
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the United
Nations Development Programme, and to thank them
for their comprehensive briefings.

The recent developments in East Timor are
encouraging. Security Council resolution 1272 (1999)
is being implemented smoothly. The United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
has made considerable progress in all areas, especially
with regard to the involvement of the East Timorese in
the administration. Despite some current difficulties,
we are gratified to note that, with the assistance of the
international community, the East Timorese are being
prepared to run their own country. This is the result of
the concerted efforts of UNTAET, various United
Nations agencies and the East Timorese people, for
which we express our sincere appreciation and
admiration.

In this context, I should like to express particular
gratitude to Mr. Vieira de Mello for the tremendous
efforts that he has made. His wisdom and skill have
ensured the smooth implementation of resolution 1272
(1999) and contributed to the great success of United
Nations peacekeeping efforts.

Today, the Chinese delegation would like to
emphasize several issues. The first relates to the
smooth transition to independence. The year 2000 was
an important one for East Timor as it made the
transition from turmoil to independence. We are
heartened to note that, with the help of UNTAET, the
administrative framework has been established and the
Transitional Cabinet and the National Council have
taken their initial shape. The Timorization of various
administrative departments is taking place fairly
rapidly. The preparation for the establishment of the
departments of defence and foreign affairs has already
begun, and these developments are truly encouraging.
However, there are still difficulties with regard to
reconstruction and the judicial and administrative
areas, which will require continued support and
assistance from the international community. After all
the turmoil they have experienced, the East Timorese
are looking forward to achieving their full
independence at the end of the year. We fully
understand the ardent desire of the East Timorese
people to be the masters of their own nation, and we
hope that their wish will be fulfilled at an early date.

The United Nations and the international
community as a whole should ensure the smooth and
steady progress ofthe process leading to independence.
To this end, the United Nations should conduct full
consultations with the East Timorese in preparing for
independence and should progressively and smoothly
transfer power to the East Timorese. The various
parties in East Timor should step up their efforts to
achieve unity and cooperation so as to lay a solid
foundation for the East Timorese to run their country
on their own in the future. The international
community should provide vigorous financial and
technical support so as to fully enable the East
Timorese to run their country as they see fit.

Secondly, efforts should be intensified to develop
the economy. East Timor is still confronted with
serious economic difficulties. The daily per capita
income for the East Timorese is less than $1, and the
unemployment rate is as high as 60 per cent. Such an
adverse economic situation will have a direct bearing
on stability and the smooth transition to independence
there. We believe that, while helping to build the
administration and legal system, UNTAET should work
together with the World Bank, the IMF and the relevant
United Nations agencies to intensify efforts for
economic reconstruction in East Timor. We hope that
the funds pledged by the international community will
be made available as soon as possible so as to facilitate
the implementation by UNTAET of measures for
revitalizing the economy.

Thirdly, the most urgent task at hand is to bring
about national reconciliation and strengthen national
unity. The problem of the refugees still stranded in
West Timor constitutes the main threat to the
independence process and stability there, and is the
main obstacle in the way of improved relations
between East Timor and Indonesia. We are heartened to
note the increased high-level exchanges, visits and
dialogue between Indonesia and East Timor. The
improvement of such bilateral relations will be
conducive to stability in East Timor, Indonesia and the
Asia-Pacific region as a whole.

The refugee problem cannot be solved without
the understanding and cooperation of Indonesia. The
Indonesian Government has taken practical measures
and made some progress towards implementing
resolution 1319 (2000), thus demonstrating its sincerity
and resolve to settle this problem, which the
international community should support and encourage
so as to enhance Indonesia's capacity to do so. Without
international assistance, Indonesia cannot solve the
refugee problem on its own. The international
community must therefore assume its collective
responsibility to provide assistance in the search for a
comprehensive, realistic, fair and lasting solution to the
refugee problem.

Fourthly, it will be necessary to maintain the
United Nations presence in East Timor following the
territory's achievement of independence. UNTAET has
made important progress towards preparing East Timor
for independence. We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation to extend UNTAET's mandate. Even
after East Timor achieves independence, the United
Nations should continue, on the basis of prevailing
conditions, to provide it with the necessary support and
assistance. The proposal made by the Security Council
mission, following its visit to the region, that the
United Nations presence be maintained in East Timor
has won extensive support. We hope that UNTAET and
the Secretariat will continue their in-depth study of this
issue, sincerely heed and respect the views emanating
from East Timor and make concrete recommendations
for maintaining the United Nations presence, including
military and civilian police components, which the
various parties can consider and prepare for.

In conclusion, I wish to stress that, as a close
neighbour of East Timor, China is ready to continue to
assist it through bilateral and multilateral channels
towards independence, self-government and
reconstruction. China is ready to develop bilateral
relations with East Timor on the basis of equality and
mutual benefit so as to contribute to peace, stability
and prosperity in the region.

