Mr. Ja'afari (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): On 12 March
(see S/PV.8201), I informed the members of the
Security Council of a number of measures undertaken
by the Syrian Government to alleviate the suffering
of Syrians throughout my country caused by armed
terrorist groups. Today, I assure those present once
again that the Government of Syria is indeed most keen
to save the lives of its citizens and continues to take all
necessary measures to ensure their safety and security.

In line with those efforts, the Government of
Syria opened the new secure corridor in Hamouriyah
village, which was liberated from terrorists yesterday
in eastern Ghouta. Its aim is to assist the evacuation
of civilians who are being used as human shields by
terrorist groups. Just yesterday, Thursday, 15 March,
more than 40,000 civilians exited eastern Ghouta
through the new additional corridor. They went to the
Syrian Government, which coordinated with the Syrian
Red Crescent, to facilitate their safe transportation
to temporary shelters that are equipped with all the
necessary resources. They were not transferred to
camps, or tents. The Syrian Army, in coordination with
the Russian Reconciliation Centre for Syria, has opened
a total of three corridors in Hamouriyah, Jisreen and
Wafideen. Yesterday, the Government of Syria also
allowed the entry ofajoint assistance convoy ofthe Red
Crescent, the Red Cross and the United Nations, made
up of 25 trucks carrying 340 tons of various medical
and nutritional supplies. The Syrian Government will
continue to allow the passage of such convoys, security
conditions permitting.

In return for all those efforts undertaken by the
Government of Syria to protect its citizens, the armed
terrorist groups - upon direct instructions from the
Governments of the States supporting them - continue
to use civilians as human shields in eastern Ghouta and
prevent them from using the corridors as they target
them with bullets and missiles. It is quite strange
that the Government of Syria is shouldering the huge
responsibility of implementing resolution 2401 (2018)
and responding to the needs of civilians exiting the
inferno of terror in the eastern Ghouta, while the United
Nations agencies working in Damascus, including the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
and Governments of other countries that are lamenting
the destiny of our civilian population have done nothing
materially or morally to alleviate the suffering of tens of
thousands of people who have escaped from terrorism.
One hundred thousand civilians were displaced in Afrin

and around 100,000 fled eastern Ghouta -- a total of
almost 200,000 civilians - yet no one has provided
them with help.

Some States members of the Security Council
are abusing the work of the Council in launching
campaigns to defame and spread misinformation about
the Government of Syria, especially with respect to the
unofficial Arria Formula meeting that the Council held
on 12 March. However, I recall that the United Nations
is an Organization of Governments and not a theatre for
the display of power, and that giving the opportunity to
terrorist groups, including the so called White Helmets
affiliated with the Al-Nusra Front, to use the platform
of the Security Council represents a gross violation
of Security Council resolutions, especially those on
combating terrorism.

The biggest scandal is that one of the United
Nations agencies working in Damascus has asked for
the transfer of 76 White Helmets out of eastern Ghouta.
It does not care about the tens of thousands of civilians
but it cares about 76 White Helmet terrorists. If the
Security Council really wants to know about what is
happening in Syria, it should ask some of our people
who are still living in the city of Raqqa to talk before
the Council about the scandals perpetrated against
civilians by the outlaw coalition, and its extreme respect
for international law after it completely destroyed their
city. The coalition has committed the most terrible
massacres against civilians, provided protection to
4,000 terrorists affiliated with Da'esh, and facilitated
their exit from the city of Raqqa in order to use them
somewhere else in Syria. The city of Raqqa is to us
what Dresden is to Germany.

The Security Council should also ask to hear from
some of our people in Afrin, who could tell its members
about the ideal implementation of the provisions
of international humanitarian law and resolution
2401 (2018) by the invading Turkish forces that have
perpetrated terrible massacres against civilians and
displaced tens of thousands of them. The Council
should also ask some foreign terrorist fighters who have
returned to their countries to explain in an open meeting
of the Security Council how the Governments of their
countries were actually involved in their recruitment,
training and financing and how they provided them
with arms and sent them to Syria to commit massacres
against the Syrian people. The problem is, however,
that these fighters have been recycled, renamed and
rebranded as the moderate opposition in Syria.

The Security Council should also ask some of
our people who have left eastern Ghouta over the past
few days to talk about the terrorist practices of Jaysh
Al-Islam, Faylaq Al-Rahman and Ahrar Al-Sham, the
three groups that have been called the moderate Syrian
opposition by the United States, France, Britain and
their agents in the Gulf Sheikhdoms, and to talk in
particular about how those groups kill anyone who tries
to get out. They have seized all forms of humanitarian
and medical assistance and sold it at very high prices.
The Council should also ask some of our people from
Fo'ah and Kafraya to talk about their years of suffering
in the ongoing oppressive siege there, which has been
conducted by Al-Nusra Front with direct assistance
from Turkey and Qatar. However, it seems that those
defenders of humanity have no ears and tongues to
listen about the suffering of those civilians and talk
about it.

If Western countries in the Security Council
were one part in a thousand as sincere as the Russian
Federation in their assertions that they really care
about the Syrian people and respect the provisions
of the international law, the purposes and principles
of the Charter and the Security Council resolutions,
particularly those pertaining to combating terrorism,
then terrorism would not have emerged in Syria and
in other countries. No civilian would have suffered in
eastern Ghouta or in eastern Aleppo or in the old city of
Homs, Raqqa or any other Syrian city. Those Western
countries have invested in terrorism to bring down
Iraq, Libya and Yemen. Now, they have also invested
in terrorism in Syria and that investment has failed. It
is as if these countries were saying that, given a choice
between supporting the demons of terrorism, on one
the hand, and the Syrian State, on the other, they, the
sponsors of terrorism, would choose the demons.

In conclusion, the Government of my country
reiterates its principled position that the solution to the
Syrian crisis is a political one, based on an intra-Syrian
dialogue led by Syria without any foreign interference
or preconditions. I have spent hours and hours in
negotiations with Mr. De Mistura on those very words
in resolution 2254 (2015). I remind Council members
that the success of the political track and the tangible
enhancement of the humanitarian situation will depend
primarily on creating an environment conducive to
international and regional commitment to seriously
fighting terrorism in Syria and freeing the process
from politicization.

