The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Austria and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) and
Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria) took seats at the Council
table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 5/2006/253, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations. I should also like to draw the
attention of Council members to document S/2006/203,
which contains the text of a letter dated 30 March 2006
from the Permanent Representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, and to
document 5/2006/219, which contains the text of a
letter dated 12 April 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America


The President (spoke in Chinese): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1671 (2006).

I now give the floor to the representative of
France, who wishes to make a statement following the
voting.


