Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): I have the honour
to make the following statement on behalf of the States
members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC). I would like to emphasize again that, on 1 July,
the name of that Organization changed and is now the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. I speak in my
country's capacity as Chair of the OIC.

We are grateful to Germany for convening
today's meeting devoted to the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. The
continuation of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the
Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole continues to threaten
international peace and security. This issue is at the
centre of security problems and challenges, the
negative implications of which are not confined to that
region, but are felt well beyond and across the globe.

It is most unfortunate that the Security Council's
efforts to address this conflict have repeatedly failed
due to the refusal by Israel, the occupying Power, to
comply with international law and relevant United
Nations resolutions, as well as the lack of political will
among Member States to implement the Council's
resolutions. This is a regrettable fact, despite the
Council's unequivocal demands from the outset for the
withdrawal of Israel, the occupying Power, from the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, in accordance with the principle of the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force.
The Council has consistently adopted resolutions
calling for an end to the Israeli occupation and the
realization of the two-State solution on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders as the guarantor of peace and security
between the two peoples.

We are shocked and extremely disturbed by the
escalation of Israel's illegal practices in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Israel,
the occupying Power, has increased its military
operations throughout the West Bank, even raiding a
summer camp for children and forcing these children to
endure harsh interrogations. The occupying forces
continue to spread fear among the civilian Palestinian
population, including women and children, and
continue to carry out arrest operations, increasing the
number of Palestinians illegally imprisoned and
detained by Israel.

At the same time, Israel continues to intensify its
illegal and destructive settlement campaign in the
occupied Palestinian territory, especially in and around
occupied East Jerusalem. We condemn Israel's flouting
of international law and of the unanimous calls for a
complete cessation of such illegal actions. The spate of
settlement activities and the demolition of homes have
reached an unprecedented level recently in a clear
attempt to further colonize the occupied Palestinian
territory and to create even more illegal alterations to
the historical and religious landmarks, demographic
composition, characteristics and status of the territory.

The OIC group is highly perturbed by the attacks
not only on Palestinian civilians, but also on peace
activists and volunteers from international
non-governmental organizations. The OIC group
reiterates that it is disturbed by the fact that, for the
past four years, about 1.5 million Palestinians have
been suffering in immeasurably grave conditions in the
besieged Gaza Strip as a result of Israel's illegal and
inhumane blockade, a most condemnable form of
collective punishment. We reiterate the call for the
immediate lifting of the blockade and for Israel's
compliance with all of its legal obligations under
international humanitarian law.

The OIC is deeply concerned over the stalemate
in the negotiations between Israel and Palestine, and
the recent failure of the Quartet during its meeting in
Washington, D.C., to deliver results that would enable
the resumption of negotiations. At its thirty-eighth
session, held last month in Astana, the OIC Council of
Foreign Ministers reiterated the need for an early
settlement of the Palestinian issue and expressed full
support for the Arab Peace Initiative, which is aimed at
reaching a lasting, comprehensive and just resolution
of the Arab-Israeli conflict.

The OIC member States have also applauded the
significant institution-building efforts of the
Palestinian National Authority, and called on the
international community to acknowledge the progress
achieved and to recognize the independent, sovereign
State of Palestine on the basis of the borders of 4 June
1967. The OIC also joins the international community
in reaffirming that all measures and actions taken or to
be taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to alter the
legal, physical and demographic status of the occupied
Syrian Golan and its institutional structure, as well as
to impose jurisdiction and administration there, are null
and void and have no legal effect.

The international community, including the
Security Council, cannot afford to lose any more time.
It should uphold its responsibility and take immediate
and decisive action to bring Israel into compliance with
international law, including its obligations under the
Fourth Geneva Convention, relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, including
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet Road Map. This is the most urgent step to
salvage the two-State solution for an independent,
sovereign and viable State of Palestine, living side by
side and in peace with Israel.

