Mr. de Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First, I
want to say that Peru fully endorses the statement made
last Friday by the Ambassador of Costa Rica on behalf
of the Rio Group.

On the question before the Council, I must say
what I have always said in the Council: the
Government and people of Peru have zero tolerance for
terrorism. That is why we are a party to the 12 United
Nations conventions to combat international terrorism
and we are working in close contact with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee to implement the measures
established by resolution 1373 (2001).

In its resolute cooperation with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, Peru has contributed a specialist
to the team of experts. A few days ago, within the
established time period, we submitted our second
national report to the Committee. That report describes
Peru's legislation to tackle comprehensively the
eradication of terrorism. The report details all the types
of links existing between terrorism and drug trafficking
and the way our criminal legislation is dealing with the
issue. The second report also explains the various
criminal acts that have been made punishable under the
law in order to combat the financing of terrorism, as
well as measures that have been adopted with respect
to border security and travel documentation, such as
passports and other documents.

Peru has repeatedly affirmed that in the fight
against terrorism, Governments must strictly respect
the human rights of the population. We say that out of
experience because many times in the fight against
terrorism conducted by the autocratic Government of
Mr. Fujimori, the human rights of innocent people in
my country were violated. Those violations are now
being punished, and the victims are being vindicated
and compensated by the current, democratic
Government.

With the same emphasis with which we underline
the violations of human rights by Governments, my
Government calls on the international community to
denounce as violators of human rights the armed
groups practicing terrorism, as Amnesty International
did years ago. However - I must be very frank before
the Council - there are still democratic, Western
Governments that appear not to have understood the
nature of asymmetrical conflict. They are reluctant to
go before the Commission on Human Rights in Geneva
or the Third Committee in New York and denounce the
armed groups practising terrorism as violators of
human rights. I hope, as India stated in the Council last
January, that the Council will find a way to agree on a
list of terrorist organizations. It is necessary that the
international community be aware of who are the real
authors of this asymmetrical conflict, in order not to
have conflicting abstract concepts of terrorism, which
is like boxing against a shadow.

We must also bring to the attention of the Council
that the humanitarian institution of political exile must
not be debased. The current globalization of terrorism
requires that countries accepting refugees should
attentively examine the requests for political exile that
they receive, in order to avoid risking extending the
coverage of that humanitarian institution to possible
authors of terrorist acts. Likewise, it is essential that
we maintain a vigilant attitude towards certain political
refugees so that they cannot use their legal status to
carry out propaganda activities and financing for
terrorism.

In a globalized world, we must be alert to
terrorism. For example, just a few miles from
Manhattan, a small group of Shining Path militants has
recently held propaganda demonstrations calling for
the freedom of their terrorist leaders in Peru. Similarly,
we have heard news of a recruitment campaign being
conducted by another small group from the Shining
Path, coordinating its European activities from
Sweden.

No country can feel itself immune from the
impact of terrorism and it is increasingly obvious that
resolute and genuine international cooperation is
needed to combat this scourge. For all of these reasons,
Peru reiterates its firm commitment to that purpose.

