Mr. Aquino (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): May I
begin, Mr. President, by thanking you for organizing
this open debate. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his statement, and Ms. Navanethem Pillay, High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Catherine
Bragg, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, and Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for their presentations.

We have been seeing a series of conflicts around
the world in which, unfortunately, civilians, including
women and children, continue to be the victims of
attacks and violations of their fundamental rights,
including the right to life.

Despite regular meetings held by this forum to
discuss this subject, it is clear that the United Nations
can and should do more on the ground to respond to
needs related to protection of civilians in armed
conflicts. The determination of mechanisms and
operational guidelines for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and the recommendations adopted by
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations are
a concrete demonstration of what the Organization can
do in tackling this delicate subject.
However, despite these major steps forward, we
must clearly point out that most of them occur
essentially at a normative or legislative level. These
advances contribute to a better understanding and
development of the common conceptual framework
that we seek. However, we must be aware that many
challenges remain to be dealt with, so we must
concentrate our efforts on implementing the norms. In
other words, we must do more concrete work on the
ground. It involves specifically preventing threats to
the lives of civilians in situations of armed conflict.

As has been pointed out repeatedly, the protection
of civilians is a fundamental aspect for achieving
peace, for the sustainability and viability of political
processes and for the credibility and legitimacy of this
Organization.

While the parties to a conflict have an obligation
and responsibility to adopt the measures necessary to
protect civilians and facilitate humanitarian aid,
political commitment must also be bolstered not only
among the parties but also within this Organization,
primarily the Security Council, bearing in mind that, as
stated in resolution 1894 (2009), deliberate targeting of
civilians and the commission of systematic violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law in
situations of armed conflict may constitute a threat to
international peace and security.

In this regard, it is essential that protection of
civilians mandates be clear, feasible and precise so that
they can be implemented in a way that is not subject to
interpretation by actors on the ground. Likewise, it is
important that these mandates provide for the
appropriate and sufficient allocation of the resources
needed to carry them out and that they reflect existing
limitations in order not to create expectations beyond
the capacity of missions to deliver, particularly in
terms ofthe use of force.

We are also of the view that it is important to
develop the analytical preventive dimension prior to
the deployment of a mission mandated to protect
civilians, with a view to ensuring the best possible
knowledge of the parties to the conflict, as well as the
reasons and circumstances of the conflict. That will
allow for specific and appropriate mandates and better
coordination on the ground in order to deal with the
obstacles that prevent the provision and delivery of
humanitarian aid. As part of this preventive analysis, it
is also necessary to continuously assess the threats on
the ground both to civilians and to actors who
participate in their protection, particularly in
peacekeeping operations.

Another aspect that must be addressed when we
talk about the protection of civilians relates to

combating impunity. In this regard, Peru considers it
necessary to improve and step up the fight against
impunity for violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law and the responsibility to protect
civilians. We should not forget that there is an
international criminal responsibility for such
violations.

That is why the international community has
provided for mechanisms through the four Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols, as
well as in international customary law, so that States
can prosecute and punish those responsible for war
crimes. Moreover, through the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, jurisdiction has been
established for that supranational body to prosecute
those who commit war crimes, regardless of which
party to the conflict commits them, under the principle
of complementarity and through effective cooperation
with the Court.

My delegation affirms the importance of the
periodic holding of these debates and reiterates its view
that it is necessary to add value to them by seeking to
move beyond the mere formal exchange of positions to
the drafting of documents that underpin real and
concrete progress that can be felt by civil society, on
Whose behalf we are meeting here today.

