Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's quarterly
debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I would
also like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Yamamoto,
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Mr. Fedotov, for their informative briefings.

It is obvious that prospects for sustainable
development in Central Asia are closely linked to
the achievement of durable peace in Afghanistan.
Therefore, Uzbekistan continues efforts aimed at
contributing to the stabilization of the situation in
Afghanistan and its social and economic development,
in accordance with the agreements reached at the
international conference on Afghanistan held in
Tashkent on 27 March. The event was convened at
the joint initiative of the leaders of Uzbekistan and
Afghanistan and attended by high-ranking officials
from 21 States and leading international organizations,
such as the United Nations, the European Union,
NATO and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
Representatives of the five permanent members of the
Security Council, members of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, as well as Afghanistan's neighbours
and key regional countries that are actively involved
in rendering assistance in economic recovery of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan were present at the
Tashkent forum. The Tashkent declaration was adopted
at the end of conference. I would like to mention some
of its highlights.

First, the declaration demonstrates a consolidated
position at the regional and global levels on the need
for an early launch of direct negotiations between the
Government of Afghanistan and the Afghan Islamic
Movement of Taliban without preliminary conditions.

Secondly, the declaration defines the obligations of
the opposing parties in the peace process. In particular,
the document includes an appeal to the Government
in Kabul to guarantee the integration of the armed
opposition into the political life of Afghanistan and
recognize it as a legitimate political force. In turn,
the Movement of Taliban must recognize its own
responsibility for peace and stability in the country,
renounce violence, cut ties with international terrorist
groups and respect the equal rights of all Afghans, in
accordance with the main provisions ofthe Constitution.

Thirdly, the importance of the full support of
the Afghan Government in combating terrorism,
drug production and trafficking, as well as in taking
resolute steps against all forms and manifestations of
terrorism without any differentiation, was underscored
by all participants.

Fourthly, all countries showed their respect for
the sovereignty of Afghanistan and adherence to
non-interference in its internal affairs.

Fifthly, the declaration also includes a separate
paragraph devoted to regional economic cooperation.
In particular, all participants underlined that, by
promoting economic ties with Kabul, the countries of
the region make their own contribution to ensuring
stability and sustainable development in Afghanistan.

Based on the declaration, Uzbekistan is taking its
own steps. The President of Uzbekistan has proposed
to develop and implement efforts at the intra-Afghan,
regional and global levels by developing a comprehensive
peace programme for Afghanistan. At the intra-Afghan
level, it is necessary to ensure the early launch, without
preliminary conditions, of direct dialogue between the
central Government and the main forces of the armed
opposition, first and foremost the Movement of Taliban.
Uzbekistan is ready to provide a platform for direct
talks between the Afghan Government and the Taliban
in its territory at any stage of their development. In that
context, the Uzbek side has held a series of consultative
meetings and negotiations with the Government of
Afghanistan and representatives of the United States,
China, Russia, member States of the International
Contact Group, States of the Eurasian region, South
Asia, the Middle East and the Near East.

At the same time, the Uzbek side established
appropriate contacts and held working meetings with
high-ranking representatives of the Taliban Movement,
during which prospects for dialogue and interaction to
establish long-term peace and stability in Afghanistan
and its economic development were discussed so as
to realize the consolidated position of the participants
of the Tashkent conference. On that basis, Uzbekistan
welcomes the mutual introduction of a ceasefire
between the Government of Afghanistan and the
Taliban Movement in connection with the celebration
of Eid Al-Fitr. The Uzbek side also welcomes the
announcement by the President of Afghanistan, Ashraf
Ghani, of the extension of the ceasefire.

At the regional level, it is necessary to ensure that
a firm regional consensus is reached, primarily with
the support of key regional players, including Central
Asian States. That is critically important given that
solving a number of key issues pertaining to economic
development and security and stability in Afghanistan
to a large extent depends upon neighbouring countries
and their goodwill, firm determination and readiness
to actively facilitate national reconciliation and end
violence in Afghanistan. The efforts of all neighbouring
countries and partners should not substitute but, rather,
complement each other. It is important to develop
and implement concerted measures, approaches and
practical mechanisms to solve the problem.

At the global level, it is important that leading
world Powers and donor organizations provide political
support to the peace process and financial assistance
for the socioeconomic rehabilitation of Afghanistan.
Uzbekistan is making its own contribution to the process
by expanding trade and implementing various projects.
As a result, in 2017 the volume of trade increased by
15 per cent to a total of approximately $600 million. In
the near future we intend to increase that number several
times over and bring it to $1.5 billion. Uzbekistan has
also initiated a number ofjoint infrastructure projects,
such as the new Mazar-e-Sharif-Herat railway project,
a project to construct the new 500-kilowatt Surkhan-
Puli-Khumri power transmission line and the training

of qualified national personnel for Afghanistan. An
educational centre for the training of Afghan citizens
has been in operation since last January in the Uzbek
border city of Termez. In order to expand cooperation
in the field of education, the President of Uzbekistan
has proposed to establish a special international fund
for supporting education in Afghanistan. The main goal
of the fund is to assist Afghans in training national staff
in in-demand professions, while providing scholarships
and grants to talented students and young scientists.

In Uzbekistan we strongly believe that ultimately
peace on Afghan soil will open up new opportunities and
bring real benefits to all States of the greater Eurasian
continent. It will advance common security and stability
and create favourable conditions for the construction
of highways and railroads, the laying of pipelines and
the development of regional and trans-regional trade,
thereby contributing to ensuring peace and stability
in this vast region. Uzbekistan remains committed to
continuing close cooperation with all stakeholders to
resolve the conflict in Afghanistan.

