Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to start by expressing my
gratitude to Mr. Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, for his presentation of
the report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) (S/2017/1113). The report sheds a great deal
of light on the current situation in Darfur. We noted
therein some positive developments, which were made
possible by the joint efforts of the United Nations, the
African Union and the Sudanese Government.

We note with satisfaction the positive results of the
joint efforts of the Sudanese Government, as reflected
in the fact that the number of clashes between the
Government and rebel groups in Darfur has dropped
significantly. This improved atmosphere makes it
possible to focus the efforts of all the parties on the
political process, which should lead to the achievement
of a lasting peace. We would also like to highlight the
Government of the Sudan's commitment to promoting
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur.

Equatorial Guinea has always believed that the
conflict in Darfur must be resolved through a political
process that makes it possible to deal with the most
controversial issues, including the issue of land
ownership, conflicts between communities and the
disarmament of the civilian population and militias.
All the movements involved in this process must work
hard to achieve peace with the Government through a
process of negotiations that is frank and inclusive. We
therefore urge the Sudanese Government to continue
working closely with UNAMID, which would be a way
of ensuring the success of the Operation and would
help the State re-establish its authority throughout
the territory.

We also welcome the fact that the movement of
UNAMID and humanitarian personnel has improved,
which was made possible by a reduction in the level of
violence. That is a very significant step forward.

We, too, urge the international community, at this
very decisive moment, to strongly support the Sudan
so as to consolidate the positive developments that we
heard about in Mr. Lacroix's report and to help resolve
the issues that require attention.

