Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
the Prosecutor, Ms. Bensouda, for her briefing this
morning on the work of her Office in relation to Libya.
Clearly, the situation in Libya demonstrates the distinct
but complementary roles of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and the Security Council. The Council has
repeatedly highlighted the importance of accountability
and of ending impunity for the most serious crimes, for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Consistent with that, the Council has twice asked the
ICC to play a direct role in the context of a Chapter
VII resolution: first, in respect of Darfur, in resolution
1593 (2005), and, secondly, its referral of the Libyan
situation, in resolution 1970 (2011), which is the subject
of today's briefing.

While some good progress has been made,
Libya continues, as we know, to face complex and
serious challenges. It is important for all aspects
of the international response - the United Nations
special Mission, the Council's sanctions regime and
international criminal procedures - to be coordinated
and complementary.
In March, the Council, in resolution 2095 (2013),
renewed its call on the Libyan Government to continue
to cooperate with the ICC and the Prosecutor. We
are encouraged by the fact that Libya continues
to demonstrate a strong desire to prosecute those
accused of committing Rome Statute crimes and that,
in challenging the admissibility of ICC proceedings,
Libya has followed Rome Statute procedures. As we
await the outcome of those proceedings, we would like
to reiterate the importance of the Libyan Government
respecting the Court's rulings on the admissibility
challenges, whatever their outcomes.

The situation in Libya demonstrates that the ICC
can, and does, play a significant role in strengthening
the rule of law in States undergoing post-conflict
transition. Referral of the situation in Libya to the ICC
was an important and necessary step for the Council
to have taken. As I mentioned yesterday during the
informal interactive dialogue, the ICC referral has
served as a catalyst for Libya's own efforts, not just
in regard to the two individuals currently subject
to proceedings, but also with respect to the reform
of Libya's judicial system, a decisive element of its
transition to democracy.

Ensuring respect for the rule of law in Libya is the
responsibility of the Libyan authorities themselves.
Regardless of the outcome of Libya's jurisdictional
challenge, it is important to bear in mind that the ICC's
jurisdiction is limited to those most responsible for
committing serious international crimes. It is therefore
crucial for Libya to ensure that justice is served in
relation to other perpetrators and other crimes.

Libya should continue to work with the Court to
ensure that all allegations of serious international
crimes are investigated and, where appropriate,
prosecuted, regardless of whether those allegations
concern supporters of Muammar Al-Qadhafi or those
who raised arms to establish a new Libya. We very
much welcome the Prosecutor's advice this morning
of recent constructive initiatives by the Prosecutor
and the Libyan authorities to ensure complementarity
and cooperation in furthering investigations against
perpetrators, both inside and outside Libya, to ensure
that they all are held to account.

The Court is a vital partner for the Council. We
all know that without justice it is difficult to establish
an inclusive and lasting peace. Effective coordination
between the ICC and the Council is essential in order
to ensure that the separate efforts of the two bodies,
which have very different mandates, have a multiplying
and reinforcing effect and that they are able to work
together to help end impunity for serious international
crimes.

To enable the Court to carry out its work effectively,
the Council needs to find creative ways to support it.
Doing so is particularly important where the Court's
jurisdiction derives from a Council resolution. The
continued and active support of the Council is necessary
to underscore the importance of States cooperating
with the Court. Support from the Council is important
to ensure that the objectives of its referrals are realized,
namely, that justice is delivered and that international
peace and security is maintained.

With that in mind, we support expanded cooperation
between the Council and the Court. Yesterday's informal
interactive dialogue between Council members and
the Prosecutor was a very useful first step towards
considering how the Council can more effectively
support the Court's work. We look forward to working
with other members of the Council to further develop
what should be an organic relationship between the two
bodies and to implement the Council's commitment to
an effective follow-up of Council referrals to the Court.

In concluding, let me say that we look forward to
further updates from the Prosecutor, in relation to both
Libya and other situations before the Court.

