Mr. Jurica (Croatia): Allow me first to welcome
and to thank the High Representative and European
Union Special Representative, Mr. Lajcak, for his
report at today's briefing. I would also like to welcome
His Excellency Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers and thank him for his briefing.

My delegation welcomes the important progress
on the reforms required for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
integrate into Euro-Atlantic institutions, which we see
as the paramount goal and the common future for all
countries of South-East Europe. Croatia has always
advocated a transparent and individual approach to the
countries in South-East Europe, with the same
standards applying to all and where hard work and
reforms are rewarded with progress in NATO and
European Union integration.
When taking into consideration the complex
domestic political circumstances and the tense regional
climate following Kosovo's declaration of
independence in February, we are pleased to welcome
the adoption of the two police reform laws on 16 April
that now enable Bosnia and Herzegovina to sign a
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the
European Union in the near future. Moreover, we are
very pleased that the agreement in late March of this
year among the State and entity governments on
movable defence property secured for Bosnia and
Herzegovina intensified dialogue towards NATO
membership's action plan.

We noted with pleasure that all the members of
the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board were
able to agree on a transition strategy and a future
policy for the international community towards Bosnia
and Herzegovina, including on the conditions for the
transition from Office of the High Representative to
European Union Special Representative, and we
commend them for their efforts. We are glad to see that
the overall goal is for transition as soon as possible and
that the policy of ownership remains the principle.

We again echo the long-standing objective of the
Peace Implementation Council and reiterate our
position that we would like to see Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a peaceful, viable State irreversibly on
course for European integration. In order to achieve
this, we join others in stating that constitutional reform
is necessary, indeed essential, for the future of that
country.

However, as the High Representative stated in
paragraph 15 of his report, "reaching any domestic
consensus on the matter will prove extremely difficult
so long as the domestic parties' conceptions remain
both antithetical and non-negotiable." We urge all
parties involved to be open and flexible in their
approaches so as to well enable all the constitutive
peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina to feel reassured in
their individual civic and ethnic well-being and in their
future.

The spirit and the letter of equality of the
constitutive peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina should
be respected by domestic parties and the international
community alike and should include not only political
representation but also the electronic media, which
should serve all three constitutive peoples to their
satisfaction, based on the principle of a free and
democratic media.

The Croats of Bosnia and Herzegovina are the
smallest constitutive people of the country, which
makes them especially sensitive. Their interests must

be kept in mind, and they need to be protected. There
can be no free and democratic Bosnia and Herzegovina
without the Croats of Bosnia and Herzegovina. And let
me emphasize this point also, to make it absolutely
clear: there cannot be a whole and united Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a State without Croats living in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The Croatian people in Bosnia and Herzegovina
must remain constitutionally equal with the other two
peoples of the country in both entities: in the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as in the
Republika Srpska - in other words, on the entire
territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This has to be
taken into consideration as it is a fundamental interest
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and therefore an interest of
all three of the constituent peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

In this regard, we call for additional funds to be
allocated for the return of Croats to Republika Srpska
in order to balance the funds invested in other areas of
return in Bosnia and Herzegovina. That should also
enable more people to vote in their pre-war domiciles
and in that way alleviate the concerns raised by the
High Representative in paragraph 8 of his report.

Also, we believe that the international community
and the High Representative should invest their efforts
into aiding the harmonization of the plethora of
different laws that are used at this time to prosecute
war crimes on different levels in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, so that the principles of equality, justice
and fairness are honoured and guaranteed for all the
citizens of the country, irrespective of the area where
they might live or the court at which they might be
tried.

In addition, we echo the calls of the High
Representative and the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board for Serbia to meet its legal obligations
and arrest Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic and
transfer them to the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
As the High Representative stated, their arrest would
not only help to bring about closure for the families of
victims, but would also do much to remove the stigma
attached to Republika Srpska and to improve inter-
ethnic relations in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

My country is working hard to finalize its
integration into NATO and the EU. In contrast with the
2004 and 2007 waves of enlargement, we have a
significant amount of additional negotiations with the
EU to undertake in order to become ready for
accession. That requires concentrated and continued
hard work on the part of our entire State
administration.

One of the beneficiaries of our efforts in Euro-
Atlantic integration in the region is Bosnia and
Herzegovina, because we are sharing our experiences
and knowledge and are readily transferring the know-
how gained during the course of our membership talks
to our neighbours, in order to help them move faster
towards Euro-Atlantic integration.

At this point, I would like to refer to paragraph
63 of the report of the High Representative, where he
mentions Croatian plans to build a bridge, bypassing
the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and where he
voices his concern that "the access of [that country] to
the open sea might be impaired". I am pleased to report
here that my Government has literally gone the extra
mile to ensure that the concerns of Bosnia and
Herzegovina are met. Our bridge, using advanced
technology and spanning the Croatian mainland and the
Peljesac peninsula, was raised and adapted to enable
the largest of vessels to reach the port of Neum, and, in
this way, we have alleviated the various concerns about
access to this Adriatic port of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Finally, while once again commending the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board countries for
achieving unity regarding Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
would like to take this opportunity to thank High
Representative and EU Special Representative
Miroslav Lajcak for his excellent work in Bosnia and
Herzegovina so far.

