The President: Pursuant to the decision taken at
the 6212th meeting of the Security Council, I
acknowledge the presence of Mr. Joseph Mutaboba,
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau, pursuant to rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/552, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in that country.

After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its previous
statements and resolutions on Guinea-Bissau, and
notes the latest report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS)
(S/2009/552). The Council reaffirms its support
for the continuing efforts to consolidate peace in
that country.

"The Security Council welcomes the
peaceful presidential elections that were held on
28 June and 26 July 2009 and the inauguration of
President Malam Bacai Sanha on 8 September. It
also takes note of the President's commitment to
combat impunity, foster national reconciliation and
achieve socio-economic development. The Council
reiterates that the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of the people of Guinea-Bissau must be
fully protected. It again urges the armed forces of
Guinea-Bissau to ensure that their commitment to
abide by the civilian authorities and to respect the
constitutional order is fully honoured.

"The Security Council also takes note of the
National Assembly's plans to convene a national
conference on "Conflicts in Guinea-Bissau:
causes, prevention, resolution and consequences",
and underscores the need to conduct an inclusive
political dialogue process aimed at ensuring
national reconciliation in the country.

"The Security Council reiterates the
importance of consolidating democracy, security,
the rule of law, national reconciliation and the
fight against impunity to ensure sustainable peace
in Guinea-Bissau. In this regard, it takes note of
the ongoing consultations between the United
Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP) to assist the Government of
Guinea-Bissau, at its request, in carrying out a
credible, thorough and expeditious investigation,
in accordance with international standards, into
the political assassinations of March and June
2009. The Security Council calls upon the
Government of Guinea-Bissau to expedite this
process, and calls on the above-mentioned
organizations and the international community as
a whole to bring their support to this end.

"The Security Council underlines the
challenges faced by the Government of Guinea-
Bissau, in particular to ensure that the security
sector is effective, professional and accountable.
In this regard, the Council emphasizes the
necessity of pursuing and implementing an
effective and comprehensive national strategy for
security sector reform, to be supported by the
international partners. The Council reiterates its
request for the Secretary-General, through his
Special Representative for Guinea-Bissau and the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Support
Office in Guinea-Bissau, for an effective
coordination of the support provided by the
international community to security sector reform
in Guinea-Bissau, taking into account the work
already undertaken by the European Union and
other international actors in this area.
09-59538

"The Security Council urges the
Government of Guinea-Bissau to take the
necessary actions in the framework of the
Guinea-Bissau anti-narcotics operational plan and
the ECOWAS plan of action against drug
trafficking and organized crime in West Africa.
The Council further notes that the situation in
Guinea-Bissau continues to be extremely fragile,
in particular as a result of increased drug
trafficking and organized crime that could pose a
threat to regional stability, and should be
addressed by an approach of shared
responsibility. In this context, the Council
welcomes the progress in implementing the West
Africa Coast Initiative involving ECOWAS,
commends the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the Department for Peacekeeping
Operations, the Department for Political Affairs
and the International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL) in support of the fight
against organized crime and drug trafficking in
West Africa, and calls on the international
partners to continue supporting this partnership
and the efforts of the national authorities to
strengthen activities on policing and internal
security, including law enforcement and border
control, as part of the security sector reform
process.

"The Security Council calls on the
international community to provide timely and
adequate support for the implementation of the
Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in
Guinea-Bissau, adopted on 1 October 2008 by the
Peacebuilding Commission, including that of the
09-59538

quick-impact projects. The Council takes note of
the importance of building synergies among the
donors. It further takes note of the preparations
for the first review of the Strategic Framework
for Peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau, and looks
forward to its finalization. The Security Council
reiterates its support for the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission country-specific
configuration on Guinea-Bissau.

"The Security Council welcomes the
ongoing planning for the transition of UNOGBIS
to an integrated peacebuilding office on 1 January
2010, and looks forward to the timely
development of an integrated strategic
framework, including a strategic workplan with
appropriate benchmarks to measure and to track
progress on the implementation of the new
Office's mandate.

"The Security Council reiterates the
importance of the regional dimension in the
resolution of the problems faced by Guinea-
Bissau and, in this regard, welcomes the role of
ECOWAS, the African Union, the CPLP and the
European Union in the peacebuilding process in
that country."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/29.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.
