Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Panama believes that this is an opportune
moment to recall that heads of State or Government,
meeting during the 2005 World Summit, acknowledged
the need for the Organization to carry out a
coordinated, consistent and integrated peacebuilding
and reconciliation effort in countries that have emerged
from conflict. To meet that need, they established the
Peacebuilding Commission with the participation of
the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council.
That is why Panama believes it is appropriate that
both the General Assembly and the Security Council
have decided to conduct an initial review of how, in
terms of form and substance, the Commission is
carrying out the task entrusted to it. After all, the
maintenance of international peace and security is a
task entrusted to both the Assembly and the Council by
the Charter itself. The mission of Panama believes that
that task must be carried out in a coherent, coordinated
and comprehensive manner.

The objective of this consultation process should
be an initial assessment of the Commission's working
mechanisms and decision-making processes so that all
of these organs, each within its own perspective, can
have the information and knowledge they need in order
to provide the Commission, if necessary, with timely
assistance or advice so that it can carry out the task
entrusted to it by the heads of State and Government.

We acknowledge that the Peacebuilding
Commission is still in the process of finding its own
identity. However, we applaud the efforts of the
Organizational Committee and the Peacebuilding
Support Office in preparing for meetings on specific
cases, assessing the progress on those cases and
drawing up a plan based on the requests of the
Governments of Sierra Leone and Burundi.

We expect and are resolved that the
Peacebuilding Commission will distinguish itself
through effective and efficient performance. To that
end, each and every one of us who are involved must
maintain a firm commitment to act with the promptness
and transparency that this responsibility requires. The
Commission's function must be to coordinate the
available resources in a comprehensive, rigorous and
coherent manner in order to make it easier for the
countries under its auspices to have the programmes,
institutions and capacities that will enable them to take
the necessary measures to achieve economically
sustainable and socially responsible development.

