Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I also thank Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his briefing and commend him for his
effective leadership. We take this opportunity to assure
him of our full support.

Nigeria is concerned about the lack of progress in
the Middle East peace process. The status quo does not
offer a sustainable solution to the question of Palestine.
What is required is a genuine effort on the part of
Israel and Palestine to return to the peace process.
We urge the leadership on both sides to take the steps
necessary for achieving lasting peace. We call on States
with influence over the parties to encourage them
to re-engage in dialogue on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid terms of
reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map and the agreements existing between them.

We reaffirm our unwavering support for a two-
State solution, with Israel and Palestine existing side
by side in peace and security. Nigeria welcomes the
meeting of the envoys ofthe Middle East Quartet held in
Cairo at the end of June, during which they considered
ways to revive negotiations and advance the two-State
solution. We look forward to positive outcomes from
the Quartet's outreach to Arab States. The engagement
of Arab States is vital to the search for lasting peace in
the Middle East.
With respect to the conflict in Syria, Nigeria is
pleased to note the sustained efforts of Special Envoy
De Mistura in holding discussions with the warring
parties. We commend the Special Envoy for his hard
work, patience and perseverance. It is important, and
indeed urgent, that the parties find a convergence of
views to enable a resumption of negotiations. We
encourage Special Envoy De Mistura not to relent in
his efforts, and we assure him of our continued support.
Our position remains that a military solution to the
conflict in Syria is unattainable. Only a negotiated
solution can bring lasting peace to the country.

Turning to Yemen, Nigeria calls for a total
cessation of the hostilities that have left thousands of
civilians dead, injured and displaced. A permanent
ceasefire is the necessary first step towards improving
the humanitarian situation in the country. A ceasefire
would also boost the chances of moving the peace
process forward. We encourage the parties to cooperate
fully with the Special Envoy Ould Cheikh Ahmed in
his efforts to find a lasting solution to the conflict in the
country. We reaffirm our support for a political solution
on the basis of the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the
comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

