Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba is following events in Haiti closely and with
great concern. Haiti is a brother Caribbean nation with
which we have close historic ties. It is the duty of us all
to stand by the side of Haiti. Let us not forget that it
was in Haiti, some 200 years ago, that the peoples of
the Caribbean and Latin American began their struggle
for freedom. The international community must help
Haiti at this crucial time in its history. To the old
problems, with their roots in colonialism and
exploitation, new, burning troubles have been added,
related to the unjust and exclusionary international
economic order.

Cuba will continue to adhere strictly to its
principled position of non-interference in the internal
affairs of any country, including Haiti. We support the
efforts of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
towards a just and peaceful resolution of the current
situation in Haiti. We firmly condemn all the acts of
violence taking place in that country and deplore the
ongoing casualties and material damage. The Cuban
assistance personnel currently in Haiti will continue to
abide strictly by the principle of non-interference in
that country's internal affairs. The security of those
personnel must be fully guaranteed. Likewise, the
integrity of the Cuban Embassy and of all its personnel
remaining in Port-au-Prince must be fully respected.

Despite the critical situation in Haiti, Cuban
volunteers continue to work at their posts. Cuban
doctors, in particular, continue to provide their services
to the Haitian people, who now need them so much.
Cuba currently has a medical brigade in Haiti
composed of 525 volunteers, of whom 332 are doctors.
They are scattered throughout the country's
departments and serve 75 per cent of the 8.3 million
Haitians. To have an idea of the importance of their
work, one must know that Haiti has fewer than 2,000
doctors, 90 per cent of whom provide their services in
the country's capital.

In the past five years, Cuban doctors in Haiti have
conducted nearly 5 million medical appointments,
assisted in almost 45,000 births and performed 59,000
surgical interventions. It is estimated that nearly 86,000
human lives have been saved by Cuban health workers
in Haiti.

Cuba has also provided assistance to the country
with regard to promoting literacy, training Haitian
doctors, sanitation, aquaculture, food security, culture,
road construction and the functioning of Darbonne's
main sugar refinery.

In the light of the current domestic tensions in
this brotherly country, which have resulted in the
departure of a number of foreign residents, our
Government on 10 February explicitly instructed our
Embassy staff in Port-au-Prince to remain in place,
working uninterrupted with all the members of the
Cuban medical brigade throughout the country.

In addition, given the obstacles that may arise
with regard to the availability of medicines, Cuba sent
a 12.2-ton shipment of 525 units of nearly 80
medicines on 11 February to enable each Cuban
medical volunteer to successfully perform his or her
work. Cuban medical personnel, who are abiding
strictly by the principle of non-interference in Haiti's
internal affairs, are honourably carrying out their noble
mission of tending to the health of the Haitian people.

If all of what I have described is proof of what
even a small and blockaded country can do for Haiti,
then other States that have ample economic and
financial resources can do much more in terms of
providing cooperation and official development
assistance to that brotherly Caribbean country. In
particular, the Cuban people feel they are fulfilling
their duty and honouring a debt of gratitude to the
peoples of the Caribbean, who have been so steadfast
in their unwavering friendship and solidarity with
Cuba.

Once again, we reaffirm Cuba's firm intention to
continue to help in every possible way to achieve a
peaceful, just and lasting solution to the situation in
Haiti. We hope that, given the grave situation facing
that brotherly country, the United Nations and the
international community as a whole will rise to the
level required by events.

