Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): As we bid farewell to
our colleague Ambassador Holbrooke, it is only fitting
to recognize that under his Visionary and informed
leadership, the HIV/AIDS pandemic, hitherto seen as a
social and health issue, was for the first time
considered by the Security Council as constituting an
international security problem.

It will be recalled that in January 2000 the
Security Council convened a meeting, under the agenda
item "The situation in Africa", on the impact of AIDS
on security, over which Vice-President Al Gore of the
United States of America presided. That momentous
occasion - the first of its kind in the Security
Council - attracted a broad spectrum of stakeholders
concerned with the HIV pandemic, which has become
not only a developmental problem, but also an
international security issue. This was followed by a
meeting, held in the Council in July, on the impact of
HIV/AIDS on international peace and security.
Resolution 1308 (2000), adopted by the Council at that
meeting, brought attention to the devastating effect of
the HIV pandemic and its threat to peace and security,
particularly its effect on United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

One year later, a number of activities have taken
place at the national, regional and international levels,
aimed at bringing the international community together
to develop coherent and concerted plans and strategies
aimed at controlling the scourge. One such forum is the
special session of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS,
scheduled to take place in June 2001.

The HIV/AIDS pandemic constitutes the most
immediate challenge to humanity and to the security
and stability of our world. Today, HIV/AIDS is the
fourth leading cause of death worldwide, with the toll
rising every day. A total of 21.8 million people around
the world are believed to have died of AIDS, 4.3
million of them children. According to figures from
the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) and the World Health Organization (WHO),
36.1 million people are now living with the HIV Virus,
while 5.3 million were infected with the disease last
year. The figure is estimated to reach 40 million before
the end of the decade. Among those infected have been
soldiers and civilian personnel who participated in
various United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Beyond the human suffering and misery caused
by the pandemic, it is now widely acknowledged that
HIV/AIDS has evolved into a developmental problem.
Governments in developing countries, struggling with a
lingering external debt problem, are forced to allocate a
disproportionate part of their meagre resources to the
health sector. Yet the disease strikes the most
productive age groups - from 15 to 49 years old -
thus causing massive losses in production and, indeed,
disruption in vital sectors of the economy. The
challenge before us, therefore, is how to strengthen the
capacities of developing countries, which are the
hardest hit, by providing adequate resources to
translate the quantum of existing political will into
action for the eradication of the disease. That we must
do urgently.

It is very important, in the discourse on the global
impact of HIV/AIDS in different regions of the world,
to recognize that the African continent continues to
experience the most devastating effects of the disease.
According to a United Nations report, some 16.4
million Africans have already died from the disease,
while another 25.3 million are now living with the HIV
virus. The pandemic poses an unprecedented threat to
the region's development. Its hard-won developmental
progress is therefore under real threat of reversal as a
result of the scourge.

In Nigeria, preparations for the African summit
on HIV/AIDS are at an advanced stage. This week, a
consensus workshop aimed at the development of a
Nigerian national vaccine strategy took place,
addressed by a cross-section of stakeholders. Nigeria is
the first country with a very large population to cross
the 5 per cent prevalence rate, which is the threshold of
an explosive epidemic. This frightening figure has
made it imperative for Nigeria to explore all possible
means to prevent the further spread of the Virus. My
President, Chief Olusegun Obasanjo, has declared
personal leadership of the campaign against HIV/AIDS
in Nigeria, and policies have been reviewed to ensure a
favourable environment for AIDS control. The
Government has also allocated additional funds to the
national AIDS programme, and intensive media
campaigns continue throughout the country. Local and
international non-governmental organizations are also
very active in the campaign against HIV/AIDS.

The frontiers of previous efforts at the regional
level were further expanded through the bold initiative
taken at the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
Summit in Lome last July. In spite of the lack of
resources, African leaders at that Summit demonstrated
a firm commitment to confront the pandemic. At the
continental level, programmes have been put in place
to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS through advocacy,
education and prevention. African leaders adopted the
Lome Declaration on HIV/AIDS, which was an
expression of Africa's commitment, at the highest
political level, to rid the continent of the disease. We
strongly believe that this African initiative merits the
support of the international community to enable
Africa to address the HIV/AIDS pandemic in all its
ramifications.

The enormity of the HIV/AIDS pandemic as a
global developmental crisis and the important role of
international efforts in finding a solution are some of
the reasons for the planned special session of the
General Assembly, scheduled for June this year. My
delegation welcomes this global initiative. The special
session, in the view of the Nigerian delegation, will
provide an appropriate forum for the evaluation of the
various programmes of action the world has so far been
engaged in. We also hope it will generate the
appropriate political commitment at the highest levels
and strengthen international cooperation and
coordination.

In this connection, the pronouncements of world
leaders at the Millennium Summit, as contained in the
Millennium Declaration, provide the requisite
reference point. In that Declaration, our leaders
resolved to halt and reverse the trend of HIV/AIDS and
halve the number of people living with the disease by
2015. This provides the forthcoming special session of
the General Assembly with a framework for the
development of its ultimate objectives - hence the
necessity for the identification of priority areas for
intensified action. This should include such areas as
prevention, better access to care and treatment, and an
increased level of national resource allocation, which is
needed for addressing the problem in a holistic manner.

In View of the obvious implications the spread of
HIV/AIDS has for peacekeeping operations, my
delegation is of the opinion that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations should embark on a massive
information campaign to educate United Nations
peacekeepers on the HIV/AIDS pandemic before they
are deployed in the field. This recommendation has
been made several times by the United Nations Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. Indeed, the
United States delegation had openly threatened, in the
Security Council, to veto any Security Council
peacekeeping mandate that did not provide for such a
programme, and we support that position.

Furthermore, we wish to suggest that troop-
contributing countries should be equally assisted with
information materials for their troops, and also assisted
with resources to enable their countries to provide
adequate medical facilities for their infected soldiers
who served as United Nations peacekeepers, upon
termination of their service.

It would also be appreciated if the Secretariat and
the Security Council, during their consultation with
troop-contributing countries, could provide data on the
prevalence of HIV/AIDS in a particular field of
operation, before the troops are deployed. This would
facilitate the taking of preventive measures by troop-
contributing countries before the departure of their
troops.

At this juncture, let me pay tribute to Mr. Jean-
Marie Guehenno and Dr. Peter Piot for their insightful
briefings this morning. We are happy to note the
commencement of cooperation between the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) in their
efforts to contain the spread of the HIV/AIDS
pandemic among United Nations peacekeepers.

During this period of unprecedented knowledge
and general development in medical science in the
world, we are convinced that the problems posed by
this disease can be successfully solved. In this regard
we must, first, open a new chapter in human history by
jointly fashioning an appropriate solution to this
devastating epidemic; and secondly, intensify
international cooperation and mobilize all segments of
society, including the private companies, which have
made some breakthroughs on certain drugs, to provide
such drugs at concessionary rates to the developing
countries.

In conclusion, let me say that there can be no
better farewell tribute to our friend Ambassador
Richard Holbrooke, through whose initiative the
narrow definition of security within the Security
Council was expanded to include the threat of
HIV/AIDS to global security. He brought the subject to
the front burner, albeit in terms of an African problem.
We know today that it is no longer an African problem
but a world problem, as its impact is being felt even in
the United States, as it is in all other parts of the world.
We would like to commend his courage and the
foresight of his colleagues in accepting his viewpoint at
the time. In his honour, this effort must be kept alive
until the war against HIV/AIDS is won.

