Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I,
too, would like to welcome you, Madam, to the
presidency. I also welcome the Liberian Foreign
Minister here today.

I also want to commend Ambassador Ayafor and
his team for presenting us with one of the most
comprehensive and useful reports we have seen in the
Council. They deserve our respect not only for the
thoroughness of their work, but also for their honesty
and integrity, particularly in the face of several
attempts by government officials in the region to
influence the outcome of the report. The methodology
of the report is highly professional and sound, with
good analysis, and the five detailed case studies are
especially informative.

In March of this year, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1343 (2001) to impose an arms
embargo, diamond ban and travel restrictions on senior
Liberian government officials. We took these steps
because we agreed that the policies and actions of
Liberian President Taylor and his Government were
causing widespread instability and violence in the
region. This continues to be the case, unfortunately,
despite some progress in the Mano River Union and the
welcome continuing efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States.

The Secretary-General's report of 5 October,
prepared by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, paints a bleak picture of the
economic and humanitarian situation in Liberia. The
fact that Liberia ranks 174th out of 175 countries on
the human development index is very troubling, but
equally troubling and saddening is the fact that
Liberia's neighbour, Sierra Leone, ranks 175th on the
same index.

The hardships now faced by the Liberian people
did not commence with the imposition of United
Nations sanctions this past March. They result from
years of war and the policies of the Taylor
Government. That, and not the imposition of sanctions,
is the reason why international assistance and donor
support for Liberia have declined.

We agree with calls for continued humanitarian
efforts and my Government provided almost $10
million in humanitarian assistance to the Liberian
people this year. But the situation in Liberia, as well as
in Sierra Leone and neighbouring States, will really
improve only when President Taylor stops all support
for the Revolutionary United Front, ceases the
exploitation of natural resources in Liberia and its
neighbours and focuses on policies truly designed to
help the Liberian people.

The Security Council has a responsibility to
address and alleviate the suffering of the people in
Liberia and Sierra Leone. My delegation believes that
continued targeted sanctions against the Taylor
Government promote progress in this regard by
encouraging an end to destructive policies in the
region, which are the real cause of the suffering there.

The report of the Panel of Experts on Liberia
proposes a series of recommendations for our
consideration. I hope that the sanctions Committee will
convene as soon as possible to review in detail the
many measures recommended. For now, let me say that
the United States believes that existing restrictions on
Liberian arms, diamonds and travel by senior Liberian
government officials should remain in place pending
further Council review when the mandate of resolution
1343 (2001) expires in May 2002. In addition, my
authorities support the extension of the Liberia Panel's
mandate for another six months so that Panel members
can return to the region to continue their important
work.

Before closing, I would like to ask Chairman
Ayafor and the Panel members two questions. First,
why are more non-governmental organizations not
involved in attempting to alleviate the suffering of the
Liberian people and why are United Nations agencies,
such as the United Nations Children's Fund and the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, not doing more to help? Secondly, what was
the humanitarian situation in Liberia before sanctions
were imposed in March of this year?

