Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I say, Sir, how good it is to see you in the presidency during what I think is your last month with us in the Council, so it is very nice to see you there. Let me also thank Special Representative Shearer for his briefing and all he has done. I would also like to thank Ms. Sunday for her very insightful briefing and her continued efforts to seek justice and accountability for women in South Sudan. It was an inspirational part of our recent visit to Juba to meet her and her fellow civil-society activists, and I am pleased to hear from her that the Council's interest then has helped her locally to open that space. Let me start, like others, by welcoming the very positive news of the decision of the South Sudanese parties to form the Transitional Government of National Unity. The people of South Sudan have long awaited this important step, and the people of the United Kingdom join them in celebrating that important progress. Let me therefore salute the leadership shown by President Kiir and First Vice-President Machar in making the necessary compromises, including on the number and composition of states in particular. Putting the people of South Sudan first is what matters and is their test of leadership. Let me also praise the role of the region in the efforts to bring the parties together. I agree wholeheartedly with the Special Representative of the Secretary- General on the important unity shown and efforts made by the subregion and beyond. Thanks are due widely, as he said, reflecting the wide concern and interest of the international community. However, he left out oneperson, so I wish to thank him personally for all that he has done. But let me also echo Special Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer's words of caution. It is really important that the dividends of this progress be felt by the wider population. That has not yet happened. Our focus remains on helping the people of South Sudan to lead their lives free from hunger, violence and fear. Only through the genuine implementation of the commitments made by all sides will South Sudan move forward. Let us not forget that this conflict has killed nearly 400,000 people; left 7.5 million people in need of humanitarian assistance; and has seen sexual and gender-based violence used as a weapon of war, more than 4 million people displaced and some 6.5 million people at risk of acute food insecurity. The United Kingdom will continue to stand by South Sudan and its people in this endeavour. We remain one of the largest humanitarian donors. Last year the United Kingdom gave more than $220 million in humanitarian assistance to South Sudan. As I have said, recent steps are only the start of the next phase of delivering change for the people of South Sudan. Our hope is that this spirit of compromise will continue and swift progress will be made to address the many challenges ahead. Most immediately, we need to see the timely formation of an inclusive Government, with positions and portfolios allocated. One very concrete step that could be taken would be to ensure the meaningful participation of women, as Ms. Sunday made clear, both in this Government and in South Sudan's future. In that regard, I would simply say that the 35 per cent quota should be the floor, not the ceiling. I welcome Ms. Sunday's comments in general, and I particularly agree with her that South Sudan's natural resource wealth should be used in support of its people, including girls' education as a priority. The tasks that should have been completed during the pre-transition phase must now be addressed. That includes with regard to unifying forces and cantonment. Partial implementation would bring new security challenges, which must not happen. We would like to see full transparency in that regard, including concerning funds that have already been disbursed. Efforts to address the increasing levels of intercommunal violence and immediate steps to tackle the humanitarian situation would show the Government prioritizing its people. The Council must remain alert to the risks. History has shown that the violence in South Sudan can rapidly escalate. In addition to the sustained commitment of the new Government, we therefore believe that the international efforts that we have recently seen reap such benefits and dividends must remain present with South Sudan in order to provide a conducive environment for sustainable peace. As part of that, we believe that it is important to maintain the sanctions regime to discourage any potential spoilers of the peace, as well as the arms embargo, which exists for the protection of the people of South Sudan. Necessary exemptions must of course be applied in the correct way. The Security Council has stood with South Sudan over the past years and months. It has been a very difficult time but the strong interest and focus, including our recent visit, have been important elements in support of peace. As a Council, we need to maintain that interest and focus. On the Security Council visit, I vividly recall the words of one of the representatives of civil society whom we met regarding South Sudan's parties. The representative said: "When they are united, they loot us. When they are divided, they kill us. It is better that they are united." The people of South Sudan deserve a world in which they are not in danger and in which they are able to fulfil their potential and live their lives to the fullest. As we say for all on the planet, let no one be left behind. The President and Vice-President have shown leadership to reach this point. True leadership means being able to make compromises for the good of their people. I applaud them for that. But this is just the beginning. We need them and all South Sudanese politicians to demonstrate true leadership now. The hard work is just starting.
