Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Foreign Minister
of Japan for having travelled to New York to preside
over today's meeting. I would like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his statement. I welcome
Foreign Minister Rassoul of Afghanistan, the Minister
of Defence of Sierra Leone, the Minister of Justice of
Timor-Leste and the Managing Director of the World
Bank and thank them for their statements. I would also
like to welcome the presence of the Foreign Minister of
Bosnia and Herzegovina at this meeting.

For some 12 years, the United Nations has
actively contributed to post-conflict peacebuilding in
the countries and regions concerned. It has achieved
evident results and accumulated rich experience. Since
the Security Council first discussed the issue of a
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy in 2001, the
international community has increasingly
acknowledged that peacebuilding is a complex
systemic project that involves the political, security,
economic and social spheres, as well as many others,
and that only a comprehensive strategy can produce
effective results. Here, I wish to make the following
points.

First, in promoting and implementing a
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy, it is necessary
to genuinely respect the ownership of the relevant
country. As the party shouldering the primary
responsibility for peacebuilding in its own country, the
country concerned is not only the recipient of
assistance, but also an equal partner with the donors in
dialogue and cooperation, and its voice should be fully
heard and heeded in setting priority areas of assistance.

The international community should take into full
consideration the priorities set by the country
concerned and formulate a corresponding
peacebuilding strategy based on the situation on the
ground. There can be no uniform norms for
peacebuilding, and donors should not impose their own
standards on a recipient country. In implementing a
peacebuilding strategy, attention should be paid to
capacity-building and personnel training in the country
concerned and to fully utilizing that country's available
human resources and expertise.
Secondly, in promoting and implementing a
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy, it is necessary
to coordinate peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts. The Security Council should
invest more energy in preventive diplomacy so as to
prevent the outbreak of conflicts in order to reduce the
need for peacekeeping operations and post-conflict
reconstruction. To secure a smooth transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding, the Security Council
should consider peacebuilding issues as soon as it
deploys a peacekeeping operation. At the same time,
the division of labour between a peacekeeping
operation and peacebuilding should be clear so as to
avoid duplication of effort.

Thirdly, in promoting and implementing a
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy, more attention
should be paid to addressing the root causes of
conflicts, in particular economic and social
development. This year marks the tenth anniversary of
the establishment and implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by the United
Nations. Judging from the current situation, achieving
the MDGs is still a difficult task for many countries
emerging from conflict: instead of seeing their
economies improve, they find themselves lagging
further behind other countries. That poses a new
challenge in our peacebuilding efforts. In discussing
comprehensive peacebuilding strategies, we should
address not only security sector reform, justice and the
rule of law, but also development. Only by helping
countries emerging from conflict achieve sustainable
development as soon as possible so that their
populations can enjoy the peace dividend can we
provide a solid political basis for peace processes.

Fourthly, in promoting and implementing a
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy, coordination
between multilateral institutions and donor countries
must be strengthened. The United Nations should build
stable cooperative relations with the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund and other international
partners so as to effectively integrate the resources of
all players. The relevant United Nations organs, such
as the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, should clarify their
division of labour and strengthen cooperation. As an
important body of the United Nations system
responsible for post-conflict peacebuilding, the
Peacebuilding Commission should play a greater role
in coordinating the international community's
peacebuilding efforts.

The Chinese delegation supports the adoption of
the draft presidential statement at the end of this open
debate, and I wish to thank the Permanent Mission of
Japan for the efforts that it has made in that regard.

