Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
thank the United States for introducing resolution
2396 (2017). We welcome its unanimous adoption
and recognize the new obligations that it creates.
We are pleased to have been a sponsor. We hope that
the implementation of the resolution will make a
meaningful contribution to our common commitment
to impede, impair, isolate and incapacitate the threat
of foreign terrorist fighters. Ensuring that States
cooperate in identifying suspected terrorist travel and
notify others when interventions are made is one of the
key deliverables of the resolutions.

We welcome the fact that the resolution underscores
that measures taken to counter terrorism need to comply
with international laws and that it so clearly underscores
the fact that respect for human rights, fundamental
freedoms and the rule of law is complementary and
mutually reinforcing with effective counter-terrorism
measures. Aggressive counter-terrorism operations
should not inadvertently fuel other conflicts and deepen
the disorder that terrorist actors so expertly exploit.
With this resolution, the Security Council is imploring
Member States to forcefully address the challenge of
foreign terrorist fighters in a way that builds resilience,
solidifies the rule of law and strengthens the legitimacy
of the State.

During the negotiations, we insisted on the need
to balance necessary security measures with preventive
action. We welcome the international momentum in
that regard. A range of United Nations agencies and
programmes are taking the lead in creating interventions
aimed at tackling the underlying causes. The Secretary-
General has spearheaded the Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism and the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy gives a clear mandate to
address the conditions conducive to terrorism.

Some 300 Swedish citizens have joined various
terrorist movements in Syria and Iraq. Preventing
future radicalization to violent extremism is now a
Government priority, with the backing of all major
political parties. Our long-term view of that challenge
has led us to create a national centre for the prevention
of violent extremism, and we urge others to think in
similar terms.

Since the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), many
States, including Sweden, have criminalized terrorist
travel. Today's resolution emphasizes that obligation,
while also recognizing that the threat has evolved.
Children travelling with foreign terrorist fighters cannot
be doubly victimized when they return to their home
country. It is reassuring to note that the new mandate
given this week to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate includes, for the first time, the
rights of children in its operative paragraphs.

Earlier this year, the Secretary-General told the
General Assembly that:

"As soon as we begin believing that violations
of human rights and democratic freedoms are
necessary to win the fight, we might as well have
lost the war" (A/72/PV3, 17.2).

For that reason, in all measures to combat terrorism,
States must comply with their obligations under
international law, in particular international human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law, as well as the principle of the rule
of law.

