Ms. Coninsx: I thank the Italian presidency for
supporting the inclusion of this topic on the Security
Council's agenda and for inviting the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) to
address the Council. I am very honoured to address the
Council for the first time on such an urgent threat to
international peace and security.

I would like to begin by joining the Council and
the Secretary-General in condemning, in the strongest
terms, the heinous and cowardly terrorist attack carried
out just a few days ago against a mosque in northern
Egypt, which resulted in the loss of more than 300
lives. On behalf of CTED, I wish to express my deepest
condolences to the families of the victims, not only
of the Egypt attack but also of the many other attacks
carried out in recent days, weeks and months in many

parts of the world.

As affirmed by the Council on numerous occasions,
all acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation. There can be no impunity
for such acts. In other words, impunity is not an option.

It is impossible to express the deep sorrow that
all of us at CTED feel at the continued senseless loss
of life caused by such acts. Despite recent successes,
including in the conflict zones of the Middle East, the
international community continues to face significant
challenges in its efforts to counter the global terrorist
threat. Perhaps nowhere is that more clearly illustrated
than in Member States' efforts to prevent and counter
the activities of foreign terrorist fighters, in accordance
with resolution 2178 (2014).

Over the past two years, the rate at which foreign
terrorist fighters have returned to their States of origin
or residence, or relocated to third States accelerated as
a consequence of the losses of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq, Syria and Libya. Over
roughly the same period, the percentage ofterrorist plots
resulting in fatalities increased significantly, owing in
part to the activities of returnees, but also to terrorists'
evolving methods, including the ways in which they
use information and communications technologies. Of
particular concern is the increasing trend of attacks
carried out by lone terrorists, who are often guided by
handlers located in other parts of the world.

Attacks by individuals inspired by ISIL and other
terrorist groups often require few resources, but can
have devastating consequences. Many recent attacks
that appear to have been inspired by ISIL, conducted
in its name or claimed by it were initially reported as
lone actor attacks. However, subsequent investigations
showed that those individuals received support or
resources from elsewhere, often via the Internet or
social media. Terrorists are also increasingly using new
technologies to transfer funds to such individuals.

Since its adoption in 2014, resolution 2178 (2014)
has been fundamental to the efforts of Members States
to address the foreign terrorist fighters threat. Member
States have made progress in many areas, but major
challenges remain. In other words, a great deal has been
done but we are not there yet. For example, fewer than
60 States have so far introduced measures requiring
airlines to provide advance passenger information.
That means that it remains very difficult for more
than 100 Member States to check for the possible
presence of foreign terrorist fighters on board aircraft
flying into, out of or transiting through their airports.
Many States require assistance in establishing the
necessary connectivity between national databases and
border posts.

States also continue to face legal challenges
relating to the transfer of data, the protection of data
privacy and the establishment of the necessary legal
and administrative frameworks. The creation of
an adequate legal and administrative framework is
indeed a precondition for the establishment of such
programmes, and many States will continue to require
guidance in that area. International cooperation
continues to be undermined by practical and political
challenges, as well as by inconsistent compliance with
human rights obligations.

States should also do more to upgrade and share
intelligence on foreign terrorist fighters and those who
return to their countries of origin or relocate to third
countries. Efforts to bring suspected foreign terrorist
fighters to justice continue to be undermined by the
difficulty of collecting sufficient admissible evidence
from conflict zones. Our assessment and analysis
show that very few States are able to do so effectively.
Member States also continue to face challenges
in implementing effective strategies to disrupt the
financing of returnees and small cells. Some have not
yet designated foreign terrorist fighters in their national
asset-freezing mechanisms. Many States will continue
to require assistance in the development of effective
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies,
as well as tailored approaches to deal with women and
children. We must therefore continue to work tirelessly
to build on the progress achieved since the adoption of
resolution 2178 (2014).

CTED's assessments and analysis show that
adoption of resolution 2178 (2014) has nonetheless
mobilized the international community. Member
States have introduced measures to strengthen their
border-screening processes for identifying foreign
terrorist fighters. The information gathered has placed
Governments in a better position to track the return of
nationals who have travelled to fight in conflict zones.
Many States have criminalized foreign terrorist fighter
travel, as well as the organization and financing of
terrorist groups and improved domestic inter-agency
information-sharing. Progress has also been made
in strengthening international judicial and law
enforcement cooperation. Central authorities for mutual
legal assistance and extradition have been established,
and 24/7 focal points on foreign terrorist fighter issues
have been appointed. Resolution 2178 (2014) also
underscores the need to engage local communities and
non-governmental actors in developing strategies to
counter violent extremism. It also encourages States to
address the conditions conducive to the spread of violent
extremism, including by empowering civil society.

CTED is engaged in a number ofinitiatives aimed at
strengthening Member States' efforts to counter violent
extremism, pursuant to resolution 2178 (2014) and other
relevant Council resolutions. Since the adoption of the
resolution, CTED has conducted 45 assessment visits,
the majority of them to States most affected by the
foreign terrorist fighters phenomenon. CTED has also
facilitated a number of hands-on activities to advance
the resolution's implementation and to identify common
challenges and gaps, emerging trends and appropriate
responses and solutions.

Pursuant to resolution 2178 (2014), CTED drafted
three analytical reports identifying gaps in Member
States' legalframeworks andinstitutionalandoperational
structures and proposing a set of recommendations on
ways to address those gaps. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee, with the support of CTED, has also approved
a set of guiding principles - the so-called Madrid
principles - which offer a holistic, forward-looking
approach to the implementation of flexible prosecution
strategies, combined with appropriate alternatives to
prosecution, including administrative measures and/or
reintegration and rehabilitation programmes, used in a
manner compliant with international human rights law
and national legislation and subject to effective review.
The principles also serve as a guide to the formulation
of national counter-terrorism policies and strategies.

CTED has also continued to work closely with its
partners to identify the core elements of an effective
approach to implementing resolution 2178 (2014),
as well as good practices. Those elements and good
practices have been incorporated into CTED's updated
technical guide to the implementation of that resolution
and other relevant resolutions.

Since the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014),
CTED has also facilitated and engaged in numerous
activities with its implementing partners to tackle
specific challenges associated with foreign terrorist
fighters. Those activities include the facilitation
of assistance delivery to highly affected countries
following visits by the Committee, as well as a number
of regional or global activities. They include a regional
programme with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) for the Maghreb countries; a
global programme with UNODC and the International
Association of Prosecutors on gathering digital
evidence; and a joint CTED/UNODC initiative aimed
at assisting Member States of the Lake Chad basin with
developing approaches to prosecuting, rehabilitating
and reintegrating persons associated with Boko Haram.

CTED has also continued to strengthen its
cooperation with INTERPOL, including on the use
of biometric data and the implementation of the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
traveller identification programme strategy, which
addresses biometric verification processes, quality
control, management of errors and exceptions, and
effective reading of biometric travel documents at
borders. CTED has also worked closely with ICAO to
develop an international standard requiring all ICAO
members to implement advance passagner information
systems and conducted deep-dive missions to high-
priority States funded by the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Centre, to advise their Governments on
the development of such systems. The effective
development and use of biometrics, advance passanger
information systems and passenger name records
systems remain key to the detection of foreign terrorist
fighters and returnees.

Ifwe are to continue making progress in promoting
and implementing the provisions of the resolutions, we
must continue to strengthen partnerships between and
among Member States, United Nations agencies and
partner organizations. Or, to put it another way - it
takes networks to beat networks.

As the Secretary-General noted earlier this month
in his London statement, to which Under-Secretary-
General Voronkov referred, there is an urgent need for
Governments and security agencies to collaborate far
more effectively in fighting terrorism while respecting
human rights. I wish to assure the Council that CTED
will continue to give its full support to the efforts of
the Council and the Committee in assisting Member
States to prevent and counter the activities of foreign
terrorist fighters and other terrorists, as well as bring
the perpetrators of terrorist acts to justice.

