Ms. Batista Diaz (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would like to thank Special
Representative Yamamoto and Ms. Samar for their
valuable briefings, and to welcome the Ambassador of
Afghanistan to this debate.

Events relating to the elections and the peace process
have dominated the political situation in Afghanistan.
In that regard, we welcomed the conclusion of the
parliamentary elections, which have enabled a new
Parliament to be inaugurated for the first time since 2011.
We hope that the instability resulting from the various
complaints and irregularities that were seen during the
elections will be overcome. It will be crucial to ensure
that the next elections are credible and legitimate and
that all stakeholders involved take to heart the lessons
learned during the parliamentary elections.

With regard to the security situation, we are
concerned about the increase in both the number of
victims of aerial and search operations and the use
of improvised explosive devices by anti-Government
elements. The announcements of offensive operations by
both the Government and the Taliban are also alarming.
We urge both the Government and the Taliban to
continue with initiatives such as the unilateral ceasefire
of last June, which raised hopes for peace among the
Afghan people, as well as the April consultations of
the loya jirga on peace, which laid a foundation for
peace talks without preconditions, a ceasefire, respect
for human rights and the right of women to participate
in the peace process, among other positive initiatives
establishing a road map for future negotiations.

We applaud the initiatives of international and
regional actors in calling for an intra-Afghan dialogue
and encourage the continuation of the talks that have
been held in Moscow, Doha, London and Washington,
in support of a process led and defined by the Afghans.
We also welcome the upcoming meetings in the context
of this process that are scheduled to take place shortly
in Germany.

We wish also to acknowledge the progress that has
been made in bolstering the level of participation of
women in the peace process, in particular the holding
of the national conference of Afghan women for
peace and the degree of participation of women in the
aforementioned loya jirga. We would like in particular
to underscore the holding of a separate loya jirga
in Shirzad district under the auspices of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, in which,
for the first time, women played an active role in a
jirga process in Afghanistan, leading to the adoption of
regulations on water distribution.

As the Permanent Representative of Germany
pointed out, also ofconcern is the humanitarian situation
resulting from the conflict and natural disasters. In
Afghanistan more than 10 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance, many of whom, like Tila, the
mother of four children and a widow, survive thanks to
the financial assistance provided by non-governmental
organizations in the field, as well as those who have left
their villages as a consequence of the conflict and the
severe drought.

We wish also to reiterate our deep concern about the
persistence of sexual violence against women and girls.
We urge the Afghan authorities to promote measures
that prohibit and punish these practices and to initiate
investigations into such cases, including those in which
the perpetrators are from the police or the military.

In conclusion, Afghanistan is at a critical juncture:
on the one hand, an electoral process and emerging peace
negotiations, and, on the other, a possible withdrawal of
troops and a worsening of the security situation.

All efforts must be deployed so that the Afghan
people can put an end to the instability and violence
to which they have subjected for years. It is our duty to
support them in this process, which must be Afghan-
led and feature the participation of all social actors,
especially women and young people.

