The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jonah (Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/l998/ 155, which contains the
text of a letter dated 20 February 1998 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its resolution 1132
(1997) of 8 October 1997, and the statements of its
President of 27 May 1997 (S/PRST/1997/29), 11 July
1997 (S/PRST/ 1997/36) and 6 August 1997
(S/PRST/ 1997/42), following the military coup d'etat
in Sierra Leone on 25 May 1997. It expresses its deep
regret at the violence, loss of life and property and
immense suffering undergone by the people of Sierra
Leone since the coup. It remains gravely concerned at
the continued violence in the country and calls for an
urgent end to the fighting.

"The Security Council welcomes the fact that the
rule of the military junta has been brought to an end,
and stresses the imperative need for the immediate
restoration of the democratically elected Government
of President Tejan Kabbah and a return to
constitutional order, in accordance with paragraph 1
of its resolution 1132 (1997).

"The Security Council encourages the earliest
possible return to Freetown by President Kabbah and
looks forward to his re-establishing a functioning
and autonomous government in the country.

"The Security Council expresses its readiness
to terminate the measures imposed by paragraphs 5
and 6 of its resolution 1132 (1997) as soon as the
conditions referred to in paragraph 1 of that
resolution have been fulfilled.

"The Security Council commends the important
role that the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) has continued to play towards the
peaceful resolution of this crisis. The Security
Council encourages the Military Observer Group of
ECOWAS (ECOMOG) to proceed in its efforts to
foster peace and stability in Sierra Leone, in
accordance with relevant provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations. It underlines the need for close
cooperation between the legitimate Government of
Sierra Leone, ECOWAS, and in particular its
Committee of Five Foreign Ministers on Sierra
Leone, ECOMOG commanders, the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General and his staff, United
Nations agencies and relevant international
organizations in their work, and specifically on the
development of a plan for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration into civilian life of
all combatants in Sierra Leone. In this context, it
supports the intention of the Secretary-General,
subject to security conditions on the ground, to take
rapid steps towards the reopening of the United
Nations Liaison Office in Freetown in order to
support the activities of his Special Envoy, and in
particular to assist national reconciliation and
political dialogue.

"The Security Council expresses the view that
the Conakry Agreement (S/ 1997/824, Annexes I and II) and the Abidjan Agreement (S/l996/1034)
provide important elements for a framework for
peace, stability and national reconciliation in Sierra
Leone. It calls upon all parties in Sierra Leone to
work towards these objectives through peaceful
means and political dialogue. In this regard, it

 

condemns all reprisal killings and related violence in
Sierra Leone and calls for an immediate end to such
acts.

"The Security Council looks forward to detailed
proposals by the Secretary-General concerning the role
of the United Nations and its future presence in Sierra
Leone. It requests the Secretary-General to establish a
Trust Fund to support such activities and calls on all
Member States to make early contributions to it.

"The Security Council welcomes the interim
report of the Inter-Agency Assessment Mission to
Sierra Leone of 10 February 1998 (S/l998/155) and
commends those Member States and international
organizations who have provided urgent humanitarian
assistance to Sierra Leone. It remains deeply
concerned about the serious and fragile humanitarian
situation in the country, and calls upon all States and
international organizations to provide further urgent
assistance to Sierra Leone and neighbouring countries
affected by the crisis. It calls on ECOMOG and all
those concerned to ensure safe and unrestricted
access to those in need.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
about the safety of all humanitarian personnel in
Sierra Leone, and condemns the taking of hostages
by former members of the deposed junta. It calls for
the immediate release of all international personnel
and others who have been detained or held hostage.
It commends ECOMOG for its efforts to liberate
those individuals being held against their will.

"The Security Council will remain seized of
this matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1998/5.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 4.40 pm.

