Mr. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines would like to begin
by fully aligning itself with essentially all of the
statements that have been made, in particular with the
statements delivered by our Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) colleagues - the Prime Minister of
Jamaica and the Ministers of Antigua and Barbuda, the
Bahamas and Barbados. Although the Foreign Minister
of Trinidad and Tobago has yet to speak, I am sure that
I can comfortably align myself with what he will say. I
would also like to endorse very strongly what was said
by the Foreign Minister of the Seychelles, particularly
in describing small island developing States (SIDS) as
essentially large ocean developing States that extend
beyond the rocks upon which we live.

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines applauds New
Zealand for its decision to focus the attention of the
Security Council on the peace and security challenges
facing small island developing States. New Zealand is
an island State, surrounded by small island developing
States, and it has demonstrated strong understanding
and commitment to the specificities and challenges
confronting SIDS.
I would like to commend you as well, Mr. Minister,
for your own display of stamina today, as we have
worked through the luncheon interval - a threat to
your own food security. I see that the faces around the
table have all changed except for yours, and I salute
your stamina in that regard. New Zealand's use of its
tenure as President of the Security Council to highlight
SIDS is of particular importance, given the Council's
historical indifference, even antipathy at times, to small
island States and our peace and security challenges.
While the Council has from time to time pronounced
itself, at various levels, on matters involving SIDS, it
is nonetheless true to say that small island developing
States, our issues and perspectives have been, by and
large, excluded from serious and sustained consideration
by the Security Council.

Within the Caribbean region - with the exception
of Haiti, which has benefited from missions and
multilateral engagement by this organ - the Council
has only occasionally become engaged when hegemonic
dramas have been enacted on island stages, as in the case
of the 1983 invasion of Grenada or the Cuban missile
crisis. However, other significant incidents - ranging
from election violence in one CARICOM. State,
which claimed over 800 lives in the 1980s, to
Hurricane Ivan's 2004 multi-island swath of death and
destruction - many episodes have come and gone with
barely an acknowledgement from the Council. To date,
the Council remains silent on the obvious threat to
peace and security posed by the Dominican Republic's
decision to forcibly expel thousands of individuals born
within its borders. Except in those rare instances when
an island happens to be the fulcrum upon which global
Powers balance, we are ignored.

Indeed, one of the most compelling arguments
in support of a comprehensive reform of the Council
is its demonstrated failure to adapt to a world where
SIDS are significant multilateral actors with unique
perspectives and issues that merit consideration at all
levels of diplomacy. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
has put its name forward as a candidate for the Council
for the 2020-2021 period, because we believe that we
have practical lessons and perspectives to share in
contributing to peace and societal harmony without
a surfeit of cash or weapons to throw at potential
problems. We are candidates also because, in the
history of the United Nations, only eight small island
developing States have ever served on the Security
Council; because only three of the 14 CARICOM
States have ever brought their perspectives to bear as
members of the Council; and because a full 40 per cent
of the countries that have never served on the Council
are small island developing States. The result is that, in
the great majority of cases, even during the few times
that the Council formally considers a small island
developing State, there are no small island developing
States on the Council to add context and perspective to
the deliberations.

The special threats to peace and security in SIDS and
their solutions must be understood through the prisms
of size, openness and exogenous influence. Hurricane
Ivan was a localized disaster in the United States, but
a national disaster in Jamaica, Cuba, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, and Grenada. Flash flooding such
as the type that occurred in the eastern Caribbean in
2013 was relatively brief and isolated, but caused death,
damage and instability in Saint Lucia, Dominica and
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines damage from
which we are still recovering. As has already been said
today, climate change is obviously a threat, but it is not
simply a multiplier of threats to peace and security. It is
a grave and destabilizing threat in and of itself.

 

A relatively small, poorly armed gang of thugs in
a large developed country may present a localized or
municipal law-enforcement challenge. In a small island
developing State, that same gang's power is multiplied
exponentially, and its potential to destabilize a society is
immense, particularly in States with modestly equipped,
unarmed constabularies with limited experience in
thwarting transnational crime. In addition, unlike most
of the challenges confronted by the Council, SIDS are
probably unique in being beset by largely exogenous
threats. The causes of climate change, transnational
crime, illicit small arms trafficking, resource theft,
cross-border threats and global financial instability are
all beyond our borders. That is an important factor in
the Council's consideration of the recommendations
and measures available to maintain peace and preserve
security on behalf of SIDS.

As we speak, almost half of the countries of the
Caribbean Community are either participating in or have
recently emerged from painful, externally orchestrated
structural adjustment programmes. Collectively, we are
one of the most heavily indebted regions in the world,
with high rates of unemployment, particularly among
our youth. In the aftermath of the global economic and

financial crisis, our rates of economic growth have
been anaemic at best.
The combustible post-crisis mix of low growth,
youth unemployment and fiscal straitj ackets has already
fuelled global unrest and instability elsewhere, with
tremendous negative consequences for international
peace and security. SIDS are not immune from that
threat. Indeed, the apparent belief that the instability
besetting other regions will somehow bypass SIDS is
rooted in wishful thinking, neglect and a misplaced
faith in the stereotype of islands as paradises populated
by carefree carousers. However, that stereotype is
belied by facts rooted in low growth, high debt, high
unemployment, high murder rates and a lack of fiscal
or policy space to engage in transformative social
investments. Those facts point to a different and likely
outcome of continued multilateral neglect.

The Council's mandate is not simply to restore
international peace and security, but to maintain it
and to prevent instability, through both military and
non-military means. Today's open debate must serve as
a wake-up call for a Security Council that all too often
has turned its back on the needs and views of SIDS. The
Council must formally determine that climate change,
transnational crime, non-State actors and economic
strangulation pose special and specific threats to
peace and security among small island developing
States. It must then consider which recommendations
and measures are within the scope of its powers. At
a minimum, they must encompass restraints on the
actions of external State actors and empower SIDS,
at an economic and policy level, to confront internal
challenges effectively, all the while fully taking on
board the Bahamas' very correct caution against the
Council usurping the role or authority of existing
multilateral bodies that are grappling with those issues
in an inclusive and transparent manner.

These issues and those delineated by those who
have spoken before me are not academic, nor are
they theoretical exercises in divining a laundry list
of potential challenges on some distant horizon. They
are real, existing and intensifying threats to our peace
and security. Our challenges, however, are neither
intractable nor insurmountable. They are imminently
solvable. Yet all that is needed for those multifaceted
threats to become complex and contagious sources of
global instability is the inaction of powerful multilateral
partners. Today there are over 50 countries, with over
50 million people, that are expecting the Council to
fulfil the letter and the spirit of its Charter obligations.
Please do not let us down.

