Mr. Amin (Bangladesh): We are outraged. We are
outraged to learn once again about crimes of genocide
and crimes against humanity committed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We read the
Secretary-General's ninth report - for which we are
grateful to him - under the heading "Territory
controlled by the Front de liberation du Congo":

"There have also been extremely disturbing
reports about the situation in Aru, Ituri Province,
where some 750 civilians have reportedly been
massacred within a six-week period".
(S/2001/970, para. 50)

The report continues, in paragraph 51, concerning
"Territory controlled by the Rassemblement congolais
pour la de'mocratie":

"In the eastern provinces, reports have been
received that RCD authorities continue to
intimidate and harass human rights activists and
to make arbitrary arrests".

We are also told about forced recruitment of
young men into the army. We are told about systematic
rape, ethnically motivated killing and targeting of
refugees and internally displaced persons, and in
paragraph 52 we read:

"In North and South Kivu Provinces, the
Mayi-Mayi, Interahamwe and the Banyamulenge
security forces have reportedly conducted a reign
of terror and brutal repression, as well as
massacres against sympathizers or even persons
suspected of sympathizing with opposing camps".
It is time we put an end to impunity for such
gruesome crimes. We ask for an international inquiry
into these acts and practices.

As for the Government-controlled territory, we
note with appreciation that the Secretary-General
reports in paragraph 45:

"The Government has made some progress
in establishing human rights laws and standards".

But the Secretary-General also tells us of gross
violations of civil and political rights and of other
violations of fundamental freedoms and human rights.

It is appropriate that we have the honour of
welcoming the Foreign Minister of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to join us in our deliberations.
Council members, the broader United Nations
membership and the audience would certainly like to
hear from him about the allegations of serious human
rights violations recorded in the Secretary-General's
report.

I join previous speakers in extending a very warm
welcome to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ngongi. We are grateful for his
contribution to our discussion on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo at the meeting with
the troop-contributing countries, in our informal
consultations yesterday and at today's public meeting.
He bears the flag of the United Nations in this
embattled country.

I shall limit my statement to a few areas,
beginning with disengagement and redeployment of
forces. For completing the verification of 95 out of 96
new defensive positions, MONUC deserves our
appreciation. It has accomplished an important part of
its mandate, and we salute the leadership. We call on
the Government, the Mouvement pour la liberation du
Congo (MLC), the FLC and the RCD to extend full
cooperation to MONUC in resolving outstanding issues
with regard to the remaining positions.

Secondly, as regards the withdrawal of armed
forces, ironically, Namibia, an ally of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo which went to that country in
aid of a legitimate Government, has given an example
by withdrawing its forces completely. Others should
have withdrawn much earlier, although we welcome
the withdrawal, however partial it is, of the Ugandan
People's Defence Force (UPDF) from the Equateur
Province. We encourage it to withdraw completely
from the sovereign territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, pursuant to the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and to Uganda's
own commitment in the Lusaka Agreement.

The continued presence of the Rwandan Patriotic
Army (RPA), reportedly totalling about 40,000 troops,
is a matter of grave concern. They, in particular, and all
other foreign forces, should withdraw from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - again, as per
their own commitment to, and in compliance with, the
Council's persistent demands.

The Political Committee, we are told, criticizes
the United Nations for its so-called hesitancy in
deploying MONUC. We would like to hear the
comments of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Ngongi, in this regard, and in the
contexts I have outlined.

Thirdly, on the subject of the demilitarization of
Kisangani, it is regrettable that the RCD continues to
occupy it and its environs in defiance of Council
resolutions demanding the immediate demilitarization
of the city and its environs. The RCD's excuse was the
threat of the Mayi-Mayi and the Forces armees
congolaises (FAC). But Kinshasa made it clear that it
had no intention of occupying Kisangani. We would
welcome a firm commitment of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in this regard,
simply to deny any excuse for the continued occupation
of Kisangani. We shall put our confidence in Mr.
Ngongi in negotiating the evacuation of Kisangani and
its environs by the RCD. The Council, as he knows,
remains committed to authorize deployment of
MONUC in the city. In fact, the authorization is
already there. This should respond to any security
apprehensions on the part of the civilians.

Fourthly, as regards cooperation with the
Mission, we welcome two positive developments. First,
as the Secretary-General states in his report, the parties
continue to provide satisfactory security for MONUC
military and civilian personnel. Local populations have
welcomed them in each area of deployment. Secondly,
the negative information campaign against MONUC
seems, happily, to have ceased. The Congolese
Government, the people of the Congo and the armed
groups deserve our appreciation for the cooperative
attitude shown thus far, and we encourage them to
continue in this spirit.

The fifth area is the inter-Congolese dialogue,
where the setback is discouraging, as has been said. We
have noted the Government's position, as explained in
the long letter from the Permanent Representative of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and as
elaborated by the Foreign Minister this morning.

Clearly, no one wants to see a repeat of the myth
of Sisyphus here. The inter-Congolese dialogue is far
too important an aspect of the Lusaka peace process.
The quick response and the generous offer of the
Government of South Africa for an orderly resumption
of the dialogue deserve our very high appreciation. We
urge all Congolese parties to demonstrate pragmatism,
patriotism and commitment to national reconciliation.
There are lessons, we are always told, to be learned
from history - from the history of the Congo itself.

Finally, on the question of entry into the third
phase of MONUC's deployment, Bangladesh has
always pleaded for a substantive engagement of the
United Nations in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo commensurate with the dimensions and
complexity of the conflict. We also call for early entry
into phase III of MONUC's deployment. In that spirit,
we support the recommendation of the Secretary-
General and the concept of operations he has outlined.
However, the Lusaka parties have to extend their
cooperation and create the environment that permits
deployment in Kindu.

In this regard, we look forward to concrete
commitment from the Lusaka signatories when the
Council meets them, hopefully in the middle of next
month.

