Mr. Diab (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting at a moment of grave and
fateful consequence. The weeks - indeed, the days -
to come would seem to be crucial in defining the
course of events and determining the fate of peace and
security in our Arab region. The security, integrity,
pride, dignity and welfare of its people are of
paramount importance to us.

The discussions of the Security Council have
proven the value of the work undertaken by the United
Nations inspectors. The inspectors' reports have
provided no evidence of the presence of weapons of
mass destruction in Iraq. Therefore, any party of good
faith cannot but agree to give the United Nations
inspectors adequate time to fulfil their mandate under
Security Council resolution 1441 (2002). The
completion of that process is the only viable option in
conformity with international legitimacy and the
imperatives of international law, and stands in stark
contrast to the course of war. Indeed, the overwhelming
majority of Member States advocate a peaceful
settlement of the crisis.

In the past, Iraq has been forthcoming in its
response to the demands of the international
community for the readmission of United Nations
inspectors. The most recent briefings by Mr. ElBaradei
and Mr. Blix have revealed clear progress in the
inspection process in many spheres, thanks to Iraq's
cooperation with the inspectors. Let me cite a few
examples, without being exhaustive: the additional
documents provided by Iraq on 8 and 9 February; the
establishment by Iraq of two commissions entrusted
with detecting any prohibited materials and armaments
and with providing the papers documenting their
disposal; Iraq's acceptance of private interviews with
Iraqi scientists and technicians and its provision of
additional lists of such personnel; Iraq's acceptance of
flights of U-2 surveillance and other aircraft over its
territory; and Iraq's enactment of a legislative decree
prohibiting the import and manufacture of weapons of
mass destruction, pursuant to relevant Security Council
resolutions.

While we recognize Iraq's cooperation with the
international inspectors, we call upon it nonetheless to
cooperate proactively and to build mutual trust with
them so that they may fulfil their mandate on behalf of
the Security Council. There is no doubt that Iraq's
ongoing proactive cooperation will ensure, as Mr.
ElBaradei has said, the high-level guarantees
demanded by the Security Council.

We cannot but note with deep regret the
application of unequal standards, especially in regard
to the monitoring and disarming of Israel's nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons of mass destruction,
which Israel refuses to subject to any inspections
system. We therefore call on the Security Council to
ensure the removal of Israeli weapons of mass
destruction, which pose a serious threat to the Arab
collective security system and international peace and
security. Their elimination would be prelude to turning
the entire Middle East into a zone free from nuclear
weapons and weapons of mass destruction, as set out in
Security Council resolution 687 (1991).

In this regard, we were encouraged by Mr.
ElBaradei's words in his briefing last Friday to the
effect that the existence of an invasive verification
system of the International Atomic Energy Agency that
would help the Agency to assess the existence or non-
existence of a nuclear armament programme in any
State would be possible even in the absence of full
cooperation on the part of the State concerned.

The Arab summit held in Beirut last March
contributed to the restoration of confidence between
Iraq and Kuwait. At that summit, the Republic of Iraq
gave assurances of its commitment to respecting the
independence, sovereignty, security, territorial integrity
and unity of Kuwait by avoiding any action similar to
the events of 1990. These affirmations were warmly
welcomed at the international level and constituted a
preliminary step towards Iraq's cooperation in an
expeditious and final settlement of the question of
Kuwaiti prisoners and the return of Kuwaiti property,
pursuant to the relevant Security Council resolutions.

The prevention of war against Iraq does not, of
course, mean preserving the status quo in the situation
between it and Kuwait. Instead, we must be committed
to revitalizing the resolutions adopted at the Beirut
summit in all their aspects so that a comprehensive
solution can be reached between those two States,
whose sovereignty and territorial integrity we wish to
see preserved, along with the welfare of their people.

The unilateral launching of war against Iraq
would represent a departure from United Nations
resolutions, a contravention of international legality
and an end to the existing world order, which has
guaranteed international peace and security since the
Second World War. The consequences of a war against
Iraq would not be limited to its people and its territorial
integrity. Rather, there would be consequences at the
political, economic, social and humanitarian levels in
all Arab States, which have continued to suffer as a
result of wars, because of continued Israeli occupation
of Arab territories and the racist policies pursued by
Israel against the Palestinian people.

The dividing line between the option of war and
peace is the Charter. The Secretary-General has always
reminded us of the need to be guided by the Charter in
seeking all resolutions to conflict. In defining its
option, the Security Council must be guided by the will
of the majority of the Member States, in keeping with
the purposes and principles of the Charter, in order to
maintain international peace and security and avoid
war and its potential tragic consequences, from which
the world could be spared.

