Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I want to thank Mark Lowcock and Jeffrey Feltman
for their very clear briefings.

I would like today to focus my remarks on our
shared road map, namely, the full implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018), which we adopted unanimously
last Saturday (see S/PV. 8188). On behalf of France, I
would like to express three main messages today.

My first message is that we must not pay lip service.
The situation on the ground remains dramatic and has
not improved in recent days. Since the adoption of
resolution 2401 (2018), the offensive against the eastern
Ghouta has continued relentlessly. France, of course,
strongly condemns these indiscriminate bombings,
which affect inhabited areas and civil infrastructure.
In this context, the disastrous humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate. No United Nations convoy has
been able to reach the eastern Ghouta or any of the other
besieged areas, no emergency medical evacuation has
been carried out, no siege has been lifted. The Syrian
regime is maintaining its stranglehold on the civilian
population and is methodically pursuing its policy of
destruction. More than 400,000 people remain under
siege in eastern Ghouta, including 130,000 children.
The demand sent by the United Nations to authorize
a priority convoy for Duma, the main city in eastern
Ghouta, has not received any response from the Syrian
authorities to date.

My secondmessage is this. The resolution adoptedby
the Security Council on 24 February makes very specific
demands on the parties. Hostilities must cease without
delay in order to establish a lasting humanitarian truce
for at least 30 days, in order to allow both the delivery
of humanitarian aid and the evacuation of the wounded
and sick. Let me stress this point. These demands are

perfectly clear and cannot be distorted or reinterpreted.
Contrary to what some would have us believe, the
demands made by the resolution are absolutely clear.
Our responsibility today is to implement, fully and in
their totality, the provisions that we have unanimously
adopted. If we do not that, what credibility can be given
to our commitments? What credibility can be given to
Security Council resolutions?

The United Nations and its partners tell us that they
are ready to deliver aid to the people of eastern Ghouta
and other priority areas. There is therefore not a minute
to lose because every minute that passes can turn lives
upside down.

At the conclusion of difficult negotiations, the
Council managed to unite in the face of the gravity of the
humanitarian situation and the escalation of the Syrian
conflict in recent months. We must now work together,
in the same spirit of unity, to effectively implement on
the ground the resolution we unanimously adopted.
This is my third message.

Following yesterday's meeting in Moscow with
French Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian and his
Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, France is putting
forward four concrete proposals for making progress
and for doing so without delay.

The first is to ensure that all parties implement
the cessation of hostilities that resolution 2401 (2018)
demands. I note that the three main opposition groups
present in eastern Ghouta as well as Nassar A1 Hariri,
head of the High Negotiations Committee of the Syrian
opposition, have written to the Secretary-General
and to the President of the Council to state that they
would respect the truce. It is therefore urgent in the
extreme - if I can put it that way - that the Damascus
regime also unambiguously express its willingness
to respect the Council resolution and to formalize it
in writing.

We have taken note of the Russian proposal of a
daily five-hour humanitarian truce. It is a positive
first step, but it is insufficient. We must go further.
Resolution 2401 (2018) demands of the parties a
minimum period of 30 consecutive days of cessation of
hostilities. Respecting that demand is non-negotiable.
That goal requires more than just symbolic declarations
or political posturing. At a minimum, it requires that
humanitarian personnel be allowed to do their work.
These workers are used to taking risks on a daily basis,
but the parties must allow them to do their work. Given
that the opposition groups have formally committed
to doing just that, the regime must do so as well, and
without delay. To that end, supporters of the regime,
beginning with Russia, must bring the necessary
pressure to bear.

Our second proposal, by way ofa demand, pertains
to the need to immediately open the relevant, clearly
identified checkpoints - beginning with Wafideen - in
order to allow the access of priority convoys of the
United Nations. We therefore demand that the Syrian
authorities submit without delay the necessary letter to
facilitate the deployment of humanitarian convoys.

Thirdly, it is extremely urgent to allow medical
evacuations for the most critical cases, giving priority
to children. The Syrian Arab Red Crescent indicates
that 1,065 people need emergency medical evacuations.
We have not a minute to lose.

Finally, France considers it essential to create a
monitoring mechanism to ensure the implementation
of resolution 2401 (2018) and compliance with the
resolution by the parties. We are working diligently to
establishing that mechanism now.

Those are the French proposals to address the urgent
need to put an end to the bombing and protect civilians,
who beyond resolution 2401 (2018), are protected under
international humanitarian law. It is also crucial to
intensify our efforts to reach a political solution in the
framework of the Geneva process and resolution 2254
(2015). It is the only way out ofthe conflict and the only
way to prevent a looming escalation of tensions. France
will not deviate from that path. The overall credibility
ofthe Security Council and the responsibility of each of
its members are crucially at stake today in the context
of the Syrian tragedy.

