Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to thank the Secretariat, and particularly
Mr. Michael Williams, for the briefing on the situation
in the Middle East. And I should like to take this
opportunity, at a time when he is leaving his post, to
thank Mr. Williams for his remarkable work over the
past few years and to wish him every success in his
new responsibilities.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made shortly by the representative of Portugal on
behalf of the European Union.

The Secretariat's briefing once again enables us
to assess the scope of the difficulties on the ground and
to see the absolute need to make immediate progress
towards a settlement.

Some reasons for hope have recently appeared.
However, in each of these cases, we must go much
further so that we can get past what the President of the
French Republic has called the hopeless feeling that
peace is not moving forward and even moving
backward in minds and hearts.

A first decisive element will be the capacity to
rebuild a strong Palestinian Authority and to reinforce
its authority. France will spare no effort in that regard
at the national level and within the framework of the
European Union. In particular, we will lend our full
support to the efforts of the new Quartet
Representative, Mr. Tony Blair.

But it is primarily through their own actions that
the two parties will create the conditions for a
solidification of the Palestinian Authority. The phased
Israeli measures to strengthen the Palestinian
Authority, taken at Sharm el-Sheikh on 25 June and
during the meetings in Jerusalem on 16 July and in
Jericho on 6 August, are thus in the right direction, and
France welcomes them. To meet the current challenges,
however, they must be broader.

Thus, at this juncture it is essential to remedy the
insecurity of the humanitarian situation in the
Palestinian territories, particularly in Gaza, where it
continues to deteriorate and where the economy is
close to collapse. It is urgent that concrete measures be
taken to make it possible to reopen the Karni terminal
and other crossing points to Gaza and the West Bank.
We also call once again on all actors on the ground to
respect international humanitarian law and to shoulder
their responsibility for the protection of civilians.

More generally speaking, more substantial
measures would establish the benchmarks for a
settlement by reinforcing the Palestinian Authority. In
particular, I am thinking of the release of a larger
number of prisoners, a lifting of the restrictions on
movement in the West Bank and even the dismantling
of unauthorized settlements and the halting of
settlement expansion.

For its part, the Palestinian Authority must show
that it is fully exercising its authority by mercilessly
combating terrorism and stepping up its efforts to
obtain the immediate release of Gilad Shalit. To that
end, France is counting on the efforts of President
Abbas, to whom we reaffirm our full support. The
appointment of Mr. Salam Fayyad to the post of Prime
Minister has opened a new chapter. Eventually, the
resumption of the inter-Palestinian dialogue will be
necessary to avoid a lasting rupture between Gaza and
the West Bank. France remains attached to Palestinian
unity and to the preservation of the institutions of the
Palestinian Authority.

Over and above that, it is crucial to immediately
re-launch a genuine momentum for peace leading to
the establishment of a Palestinian State. Indeed, it is
essential to give the peoples a political perspective.
Thus, France notes with interest the resumption of the
Israeli-Palestinian dialogue. We also consider the
holding of an international conference in the autumn to
be a positive element.

We must do everything possible to strengthen the
momentum that seems to be developing. The Quartet
must thus play its full role by supporting a solution
whose broad outlines we know: the establishment of an
independent, sovereign, democratic and viable
Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel in
peace and security. The Quartet meeting planned for
September will be an important opportunity to make
progress in that regard with the countries of the region,
particularly Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates, which have leading roles to play in
promoting peace in the Middle East.

Finally, France believes that if we make progress
towards an agreement, the international community,
and particularly the Security Council, must be prepared
to provide guarantees enabling both parties to have the
confidence necessary to implement a possible
agreement. Thus, France, convinced that peace will be
negotiated first between Israelis and Palestinians, is
resolved to take or support any useful initiative.

