Mr. Davies (South Africa): We thank the Special
Adviser and Head of the Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD),
Mr. Khan, for his informative briefing on the work
of the Team, and commend him and his team on the
progress achieved in their challenging task.

As experience has taught us in South Africa,
accountability, truth and justice are fundamentally
important to the process of healing. We therefore
welcome the important work that UNITAD is engaged
in, in line with resolution 2379 (2017), in supporting
Iraqi domestic efforts in seeking accountability for
the grave crimes committed by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in the country, as well as
its broader role in promoting accountability for ISIL/
Da'esh crimes internationally.

UNITAD's role as an impartial, independent and
credible body, operating within the Charter of the United
Nations, employing United Nations best practices,
in line with relevant international law, including
international human rights law, is vital in assisting the
uncovering of the atrocities that have been committed
and bringing their perpetrators to justice. UNITAD's
painstaking efforts to collect and preserve various
forms of evidence are particularly important, and it is
to be commended for the important progress that it has
made in that regard, under difficult circumstances.

South Africa notes with concern the recent report
ofthe Special Adviser (see S/2019/407), which indicates
that despite the setbacks that it has suffered, ISIL/
Da'esh remains a pervasive threat in Iraq. That threat
must be addressed, as the continued presence of ISIL
has ramifications, not only for the destabilization of
Iraq but also for the entire region. UNITAD's role is
invaluable in sending a clear and unequivocal message
that the international community, under the leadership
of the United Nations, will not sit idly by and allow the
barbaric crimes that were committed by ISIL/Da'esh to
go without accountability.

Allow me to conclude by reiterating South
Africa's support for the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI), whose important,
multifaceted work is providing hope in assisting the
rebuilding of Iraq and healing its wounds. We encourage
all stakeholders to continue to support and engage with
the efforts initiated by UNAMI to achieve effective
post-conflict reconstruction and sustainable peace in
Iraq, including by supporting the invaluable work that
UNITAD is doing in its respective role.

