Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we congratulate you, Mr. President, and your
team on your leadership and presidency in the month
of November. We welcome the convening of this public
wrap-up session, which is a working practice that we
would like to see continue.

Let me begin by mentioning some of the highlights
of our work in November. We will refer mainly to
the issue of sanctions. Chile welcomes the Australian
initiative to bring the issue of sanctions to the
attention of the Security Council, which allowed us
to reflect on and discuss elements for facilitating the
effective implementation of sanctions. We recognize
the specificity of each situation and each sanctions
committee, but if they are to be effective, we must
establish some harmonizing and common criteria to
facilitate the implementation of sanctions, bearing in
mind the different situations on the ground. We hope
that a consensus will be achieved on the draft resolution
proposed by Australia.

Moreover, we reiterate the importance of ensuring
due process. We value the attempts to make
improvements in the listing and de-listing of persons
and entities on the sanctions lists and the establishment
of the post of focal point in resolution 1730 (2006).
But that is not enough, and we therefore hope that we
can make progress on extending the mandate of the
Ombudsperson of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities to other
sanctions committees.

As Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Cote d'Ivoire, I had
the opportunity to lead the Committee's visit to that
country. That showed me how important field visits
are for obtaining a more complete and detailed view
of the situation in a country subject to sanctions by the
Security Council. We believe it is crucial to encourage
such missions in order to avoid gaps between what
is resolved in New York and what actually happens
on the ground. As only non-permanent members of
the Council assume responsibility for chairing such
subsidiary bodies for one or two years, a bigger budget
for such visits is advisable, so that more delegations
can participate in field visits. We reiterate that the
perspective gained by field visits is irreplaceable.

Another landmark area of work of the Security
Council this month was the briefing (S/PV.7317) and the
unanimous adoption ofresolution 2185 (2014) on the role
of police in peacekeeping and peacebuilding in post-
conflict situations. It allowed for an interesting debate
on how to support host States in reaching agreements
and overcoming conflicts. The format that was followed
generated an exchange of information that we consider
useful in the Council's work, as it provides first-hand
knowledge of the challenges, visions and fears ofpolice
forces in the field. We call, as the resolution indicates,
for such meetings to continue to be held in the future.

An analysis of this month's work would be
incomplete if it did not highlight the aspects that
we feel need improvement. It is essential that when
analysing the various situations under consideration by
the Security Council, we do so from a perspective that
considers the situation on the ground and recognize
the specificity of each subject based on its own merits,
thus preventing other agenda items from affecting the
relevant discussions.

With regard to issues that it seems appropriate to
follow-up in the future, it seems that the situation in
South Sudan is one of them. We welcome the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS), which will, among other
things, continue to provide protection to the civilian
population affected by that conflict. That is a document
that we support and welcome. However, we regret
that no concrete progress has been evident recently in
the implementation of the ceasefire agreement or in
reaching a political resolution of the serious situation
in the country. Of special concern are the worrying
signs that the fighting could begin again, at the end
of the rainy season, thereby aggravating the conflict
and deepening the already dire humanitarian crisis.
We acknowledge the efforts of UNMISS in fulfilling
its mandate to protect the civilian population, but we
would like to emphasize the obligation to respect the
inviolability of United Nations facilities.

In addition, the humanitarian situations in
several countries that have been considered this
month highlighted the importance of ensuring that
humanitarian workers and staff from the various
missions deployed are granted freedom of movement
and access to all areas needed to fulfil their mission, be
it humanitarian or for protection or verification.

Finally, we wish success to our colleagues in the
delegation of Chad, and we pledge our support to their
presidency in the month of December.

