Mr. Turner (United States of America): We appreciate today's briefing by Special Envoy Huang Xia on the latest developments in the region. Since we last met to discuss the situation in the Great Lakes region, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has continued to turn our world upside down. The Great Lakes region, which was in the midst of overcoming the second-most deadly Ebola epidemic in world history, is no different. Despite the obstacles to travel created by the pandemic, we are encouraged by the ongoing and constructive diplomatic efforts that continue to be made to address root causes of conflict in the region. October is an important month for the engagement of the United Nations in the Great Lakes region, with three prominent forthcoming reports - a United Nations regional strategy for the Great Lakes region, an assessment of the United Nations role in Burundi and a report on the exit strategy and the drawdown benchmarks for the United Nations Peacekeeping operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The United States looks forward to receiving those reportsand working with the United Nations to advance long- term stability and security in the region. The United States is pleased to see that Governments have already taken important steps to improve stability. A case in point: we commend the efforts of the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia, supported by the Southern African Development Community, towards work to address a long-standing border dispute. We also welcome reports of meetings between Rwandan and Burundian security officials, as well as continued progress to mediate disagreements between Uganda and Rwanda. This news bodes well for regional stability. At the same time, the United States is disappointed by reports of violations of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. The report of the Secretary- General (S/2020/951) includes many allegations of troops carrying out attacks and operations outside their borders, underscoring the need for all Governments to uphold their commitments under the Framework. Those incidents must stop, and those responsible must be held accountable. The United States calls on regional oversight mechanisms to address those violations in earnest and take steps to ensure that such violations no longer occur. We believe that Special Envoy Huang Xia and his team have a key role to play. Of particular importance, the United States commends the efforts of President Tshilombo Tshisekedi to energize regional reconciliation through a virtual eastern Congo summit. We hope that conversations like that one can maintain momentum for much-needed dialogue among Heads of State that can trickle down into concrete proposals for regional economic integration. We have a rare window of opportunity to work together to address long-standing issues that impact security for all Great Lakes countries. Governments of the region could build a different way of doing business by tackling the illicit flows of minerals that fund armed groups. This October also marks the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), which established the Security Council's women and peace and security agenda and recognized the important role women play in conflict prevention, resolution and recovery. We must continue to support women as drivers of social and economic recovery and put in place the building blocks for them to contribute fully and meaningfully. The United States is very concerned by reports of wide-spread sexual exploitation and abuse by personnel who claim to be employed by international organizations and private relief agencies as part of the Ebola response. We urge the organizations and agencies involved to ensure that their recently announced investigations are thorough and conclude in a timely manner, with appropriate steps taken to address the situation in a survivor-centred manner. Finally, the role of Special Envoy Huang Xia is more critical than ever. We urge his Office to innovate, including by using video-teleconferencing technology to support Governments in continuing the conversations they have started. There are a number of important regional conversations under way that will need his constant support.
