Mr. Thornberry (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to commend the initiative of the
presidency of the Security Council to convene this
open debate on the situation in Haiti. We also welcome
the presence of the Acting Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Mr. Nigel Fisher, and
thank him for introducing the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Haiti (S/2013/139).

Peru wishes to continue to cooperate in order to
achieve security, stability, sustainable development and
institution-building in Haiti. My country has therefore
actively participated in the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) since 2004, with a
military contingent consisting of 366 soldiers and
military officers in the general staff of the Mission.
Similarly, Peru is a member of the Group of Friends
of Haiti, the Ad Hoc Advisory Group for Haiti of the
Economic and Social Council, the Group of Friends of
Haiti of the Organization of American States and the
Latin American Political Coordination Mechanism for
Haiti.

Peru is convinced that there can be no sustainable
social and economic development without strong
institutions that promote and sustain that development.
We also reaffirm the validity of the principle ofnational
ownership, whereby the Haitian Government itself must
lead the process to consolidate its national institutions,
strengthen the rule of law, consolidate democracy
and build capacity. In that regard, we believe that the
work of MINUSTAH remains essential to providing
the Haitian authorities with the security and support
necessary to facilitate that process, in accordance with
national strategies and priorities set out by them.

In that context, my delegation wishes to draw the
attention of the Security Council to two aspects of the
report of the Secretary-General that Peru considers
to be of paramount importance. The first is the need
for continued support to the Haitian authorities in
establishing and strengthening strong public institutions
that allow the problems currently facing the country
to be addressed effectively. The second is the plan to
reconfigure and strengthen MINUSTAH on the basis
of the existing conditions in Haiti and the needs of the
Haitian people.

As has already been noted by speakers who
preceded me, in particular the representative ofUruguay
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti - whose
statement Peru endorses - we agree that the work of
MINUSTAH in ensuring the stability and security of
Haiti has been essential to the achievement of significant
progress in strengthening the democratic institions and
the rule of law in Haiti. However, we are also aware that
the stability achieved is an opportunity that should be
used to achieve a political agreement that would ensure
the governability of the country in the long term. In
that regard, recognizing the democratic aspirations of
the Haitian people, my delegation calls on all political
forces in Haiti to reach the agreements necessary
to lay the foundations of the basic institutions for
strengthening democracy in Haiti. We therefore hope
for the early establishment of the permanent electoral
council, the body responsible for ensuring that the
elections are conducted transparently, democratically
and credibly, while highlighting the significant support
that MINUSTAH has been providing in the area of
electoral assistance.
The progress registered by MINUSTAH in
stabilizing Haiti in recent years allows us to look
optimistically to the future. We therefore believe that
the time has come to launch a process of gradual and
orderly transition to a second phase of cooperation of
the United Nations system for Haiti. In that respect, we
welcome the development by the Secretary- General of a
reconfiguration and consolidation plan for MINUSTAH
to strengten the achievements made and to lay the
foundation for long-term development programmes.

In that regard, Peru believes it important that the
core objectives identified in the concise version of the
MINUSTAH consolidation plan annexed to the report of
the Secretary-General contain precise parameters and
indicators that will measure progress achieved by the
Haitian Government in areas crucial to strengthening
the institutions and democracy of the country.

I also wish to acknowledge the progress in
the institutionalization, professionalization and
strengthening of the Haitian National Police, which has
been playing a leading role in protecting and ensuring
the safety of its citizens, as demonstrated by the recent
transfer of security functions to the Police in four regions
of Haiti. In that regard, we welcome the adoption of
the five-year development plan for the Haitian National
Police for 2012-2016, which will in the near future
endow the Haitian Police with the personnel necessary
to maintain public order and security throughout the
country and a strong institutional structure aimed at
strengthening the rule of law and respect for human
rights.

It is clear that the cooperation of the United Nations
system with Haiti is not limited to the invaluable support
of MINUSTAH. Peru therefore believes that even
broader and better coordination is necessary between
MINUSTAH and the various agencies and programmes
of the United Nations system on the ground.

Finally, my delegation is of the View that the
significant achievements to date should not lull us into
the false belief that the task of the United Nations in
Haiti is complete, or close to being so. We therefore
call on States Members of the Organization and the
entire international community to continue their
support to Haiti, highlighting the three areas that have
a direct impact on the ongoing process of recovery and
reconstruction of that country, namely, governability,
security and development.

