Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda for their very useful reports (see S/2011/316 and S/2011/3l7) and for their briefings here today. I
should like especially to convey greetings to Judge
Byron, along with our thanks for his work. I also
warmly congratulate Judge Khalida Rachid Khan, to
whom we wish every success as she assumes the
functions of the presidency of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).

I wish to make four comments.

First, I welcome the recent arrests of Ratko
Mladic' and Bernard Munyagishari. The arrest of

Mladie - indicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for
genocide and crimes against humanities 4 is a

significant outcome of the cooperation of Serbia with
the ICTY and a positive step towards reconciliation in
the region, as well as towards the European
institutional perspective of Serbia and the other Balkan
States, as the Council promptly recognized.

We also welcome Serbia's declared intention to
continue the search for Goran HadZic', the remaining
person indicted by the ICTY who is still at large, on the
same day that Bernard Munyagishari was arrested. He
is accused of crimes against humanity during the 1994
conflict in Rwanda. He was captured after 17 years,
through cooperation between the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. He should
be brought before the ICTR, as should all those who
are still fugitives.
Cooperation with the Tribunals is indeed most
crucial to conclude their work. We note other
developments in that regard reported by the
Prosecutors, and their efforts, in cooperation with
national authorities, to detain those still at large, who
must be brought to trial, as well as to provide access to
documents identified as necessary for their
investigation. We welcome the efforts undertaken in
the region by national authorities, as reported, and
encourage all further possible efforts by those
authorities to respond to the Prosecutors' and
Tribunals ' requests.

Secondly, I wish to commend the efforts put
forward by the Tribunals in keeping as much as
possible with the schedule of case work. In our View, it
is important that the Tribunals are able to avoid
significant slippage in their work in order to conclude
the cases within the timeframe established, while
making sure that the highest international standards of
due process are preserved. On the other side, it is vital
that all administrative obstacles hampering the
Tribunals' work - namely, in the field of human
resources - are rapidly and effectively removed.
Portugal underlines the assessments of the Presidents
of the Tribunals and will endeavour - in the Council,
in the Informal Working Group and in the General
Assembly - to support the appropriate measures, as
identified, to facilitate their work, stressing the need
for allowing the necessary measures to overcome
difficulties, particularly in human resources
management. The problem of staff attrition is a serious
one, with a direct repercussion on the successful and
timely transition to the Residual Mechanism. All
efforts, including through flexible, pragmatic and
administrative arrangements, should be made to
facilitate the retention of the personnel needed to
conclude in due time the cases assigned to them.

My third point is to highlight other important
matters presented by the Presidents in their reports
concerning the enforcement of sentences - that is,
identifying and encouraging further countries willing
to host convicted persons to serve their sentences and
the particular situation of the three acquitted persons
still remaining at a safe house in Arusha while efforts
are under way to find host countries to receive them.
Moreover, the question of victims - in particular, how
to find a proper way to assist and support them through
a possible trust fund - is yet another important matter
brought to our attention by President Robinson. These
are issues that we will be discussing in the framework
of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, which I have the honour to chair.

Fourthly, I wish to highlight and commend the
efforts of the Tribunals and their staff, together with
the Office of Legal Affairs (OLA), in the activities
conducive to the establishment of the Residual
Mechanism. Both the Tribunals and OLA have
important tasks to carry out under the framework
established by resolution 1966 (2010) in order to
ensure a smooth transition to the Residual Mechanism
in approximately one year. These are also matters that
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
will follow up very closely in the months to come. I am
confident of the support of all the other members of the
Working Group to pursue those objectives in the most
efficient way possible.

Fighting impunity and pursuing justice for
victims are crucial to preventing further crimes from
occurring and to helping foster reconciliation between
people in the regions concerned. The task is not only
the responsibility of international tribunals; it is also
the responsibility of national authorities. They play a
fundamental role in ensuring that impunity is not
tolerated, in particular through their resolve to address
these crimes at the national level. Outreach and
capacity building efforts are also crucial in that regard
for an enduring justice legacy. We welcome the work
undertaken by the Tribunals in that vein and encourage
further engagement with national authorities to
increase cooperation in that framework.

A good part of the debate on this agenda item in
recent years in the Security Council has centred in the
completion strategies of the Tribunals. This particular
focus, as relevant as it is to closing part of an important
cycle of international justice, should not make us forget
the important role of the Tribunals for international
peace and security as a whole. I would therefore like to
conclude by paying my country's homage to the
outstanding contribution made by the Tribunals and
their staffs, represented here by both their Presidents
and Prosecutors, to the international criminal justice
system and the prevention of crimes, setting an
example and paving the way for the establishment of
other tribunals, in particular the International Criminal
Court.

