Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, I would
like to thank Under-Secretaries-General Feltman and
O'Brien and Ambassador Apakan for their detailed
briefings. What we heard from them has reinforced
our deep concerns about the escalation of tensions
in Donbas over the past few days. That is why we
urge all the parties involved to immediately end the
intense fighting that erupted around Avdiivka, which
involved the use of heavy weapons proscribed by
the Minsk agreements and inflicted suffering on the
civilian population. We urge them to agree on concrete
and immediate steps to reverse the deterioration of
the security situation. That includes a return to the
ceasefire without delay, to which they have repeatedly
committed, as well as to proceed with disengagement
in the areas specifically identified in September and to
withdraw heavy weaponry in line with the provisions of
the Minsk agreements.

Secondly, we are seriously concerned about the
dire humanitarian situation in the area. In the current
harsh winter conditions, with freezing temperatures,
thousands of lives are at risk on both sides of the
contact line because of the destruction of the local
power and water filtration plants. Every action required
to restore full access to water, electricity and heating
should be put in place without delay to prevent further
suffering. We therefore call upon all the parties to allow
the urgent repair of critical infrastructure and to grant
safe, full, unrestricted access to the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special
Monitoring Mission and to humanitarian organizations.
The protection of the civilian population must remain
the highest priority for all sides. In that regard, my
country promptly responded to the humanitarian call
with a contribution of €1 million to the World Food
Programme and UNICEF programmes on food security
and mine-risk education in conflict-afflicted areas.
Thirdly, the blatant violation of the ceasefire we are
witnessing is not acceptable. The latest developments
represent a serious Violation of the Minsk agreements.
We firmly believe that their implementation is the only
path to a political solution to the crisis. In that regard,
Italy reiterates its full support of the role played by the
Normandy group and the OSCE in facilitating dialogue.
We deem it to be necessary to relaunch negotiations
without delay and expect a constructive commitment
with tangible results to be made with the Trilateral
Contact Group. I would like to take this opportunity
to recall Italy's well-known position in support of the
territorial integrity of Ukraine.

Let me conclude by emphasizing that dialogue
and political will must prevail over a military solution.
All parties are encouraged to fully honour their
commitments in order to achieve an inclusive and
sustainable solution to the crisis in Ukraine.

