Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): I have the
honour to make the following statement on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia - as well as
the European Free Trade Association country member of
the European Economic Area, Iceland, align themselves
with this statement.

The European Union reiterates its unequivocal
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms. Terrorism
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
The European Union stresses the need to strengthen
international cooperation between States, international
organizations, agencies, regional organizations and the
United Nations in order to prevent, combat and eliminate
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever
and by whomsoever committed. The decisions taken by
the Security Council with regard to Libya were and
remain guided by the desire to curb international terrorism
and to ensure that justice is done.

The European Union deeply regrets that, more than
nine years after the bombing of Pan Am flight 103, with
the loss of 270 lives, and six and a half years after
charges were filed, those accused of this crime have still
not been brought to justice. The European Union calls on
the Libyan Government to comply fully with the
resolutions of the Security Council, in particular to ensure
the appearance of those charged with the bombing of Pan
Am flight 103 for trial before the appropriate United
Kingdom or United States court, as set forth in resolution
883 (1993).

The European Union welcomes the recent report by
independent legal experts appointed by the Secretary-
General of the United Nations. Its findings make clear
that the Scottish judicial system is fair and independent;
that in this particular case the two accused would receive
a fair trial in Scotland; and that their rights would be fully
protected. The European Union also welcomes the offer
of the United Kingdom to allow international observers to
attend the trial in Scotland.

 

The European Union notes that the report of the fact-
finding mission to Libya has been sent to the sanctions
Committee for consideration. The European Union
welcomes the recent press statement by the Chairman of the
sanctions Committee emphasizing the readiness of the
sanctions Committee to continue to respond promptly to
requests for humanitarian exemptions and its determination
to continue to pay special attention to all humanitarian
issues arising under the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including those pertaining to religious
obligations.

Regarding the recent decisions of the International
Court of Justice, the European Union notes that these
decisions were procedural in nature and that the Court will
consider the arguments on the substance of the cases in full
before reaching a final judgment. The Court has not
pronounced on the merits of the Libyan claim concerning
the applicability of the Montreal Convention. Nor do these
decisions affect the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, which remain in full force. Libya must comply
with them as required by the Charter of the United Nations.
Regarding the bombing of flight UTA 772, which
resulted in the death of 170 people, the European Union
notes that the cooperation with French judicial authorities
finally satisfied most of the French demands, although some
of them have still not been met. This cooperation enabled
the investigating magistrate to make significant progress by
giving him the opportunity to issue two additional arrest
warrants for Libyan nationals and to complete the file of
the inquiry. It has opened the way to the trial in absentia,
as permitted under French law, of the six suspects.

The European Union notes also Libya's declaration
that it no longer supports terrorism and the steps it has
taken to end its support for terrorism. Nevertheless, Libya's
failure to comply fully with the Security Council resolutions
remains a serious obstacle in the way of the development
of its relations with the international community.

The requirements of Security Council resolutions
731 (1992), 748 (1992) and 883 (1993) are clear. In the
view of the European Union, only when Libya has
complied fully with these requirements will sanctions be
lifted.

