Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Chinese presidency of the
Security Council for having organized this important
debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union (AU) for their very informative briefings
and their unflagging commitment to the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union.

At the outset, Iwould also like to echo the outstanding
statement made on behalf of the three African countries
on the Council by the Ambassador of Cote d'Ivoire. We
are completely in line with that position.

For France, the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union is of strategic importance
today, and we are resolutely committed to supporting
its development, which has immense potential in our
view. That partnership is fully in keeping with current
trends in peacekeeping and is a major component of the
Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
In that context, we welcome the progress made
under the leadership of the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, especially since the April
2017 signing of the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security. That partnership is part of our day-to-
day reality and is now being expressed in a concrete
way on a daily basis on the ground. I would mention,
for example, the Central African Republic, where the
United Nations and the African Union are working
hand in hand to restore peace and stability in the
country through the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, which
is the sole framework for achieving a comprehensive
and inclusive peace agreement. It is also because of
the importance of that partnership that we continue to
advocate for United Nations peacekeeping operations
with a strong collective commitment, clear mandates
for a genuine political strategy and provided with
adequate means. For the same reason, we would warn
against any reconsideration, including financial, of
frameworks that were determined collectively for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union is of strategic importance for
France; a reason for that is the increasing strength
of African peace operations. In the face of evolving
threats in Africa and the need for the United Nations
and the AU to become more responsive and efficient,
we consider that African peace operations represent a
real opportunity for a better division of labour between
peace enforcement and peacekeeping with the United
Nations. We see it on the ground with the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel, the African Union
Mission in Somalia and the Multinational Joint Task
Force deployed in the Lake Chad basin. Those African
peace operations play a major role today and have at
least three points in common: they are better adapted
to their environment and to the threat; they have a clear
mandate with a single objective; and they are less costly
than United Nations peacekeeping operations. Those
operations therefore have, in terms of their range and
diversity, undeniable advantages.

However, it is clear that African peace operations
still do not count on predictable and sustainable funding.
It is therefore essential to remedy that situation. That is
why, as President Macron reaffirmed in his address to
the General Assembly in September (see A/73/PV.6),
France supports the African Union initiative aimed at
the adoption of an ambitious draft resolution by the end
of the year. That initiative has two cornerstones. First,
we are dealing with a decision made by the Heads of
State and Government of the African Union to support
the African Union Peace Fund, which will cover 25 per
cent of the cost of African peace operations. That is
followed by the African Union's request to the United
Nations to cover 75 per cent of the cost of future
operations, including through mandatory contributions.

In that context, France welcomes the reforms led by
the African Union and the progress made in cooperation
with the United Nations since the adoption of resolutions
2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017). That progress represents
milestones in defining the framework we wish to give
to African peace operations. I would refer in particular
of the Secretary-General's proposals for joint threat
assessment, planning, mandate-setting and evaluation
of African peace operations. I would mention as
well the work on the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on the execution of mandates. Lastly, I
refer to the development of compliance frameworks
for international humanitarian law, human rights and
conduct and discipline, which are crucial in terms
of accountability as well as for the support that the
United Nations can provide to African operations. That
progress must also be part ofa framework that responds
in particular to two principles: the primacy of the
Security Council, which has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
and the need for clear mandate that define a limited
duration and restricted area.

In that context, France considers that the important
progress made by our partners in the African Union
must now be strongly supported by the Security Council
through the adoption of a framework draft resolution
that definitively allows the Council to mobilize, on
a case-by-case basis, United Nations mandatory
contributions to co-finance African operations led
by the African Union or mandated by the African
Union. I emphasize that last point because coalitions
and subregional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States and the Southern
African Development Community, mobilize African
forces who must also, when mandated by the AU, be
able to receive support from the African Union and the
United Nations.

The aim of that framework draft resolution would
be to establish a renewed partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union. That partnership
should respond to the security challenges of our century
on the African continent by supporting African forces
as they grow in strength and bringing the solidarity of
the international community to the fight against the
terrorist groups and criminal networks that threaten
stability and prosperity on the continent. The countries
of the African Union can count on France's resolute
support throughout that journey.

I would like to conclude by once again paying
tribute to all Blue Helmets deployed on peacekeeping
operations, particularly those in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Central African Republic
who recently made the ultimate sacrifice.

