Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): Let
me begin, Sir, by congratulating you on your
assumption of the Council presidency for this month,
and by wishing you every success in your work. Let me
also take this opportunity to praise Ambassador
Mikhail Wehbe for the way in which he conducted the
work of the Security Council last month. Also, I would
like to express our thanks to all Council members, and
to you personally, Mr. President, for your speedy
response to the Arab Group's request through its
Chairman, the Permanent Representative of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and for convening this
important meeting.

(spoke in English)

Israel, the occupying Power, continues to commit
and escalate war crimes and State terrorism against the
Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem. In the pre-dawn hours, Palestine
time, yesterday, an F-l6 warplane dropped a one-ton
bomb on a three-story apartment building in northern
Gaza City. That air strike killed 15 Palestinian civilians
and wounded more than 150 people. Among those
killed in the attack were 9 infants and children between
the ages of two months and 13 years. In addition to the
human devastation, the building that was hit, and at
least four other homes, were destroyed, and several
other nearby buildings sustained serious damage in the
attack on this densely populated civilian
neighbourhood.

Israel, the occupying Power, declared that this
military attack was in fact carried out as a targeted
killing. This repugnant practice of extrajudicial
execution has been repeatedly condemned by the
international community and constitutes a war crime.
Yesterday, however, the occupying Power took this
practice to a new, extreme level, as the occupying
forces knowingly and deliberately killed innocent
civilians - children, women and men, many belonging
to the same family - in the attack, along with the
targeted person, Mr. Salah Shehada. Clearly, there was
no way that such a military strike would not cause such
tragic results in terms of civilian deaths and injuries
and physical destruction.

This Israeli assault represents the first blatant war
crime committed by the Israeli occupying forces since
the entry into force this month of the Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). This action
definitely falls within the jurisdiction of the Court and,
thus, measures to bring the perpetrators to justice
should be taken. At the same time, this latest Israeli
war crime was committed at a time when serious, and
apparently succeeding, efforts were being undertaken
to curb the violence and restore some cooperative
measures between the two sides.

Obviously, the Israeli Prime Minister, the man of
peace, Mr. Ariel Sharon, who labelled the crime as a
"great success", is once more trying his utmost to
prevent any progress towards restoring a meaningful,
peaceful process. Mr. Sharon and his lieutenants must
be held responsible for such actions and the ensuing
results.

The aforementioned Israeli war crime comes after
the recent demolition of the homes of families of
suspected Palestinian suicide bombers, as well as a
series of threats by Israeli officials to deport some or
all of those family members. Such actual or threatened
measures are illegal and are prohibited under the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,
which is applicable to all of the occupied Palestinian
territory, including Jerusalem. Further, they represent a
collective punishment as well as a war crime under
international humanitarian law and the Statute of the
ICC. Again, the international community is obligated
to take measures against the perpetrators of these
crimes.

All of this is happening while the Israeli
occupying forces continue with their second wave of
reoccupation of most Palestinian cities and population
centres in the occupied West Bank, which has now
continued for more than a month. Throughout this time,
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians - actually the
whole Palestinian population in those areas - have
been subjected to round-the-clock curfews, confined to
their homes and denied any aspect of normal daily life,
including access to basic necessities, such as food and
proper medical care. In other areas, closures and severe
restrictions on the movement of persons and goods also
remain in effect. The extent of human loss and physical
destruction that has been caused, the continuous
confinement of the people, and other Israeli collective
punishment measures against the Palestinian people
have led not only to socio-economic devastation but
also to a real humanitarian crisis, for which the
occupying Power must be held responsible.

Since September 2000, more than 1,705
Palestinians have been killed by the Israeli occupying
forces in military attacks. This tragic figure does not
include the hundreds of other Palestinians who have
died as a result of other illegal practices being carried
out by the occupying Power. Moreover, thousands of
Palestinians have been injured, many seriously and
permanently, by the occupying forces. Hundreds of
homes have been destroyed, and thousands of people
have been rendered homeless. Billions of dollars have
been lost in Palestinian wages and other income.

Further, the Israeli military siege on the
headquarters of President Yasser Arafat in the
Palestinian city of Ramallah continues, in violation of
all norms and logic. It essentially represents a direct
attack on the leader and symbol of the Palestinian
people and the Palestinian Authority. In addition, this
siege continues to seriously obstruct the efforts of the
Palestinian Authority to exercise its responsibilities
and to rebuild itself.

All of the aforementioned is an escalation of the
same Israeli military campaign against the Palestinian
people that began with the infamous visit of
Mr. Sharon to Al-Haram Al-Sharif on 28 September
2000. There was, as Council members will recall,
another level of escalation prior to this recent period,
which began on 29 March 2002, in response to which
the Security Council adopted resolutions 1402 (2002),
1403 (2002) and 1405 (2002). Needless to say, Israel,
the occupying Power, has not only not heeded those
resolutions, but has now created an even graver
situation on the ground. We believe that the Security
Council has a clear responsibility vis-a-vis the
situation, including the necessity for implementing the
Council's own resolutions.

The Government of Mr. Ariel Sharon has been
trying to portray its policies and practices as simply a
response to the suicide bombings. Nothing could be
further from the truth. Indeed, the Palestinian side has
condemned this practice that has undermined the
Palestinian national interest. In fact, what the Israeli
Government has been doing is intended to serve clear
political objectives, expressed repeatedly and publicly
by Mr. Sharon. His aims have always been to drag us
all back to a pre-Oslo situation and to destroy the
Palestinian Authority, while inflicting maximum pain,
suffering and loss on the Palestinian people. Only in
that manner could he guarantee blocking any
possibility of a serious peace settlement, so that the
occupation and the colonization and settlement
activities could continue.

Unfortunately, some on the international scene
have been trying to avoid the realities and to avoid
confronting Mr. Sharon. Thus came the search for
solutions that would show a lot of motion, even
without any real movement. The problem is that such
an approach can only make matters worse. Obviously,
avoiding the truth is not going to make it disappear.

At this time, some parties have decided to focus
on the issue of reform of the Palestinian Authority,
making this the central issue regarding the situation.
While we believe that reform is in our national interest,
we hope that this focus does not represent another
attempt to avoid the realities and divert attention from
the imperative of confronting the illegal policies of the
Israeli Government of Mr. Sharon.

Two clarifications are necessary on this issue.
First, the current system of the Palestinian Authority
has its limitations and deficiencies as a result of the
Oslo negotiating process, and not as a result of a
Palestinian choice. Secondly, any talk about
restructuring reform or free elections, while important,
remains meaningless while the Palestinian people are
under Israeli occupation, let alone while Israeli tanks
remain in the heart of Ramallah and while Israeli
warplanes fly above Gaza.

We appreciate the established international
consensus that has emerged on the two-State solution,
and on the need for the establishment of the State of
Palestine. Allow me in this regard to put forward some
main Palestinian positions on the debate that is
currently taking place. First, the internal Palestinian
situation will always remain the domain of the
Palestinian people themselves. We hope that no one is
trying to give free and democratic elections a new
meaning.

Secondly, any initiative or plans that would
exempt the Israeli side, and particularly Mr. Sharon,
from taking specific actions up front and from adopting
different policies, would only provide cover for further
destructive Israeli actions. Such initiatives would lead
nowhere, and no one could even seriously believe in
them.

Thirdly, we reiterate our belief regarding the need
for a comprehensive approach. This does not only
mean dealing with political, economic and security
issues simultaneously; it also means agreeing from the
beginning on the final outcome or the end game.
Details, of course, would be left to the parties to
negotiate, but the overall framework should be clear.
We believe that the Security Council can and should
play an important role in this regard.

Finally, with regard to the political aspect, let me
also say that the Palestinian side believes that the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem, is not subject to negotiation. Palestine
should be established in that territory, with its borders
based on the 1967 lines. We have already compromised
more than our share, and any expansionist Israeli
designs shall not be accepted. Needless to say, this
position is also reflected in the Arab initiative adopted
at the Beirut Summit, which was based on the initiative
of Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia.

In all honesty, we feel that the international
community needs to show more resolve and
seriousness in dealing with the situation, whether on
the ground or concerning the political aspect. The
growing Israeli violations and crimes are suffocating,
and indeed killing, any potential for peace between the
two sides. This tragic situation is only being further
exacerbated as the international community continues
to stand idly by while the Israeli occupying forces
continue to wreak devastation and destruction against
the Palestinian people.

We will continue to cooperate with the "quartet"
and with other interested parties, but we strongly
believe in the need for decisive action, especially on
the part of the Security Council, to prevent the worst
from happening and, hopefully, to carry us forward to a
different and better situation.

