Mr. Jiang Jiang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset to thank High Representative
Lord Ashdown and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Klein, for their detailed
briefings. We welcome all of the achievements made in
Bosnia and Herzegovina on all fronts.

China has closely followed developments in the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and has taken note
of the new and effective measures taken by the High
Representative to assist the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in taking concrete measures to implement
the reform process and to promote the establishment of
the judicial and legal system. China believes that these
measures will help Bosnia and Herzegovina to stand on
its own at an early date.

We welcome these first elections, which were
independently organized by the Government of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in early October and were held in a
fair and peaceful atmosphere. We hope that the newly
elected Government will continue to be committed to
the maintenance of peace, stability and security in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and that it will give priority to
promoting national reconciliation; expediting the return
of refugees; and reforming the judicial and legal
systems.

Next month will witness the seventh anniversary
of the conclusion and signing of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Peace Agreement. However, we still see
frequent reports in newspapers of problems among the
three main ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We have heard, for instance, that some restaurants
charge members of the three different ethnic groups
three different prices for a cup of coffee.

There is an old saying in China: "Peace at home
brings prosperity for all". It is only when all ethnic
groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina can coexist
peacefully that the country will truly be able to stand
on its own and achieve lasting peace and stability and
sustainable economic development; only then will its
peoples be able to emerge from the shadow of war and
return to a normal way of life.

It is our hope that the withdrawal of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH)
will not have a negative impact on peace and stability in
the country. We hope that the Security Council will
continue to follow developments in the region. We hope
also that, under the leadership of the European Union,
the various institutions of the international community in
Bosnia and Herzegovina will be able further to
strengthen their coordination and cooperation, fulfil their
respective responsibilities and help the Government and
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina achieve self-
reliance, economic development and lasting peace and
stability in the region, and that there will no longer be
such a phenomenon as a cup of coffee with three
different prices.

