Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
Permit me first, Sir, to welcome you warmly and to thank
you for personally presiding over this very important
Security Council debate. The Tunisian delegation expresses
its appreciation to your friendly country for having
proposed a debate on so important an item as the
protection of United Nations personnel, associated
personnel and humanitarian personnel in conflict zones.

Tunisia has participated in peacekeeping operations
and will continue to do so, despite the losses it has
suffered. We share the concerns of the international
community about hostile acts committed in certain
conflict situations against United Nations personnel,
associated personnel and humanitarian personnel. The
general thrust of operations conducted by the United
Nations or under its auspices must always be the same: to
keep and consolidate the peace and to provide
humanitarian assistance. But in recent years, the
proliferation and diversity of United Nations operations
and the involvement on the ground of actors and bodies
other than the United Nations itself have to some degree
affected that understanding of the role of the Organization
as defined by the Charter.

In his 1999 report on strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the
United Nations (A/54/ 154 and A/54/154/Add.1), the
Secretary-General painted a clear picture of the situation
of the United Nations personnel deployed in many
regions. That picture includes murder, illegal arrest,
detention, robbery and much more. That negative picture
raises two questions: What is behind this situation? And
how can we remedy it?

In our view, these violations and this lack of
respect for humanitarian and other United Nations
officials, staff and humanitarian personnel stem from a
certain degree of misunderstanding, ignorance and even
negligence, particularly in conflict zones, concerning the
peaceful basis, impartiality and neutrality of these
missions. Such questionable conduct towards any
peacekeeping or humanitarian assistance operation can be
explained in part by a lack of information and awareness
about the role of the United Nations and its objectives in
any given operation. The United Nations as a whole must
find ways to disseminate a culture of peace and to
strengthen its own image as an organization of peace,
pacific settlement and humanitarian assistance.

Tunisia is concerned about a situation where the
distinctive flag of the United Nations and the protective
insignia of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, which
represent impartial assistance, are providing less and less

 

protection for humanitarian personnel; this reflects their
continued vulnerable status, especially in conflict situations.

As to how to remedy these problems of a lack of
security, especially given the growing number of victims,
the United Nations has responded in a most appropriate
manner: through the adoption of the first legal instrument
in this connection, the 1994 Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel. The Convention
in fact identifies the personnel entitled to protection, the
obligations of host countries in whose territory the United
Nations operations are deployed, and intentional violations
against United Nations personnel, including the appropriate
penalties. But, like any legal text, the Convention is binding
only on States parties, which limits the scope of its
implementation.

That said, the recommendation of the Secretary-
General in his 8 September 1999 report to the Security
Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/1999/957), to broaden the applicability of the Convention
to cover other categories of United Nations personnel,
warrants careful consideration with a View to addressing all
these concerns.

For these reasons, we believe that the next step
should be the consideration of specific preventive measures.
Here, my delegation hails the efforts of the Secretary-
General to strengthen and improve the protection of United
Nations personnel, associated personnel and humanitarian
personnel through training on security issues and through
sensitivity training. We also welcome the other measures
proposed by Ms. Frechette and Ms. Bertini, whom I thank
for their excellent statements. I am particularly pleased by
the appointment of a security coordinator.
In our View, it is time for the Security Council and
the General Assembly, which are both principal organs of
the United Nations, along with all Member States, to look
seriously at problems related to the deployment of certain
United Nations operations, specifically with respect to the
safety and security of personnel. In our view, those
deliberations should focus on the following five points.

The first is clear and precise definition of the
mandate of peacekeeping operations, especially those that
fall within the framework of humanitarian assistance.
Secondly, account must be taken of the special
characteristics of each United Nations operation in order to
determine what risks it could involve. Those elements
essentially depend on the facts of the conflict or crisis,
which must be studied.

The third is strengthening cooperation among the
various bodies operating in the field. The fourth is
providing security training for United Nations personnel,
and providing the resources needed for such training. And
the fifth is respect for the fundamental principle of the
consent of States in accepting the deployment of a
peacekeeping or humanitarian assistance operation.

I wish in conclusion to state our support for today's
draft presidential statement and for the specific
recommendations and measures that will make it possible
in a practical way to ensure the protection, safety and
security of United Nations personnel and associated
personnel. We urge all States to cooperate to that end.

