Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): The Republic
of Korea remains deeply concerned about the continuing
volatile situation in the Middle East. The rise of
Violent extremism based on religious hatred and ethnic
intolerance, as witnessed in the recent series of tragic
events in Syria, Iraq and Libya is a cause for serious
concern for the entire international community.

My delegation believes that a culture of tolerance
and harmony must prevail, and that efforts should be
made to foster a dialogue to overcome the deep rifts
that exist along religious, ethnic, and tribal lines. We
also share the views expressed by many Member States
in the Council today that more needs to be done to
address that issue in order to ensure that the Middle
East remains both diverse and inclusive. As detailed in
various United Nations reports, including the report of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees on the human rights situation in Iraq
(A/HRC/28/18), abuses committed by the Islamic State
of Iraq and the Levant and associated groups that have
specifically targeted Yazidis, Christians, Turkmen,
Kurds and Shiites, among others, could in fact constitute
genocide, while other incidents "may amount to crimes
against humanity and war crimes".

With respect to such crimes, the Council has taken
firm positions in the past, recognizing that those who
are most vulnerable, such as women, children and
minorities, bear the brunt of the suffering and are in
dire need of protection from the broader international
community. One of the concepts that arises from that
recognition is the idea of the responsibility to protect,
which places primary responsibility on States to
protect their populations from genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing, while
imposing a corresponding duty on the international
community to assist States in fulfilling that obligation
and to take action when such crimes are committed.
In that vein, we urge the Council to consider ways
to ensure civilian protection while fighting against
impunity.

During the Republic of Korea's presidency of
the Council in May 2014, we voted in favour of draft
resolution S/2014/348 referring Syria to the International
Criminal Court for crimes against humanity. Although
that draft resolution was not adopted, the Republic of
Korea supported the need for accountability, because
we believed that sustainable peace is not possible
without justice. We still hold that belief.

Strengthening the international community's
tool kit to effectively respond to the widespread and
systematic persecution of individuals based on ethnic
and religious grounds is in everyone's interests. In that
regard, the Republic of Korea supports France's efforts
to build on the outcome of the Summit on Countering
Violent Extremism that was held in Washington, DC, on
19 February, in which the Republic of Korea expressed
its commitment to contribute in the areas of education
and private sector partnership. We look forward to the
opportunity for additional discussions on that issue in
this Chamber in the near future.

In conclusion, the Republic of Korea pledges to
remain focused on the plight of vulnerable populations
in the Middle East and will make every effort to call
for increased civilian protection, greater accountability
and eventual justice vis-a-vis crimes perpetrated on
ethnic or religious grounds.

