Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to warmly welcome to this Chamber the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia, Mr. Yusuf
Hassan Ibrahim. I would also like to thank him for the
information that he gave us during the closed meeting.
Rest assured, Mr. Minister, that it is very useful to us.

The Transitional National Government, which
emerged from the Arta process, deserves support. As
the Secretary-General has said, it is the only viable
option. It is also the best guarantee of the unity and
territorial integrity of Somalia - a unity and territorial
integrity to which the Council constantly reaffirms its
commitment. The new Government of Prime Minister
Farah should be given every chance. We should
respond to this Government's offers to cooperate in the
struggle against terrorism.

A statement will be made later in the meeting by
the Permanent Representative of Spain on behalf of the
European Union. France fully endorses it. I will
therefore limit my statement to a few brief comments.

The Security Council was first seized of the
situation in Somalia in early 1992, 10 years ago. It has
devoted much energy to the Somali crisis and has
adopted close to 20 resolutions on the matter. These
resolutions have allowed for the deployment of two
peacekeeping operations, at the cost of some $2 billion,
and ofa multinational force of 37,000 persons.

This is no time to give up. France shares the
cautious optimism of the Secretary-General. The 9th
lntergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
Summit opened up new prospects. The National
Reconciliation Conference, scheduled for the second
half of April in Nairobi, should confirm them,
provided, however, that the Transitional National
Government and all of the Somali parties participate in
it without preconditions and provided also that all
States of the region confirm their good will. This is one
of the messages that the Council should pass on.

In the new post-11 September context, it is
essential to help Somalia in order to prevent it from
becoming a new Afghanistan. It should be done in
cooperation with the Somalis. It should be done by
limiting negative humanitarian consequences. We can
only emphasize from this point of view the very grave
consequences of the freeze on the assets of Al-
Barakaat. The formula of a controlled lifting of the
freeze of the frozen assets, proposed by the Somali
authorities, should be welcomed.

What can the Council do? Several excellent
courses of action have been put forward in the
Secretary-General's report. The good-offices missions
of Mohamed Sahnoun have certainly had a very
beneficial impact, particularly on the Khartoum
summit. It is necessary to pursue and intensify them.
They will usefully complement the daily activities of
the Secretary-General's new Representative,
Mr. Winston Tubman.

The creation of two groups of friends, in Nairobi
and New York, is also a step in the right direction.
France would be interested in participating, alongside
other countries that could help with the settlement and
to contribute to the mobilization of the international
community.

What else can be done? It is important, first of
all, that the Council clearly reaffirms its commitment
to certain principles. France unreservedly supports the
preparation of a presidential statement that could be
adopted this week.

Further, the means of making effective the arms
embargo imposed in 1992 are being discussed by the
sanctions Committee under its new Chairman, the
Ambassador of Bulgaria. I will not go into the details,
but the stakes are high for a country that is marked by
arms proliferation. Significant disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes will also
be indispensable.

Finally, the Council should stand ready to take
decisive steps. France is in favour of sending a peace-
building mission to Somalia as soon as the security
conditions allow for one. Unfortunately, the outcome of
the inter-agency mission that went to several Somali
regions between 15 and 23 January has not yet led to
this. But it is necessary that security in Mogadishu, in
particular, continue to be regularly assessed in the hope
that a green light can soon be given to the return of the
United Nations, particularly to the capital.

