Mr. Pelss (Latvia): First, I would like to convey my
condolences to the Permanent Mission of the Russian
Federation on the sudden passing away of the Permanent
Representative, Ambassador Vitaly Churkin.

I should like to thank the Ukrainian presidency
for organizing today's debate on conflicts in Europe.
I should like also to thank the Secretaries General
of all three organizations - the United Nations, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the European Union External Action
Service - for their remarks.

In many respects, Europe is characterized by peace,
stability and prosperity. However, Europe is not immune
to security and stability challenges. Since the beginning
of the century, we have witnessed serious breaches of
the rules of international security. The ongoing conflict
in the eastern part of Ukraine is the most recent threat
to the security of Europe. The protracted conflicts in
Nagorno Karabakh, Transnistria, Abkhazia and South
Ossetia remind us that this is no time for international
complacency.

Universal respect for territorial integrity and
sovereignty is enshrined in the purposes and principles
of the United Nations Charter; it must be adhered to
by all. All States Members of the United Nations have
committed to renouncing the illegal threat or use of
force, and all have agreed to settle their disputes by
peaceful means. But Russia's actions in Ukraine are
a blatant violation of international law and a serious
challenge to the principles of the United Nations
Charter. Three years ago, Russia occupied Crimea.
The international community has witnessed similar
acts of aggression committed by Russia and Georgia as
recently as in 2008.

We must return to the rules-based security order in
Europe. There is no universal solution when it comes
to the resolution of active and protracted conflicts,
but clear consequences for the aggressor, resolute
international pressure and accountability for violations
ofinternational law can be very useful in facilitating the
de-escalation and the political resolution of conflicts.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the European Union as regional
organizations have a natural role in resolving conflicts
in Europe, and we expect these organizations, together
with the United Nations, to actively engage in conflict
resolution. All parties must remain committed to
the international instruments for peaceful conflict
resolution, and that includes support for and the
facilitation of the unhindered deployment of United
Nations, Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and European Union international missions.
It is unacceptable for territories of conflict to be
inaccessible to international monitoring mechanisms.

In order to prevent escalation, the Security Council
should pay closer attention to existing conflicts in
Europe. The veto-wielding Security Council members
have not only the privilege but also, and mainly, the
responsibility to work in the interest of common peace
and security. Their national interests must not hamper
constructive efforts to fulfil their role as permanent
members. We appreciate the United Nations Secretary-
General's participation today and his continuous appeal
for peace and for the settlement of all conflicts. We call
on him to use all the tools at his disposal to preserve the
rules-based international order and to restore it where it
has been broken.

A peaceful resolution of the conflict in Ukraine
that respects Ukraine's independence and territorial
integrity must remain high on the international agenda.
Latvia will remain vocal as concerns our indisputable
non-recognition policy of the illegal annexation of
Crimea.

Unfortunately, there has been no progress towards
the resolution of the conflict. The latest escalation of
violence by Russia-supported separatists in eastern
Ukraine and Russia's decision to recognize the so-
called passports issued by separatists in the Luhansk
and Donetsk regions undermines the Minsk agreements.

Latvia reiterates that the full implementation
of the Minsk agreements remains our unchanged
benchmark. The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
must continue observing and assisting the progress
made in implementation. The monitoring officers must
be granted full, safe and unrestricted access to all
conflict-affected areas, including the disengagement
zones, heavy-armaments storage sites and the Russian-
Ukrainian border. We also believe that the Normandy
format must continue its efforts to bring the devastation
in eastern Ukraine to an end.

Let me say by way of conclusion that the settlement
of protracted conflicts in wider Europe remains of the
utmost importance. More efforts and, mainly, political
will are needed to achieve a peaceful resolution of the
conflict in Georgia, the Transnistrian conflict and the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict.

