Mr. Mladenov: On behalfofthe Secretary-General,
I devote my regular briefing on the situation in the
Middle East today to presenting the fourth report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), covering the
period from 20 September to 18 December. I will focus
on developments on the ground in accordance with the
provisions of the resolution, including on regional and
international efforts to advance the peace process.

Let me note from the outset that none of the
developments on the ground can be divorced from
the broader context in which they are happening:
uncertainties about the future of the peace process,
unilateral actions that undermine the two-State
solution, occupation and violence. As 23 December
will mark one year since the adoption of the resolution,
I will also take this opportunity to address some of the
broader trends we have witnessed during the past year.

In its paragraph 2, the resolution reiterates its
demand that Israel

"immediately and completely cease all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem".

No such steps were taken during the reporting period.
Some 1,200 units in the occupied West Bank were
approved for construction, approximately 460 of them in
the settlement of Ma'ale Adumim. Israel also advanced,
through the various stages of the planning process,
some 1,400 housing units in Area C of the West Bank.
Plans promoted included units in the new settlement of
Amihai, a new neighbourhood in Kochav Yaakov, and a
new site near Alon Shvut, north and south of Jerusalem,
respectively. All three have been designated for either
those evicted from the "illegal outposts" of Migron
in 2012 and Amona in February of this year, or those
soon to be evicted from the outpost of Netiv ha'avot,
which has been planned for demolition and evacuation
in March 2018. In October, the Government announced
that it would issue a tender for 296 housing units in the
Beit El settlement, adjacent to Ramallah. However, that
tender has not yet been published. The authorities also
conditionally approved building permits for 31 housing
units in Hebron's H2 area, the first such approvals
since 2001.

In East Jerusalem, preparations began for the
construction of infrastructure in Givat Hamatos,
which, if built, would solidify the ring of settlements
isolating East Jerusalem from the southern West Bank.
In October, the Jerusalem municipality conditionally
approved building permits for 168 housing units in
the settlement of Nof Zion located in the Palestinian
neighbourhood of Jabel Mukaber; and in November, it
also granted building permits for at least 418 housing
units in Gilo and Ramat Shlomo.

Let me reiterate that the United Nations considers
all settlement activities to be illegal under international
law and a major obstacle to peace.

As the Middle East Quartet report noted in
2016, all structures lacking permits from the Israeli
authorities in Area C and East Jerusalem are potentially
subject to demolition. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, during the
reporting period the authorities demolished or seized 61
structures for lacking building permits. Consequently,
110 people, including 61 children, were displaced and
the livelihoods of over 1,000 people were affected.

Meanwhile, over 10 Bedouin communities,
comprising some 1,500 residents, remain at heightened
risk of demolition and displacement. This includes
herding communities in Ain al-Hilwe and Um al-Jmal
in the northern Jordan valley, as well as Jabal al-Baba
in the sensitive El area.

The reporting period also saw several potentially
significant legal developments. In an opinion issued
in November, the Attorney General approved the
legalization ofan access road built on private Palestinian
land, leading to the illegal outpost of Haresha. The
opinion came in light of a court decision by Supreme
Court Justice Salim Joubran, who determined that the
confiscation of private Palestinian land for the public
interest, including in the exclusive interest of settler
communities, may under certain conditions be legal
in the West Bank, if done proportionally and with
fair compensations to the landowners. However, the
Attorney General did not soften his stance on the Land
Regularization Law. On 22 November, he wrote that
"there is no alternative to a judicial ruling declaring the
Land Regularization Law unconstitutional".

Separately, and still in November, the Government
informed the Court that, for the first time, it intended
to implement a clause in military law allowing the
confiscation of private land if it has been used by a
third party unknowingly. This may clear the way for
the retroactive legalization of settlement homes and
possibly illegal outposts.

Allow me to turn to the problems of violence and
terrorism that remain a hallmark of the conflict.

During the reporting period, the security situation
in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory remained
relatively calm. During the past three months, 22
Palestinians have been killed by Israeli security forces,
including in clashes and security operations, and one
was killed by an Israeli civilian in the West Bank. Four
Israelis have been killed by Palestinians in attacks. Last
week, Israel reported that it had foiled a kidnapping
plot by Hamas in the West Bank.

Since 6 December, in the wake of the decision of
the United States to recognize Jerusalem as the the
capital of Israel, the situation has become more tense,
with an increase in incidents, notably rockets fired
from Gaza and clashes between Palestinians and Israeli
security forces. Most recently, on 10 December one
Israeli was seriously injured in a stabbing attack at the
Jerusalem bus station. The Palestinian perpetrator has
been detained.

On 30 October, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF)
destroyed yet another tunnel that extended from Gaza
into Israel. During the operation, at least 12 Palestinian
militants were killed underground. According to
statements by a spokesperson for Islamic Jihad, the
group's aim in constructing the tunnel was to "kidnap
Israeli soldiers". A second tunnel was destroyed on
10 December. On 31 October, a 25-year-old Palestinian
man was shot dead by IDF while in his car near the
settlement of Halamish. On 30 November, an Israeli
civilian shot dead a Palestinian man in the northern
West Bank and a group of Palestinians reportedly threw
stones at a group of Israelis. Both shooting incidents
are under investigation by Israeli authorities.
During the reporting period, 28 rockets and 12
mortar rounds were fired from Gaza towards Israel. In
response, the IDF continued to target a number ofHamas
and Palestinian Islamic Jihad military posts across the
Gaza Strip, in which two Palestinian militants and one
civilian were killed, and at least 28 people were injured.

Since 7 December, there has been a visible increase
in rockets fired by Gaza militants. Of the 40 projectiles
fired during the reporting period, 27 were launched
since Hamas called for an escalation. Four rockets
were intercepted by the Iron Dome system. One rocket
and the remains of an intercepted rocket landed in the
town of Sderot, causing damage to a kindergarten and
to vehicles, but resulting in no injuries. At least eight
more rockets landed in Israel.

Allow me to now turn to some of the problems of
inflammatory rhetoric and provocations. Resolution
2334 (2016) calls on all to refrain from such acts and
undertake efforts to combat them. During the reporting
period, while on a visit to Iran Hamas leaders continued
to make deplorable calls for the destruction of the State of
Israel. The level of provocative rhetoric has heightened
since 6 December, including with calls for escalation,
violence and an intifada. On its official social media
pages, Fatah continued to celebrate perpetrators of
past attacks against Israelis, including a 26 September
attack in Har Adar in which two security guards and
a border policeman were killed. Most recently, Hamas
and other factions applauded the stabbing attack at
the Jerusalem bus station, organizing rallies in Gaza
and the West Bank and calling for escalation. Israeli
politicians also made provocative statements during
this period, including by calling for "only one State
between the river and the sea" or "recognizing Judea
and Samaria as Israel".

Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterates the call by the
Middle East Quartet on both parties to take steps to
reverse the negative trends on the ground that are
imperilling the two-State solution. While the goal of
realizing a sustainable peace based on the two-State
solution remains elusive, Palestinian factions signed
an agreement on 12 October to allow the Palestinian
Authority (PA) to assume control of Gaza, the Gaza
crossings to be fully returned to the control of the
Palestinian Authority on 1 November, and the public
sector employees who were recruited by the PA prior to
2007 to be registered in preparation for establishing a
unified work force. The process, however, is faltering
over substantial disagreements, including on important
questions related to the payment of public sector
salaries, the lifting of PA-imposed measures and Hamas
giving up its security control of Gaza.

Despite repeated calls on the Palestinian Authority
to alleviate the electricity crisis in Gaza, which was
exacerbated by the Palestinian Authority's decision
earlier this year to reduce payments to Israel, residents
still live with four hours of electricity per day. Forty-
five per cent of essential drugs and medical supplies
are at zero stock, while basic services are maintained
only through donor-funded emergency fuel that is
distributed by the United Nations. On 7 December, an
additional $2.2 million was released from the United
Nations humanitarian pooled fund to cover urgent
health and food security needs in Gaza.

On a positive note, talks between the Israeli and
Palestinian Ministries of Finance resumed during the
reporting period. On 28 November, Israel transferred to
the Palestinian Authority a lump sum of $63.8 million
in value-added tax collections and tax clearance.
Construction of the Northern Gaza emergency sewage
treatment plant is expected to be completed by the
end of this month. Israel has informed the Palestinian
Authority ofits willingness to increase the energy supply
to Gaza by six megawatts for the plant. If implemented,
that would help to address critical sewage and broader
environmental problems in Gaza and beyond.

During the reporting period, there were no
developments related to Member States distinguishing
in their relevant dealings between the territory of the
State of Israel and the territories occupied in 1967.
Regrettably, the reporting period did not see significant
positive moves towards advancing peace, and the
parties remain further divided than ever. The United
States President announced in December his decision
to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of the State of
Israel, while stating that final status issues remained
to be determined by the parties. He also made clear
his commitment to advancing peace between Israelis
and Palestinians and called for the status quo at the
holy sites to be respected. Since then, the Palestinian
leadership has cancelled meetings with visiting
United States Vice-President Pence and called for the
establishment of a new mechanism to achieve peace.
The Palestinian President has also vowed to seek
unilateral recognition of Palestine and full membership
in international organizations in the absence of a
meaningful peace process.
The United Nations maintains the View that
Jerusalem is a final-status issue that must be resolved
through direct negotiations between the two parties on
the basis of the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, taking into account the legitimate
concerns of both the Palestinian and the Israeli sides.

In closing, I would like to share some broad
observations on developments concerning the
provisions of the resolution over the past year.

First, continued settlement construction in the
occupied Palestinian territory contravenes resolution
2334 (2016). Significantly more housing units were
advanced and approved this year. The number of units
advanced and approved more than doubled from 3,000
in 2016 to nearly 7,000 in 2017. In East Jerusalem, the
increase has similarly been from 1,600 in 2016 to 3,100
in 2017. However, the number of tenders published and
opened for bidding has decreased this year. In Area C,
out of tenders for 3,200 units that were announced this
year, only two for some 50 housing units have been
published so far. For the first time since 2010, this
year in East Jerusalem there have been no new tenders
published. About 50 per cent of the settlement moves
this year have been concentrated in and around major
Israeli population centres, while some 20 per cent
have been in outlying locations deep inside the West
Bank. The number of Palestinian-owned structures
demolished this year in the West Bank is significantly
lower than in 2016, and the lowest since 2009. In
total, 400 Palestinian-owned structures have been
demolished in the West Bank this year, including East
Jerusalem - a sharp decline compared to the more
than 1,000 structures demolished in 2016.

In addition to those developments, 2017 has seen
worrying legislative, judicial and administrative
initiatives that aim to change the long-standing Israeli
policy concerning the legal status of the West Bank and
the use of private Palestinian land. Settlement-related
activities undermine the chances for the establishment
of a viable, contiguous Palestinian State as part of a
two-State solution.

Secondly, continuing violence against civilians and
incitement perpetuate mutual fear and suspicion. Since
the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), there has been a
significant reduction in the number of violent attacks.
In 2017, there have been 109 shootings, stabbings,
rammings and bombing attacks conducted, compared
to 223 similar attacks in 2016. Regarding fatalities, 72
Palestinians and 15 Israelis have been killed this year,
compared to 109 and 13, respectively, in 2016.

I call on the international community to join the
United Nations in condemning terror attacks and such
reckless action, which impede any efforts to bridge the
gap between Israelis and Palestinians and empower
extremists. Nothing - no cause or grievance -justifies
terror. The terror threat from Gaza of indiscriminate
rocket attacks and tunnel construction continues, and
the recent escalation by militants in Gaza is reckless
and dangerous. I urge all Palestinian factions to
commit to rejecting violence, inflammatory rhetoric
and provocative actions that undermine the cause of
peace. Israel must also uphold its responsibilities under
international human rights and humanitarian law and
calibrate its use of force.

Thirdly, bringing the legitimate Palestinian
National Authority back to Gaza is key to alleviating the
humanitarian crisis, lifting the closures and enhancing
the prospects for peace. I commend Egypt for its tireless
efforts in that respect, and encourage all sides to focus
on addressing the devastating humanitarian situation,
with an immediate focus on the electricity crisis, and
to ensure that agreement is reached on mechanisms to
implement the 12 October intra-Palestinian agreement
in full.

Fourthly, this past year has witnessed important
progress in finalizing agreements between Israel
and the Palestinian Authority with regard to water,
energy, telecommunications and other areas aimed at
improving the economic reality of Palestinians. Those
efforts are critical to rebuilding trust, and obstacles to
their realization must be removed. The United Nations
will continue supporting such efforts.

Fifthly, I am particularly concerned as to the future
ofour collective efforts to achieve peace between Israelis
and Palestinians. The United Nations remains strongly
committed to supporting all endeavours towards a
negotiated two-State solution. The Secretary-General
has been clear that ending the occupation and realizing
a two-State solution, with Jerusalem as the capital of
Israel and Palestine, is the only way to achieve such a
vision. Today, however, there is a growing risk that the
parties may revert to more unilateral actions.

In the current environment, the continued absence
of a credible proposal that could become the basis of
meaningful negotiations is damaging the prospects
for peace. The lack of significant steps on the ground
that protect the viability of a two-State solution
and support Palestinian statehood is undermining
moderates and empowering radicals. The weakening
of the international architecture in support of peace is
increasing the risks to the region. Resolving the conflict
will remove a key driver of extremism and terrorism
in the Middle East and provide hope to generations of
Israelis and Palestinians trapped in a vicious cycle of
violence and conflict.

