Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I will be short in echoing
what my British colleague just said and thanking the
United Kingdom for the good close cooperation on
our path. I also thank all delegations that worked very
constructively in support of resolution 2495 (2019),
for which we were co-penholder. We are also very
thankful for the close cooperation with the Sudan as
the host country of African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). This was a
very positive experience. I have three brief thoughts.

First, the Security Council has once again
demonstrated that it is responsive to the dramatic
changes that we all witnessed in the Sudan. It is
responsive to the request by the Government of the
Sudan to see UNAMID's mandate extended for a
year. With that mandate and the resolution we just
adopted, we sent a very strong message of support for
Prime Minister Hamdok and the Sudanese efforts to
foster peace.

Secondly, we reaffirmed that UNAMID plays an
important role in Darfur, especially in this very crucial
phase during which talks between the Government of
the Sudan and the armed movements are ongoing with
a hope for lasting peace. Collectively, we sent a strong
message with this resolution that all armed groups
should join the talks without preconditions.

Lastly, with this resolution today, as Jonathan Allen
said earlier, we are also laying out a clear road map
for a transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
For Germany, that is a very positive and welcome
development. We will offer our support to make the
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding a reality.

Of course, once again, the transition hinges on a
close dialogue among the Government of the Sudan, the
United Nations and the African Union, which plays a
very important role. Such dialogue will define how a
special political mission that would follow on UNAMID
should be designed so it best responds to the Sudan's
needs and wishes. Such a transition has to be informed
by the conditions on the ground, which we should
consider carefully before making our next decision on
the drawdown of UNAMID. We are therefore looking
forward to close cooperation here in the Security
Council and between the Council and the new Sudan.

