Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): We too are grateful
to Mr. O'Brien for his sobering and chilling account
of the humanitarian situation in Syria. This month,
unfortunately, seems to be no different from previous
ones, since the humanitarian track continues to be
dominated by devastating negative trends, as we just
heard. While there are many ofthem, today I would like
to touch on three areas of particular concern.

First, there are still more than 600,000 people
under siege. Of those, 82 per cent are besieged by
the regime's forces. At the same time, the issues of
sustainable humanitarian access and lifting the sieges
are an integral part of the Astana memorandum and the
concept of de-escalation zones. The question, therefore,
is about how much real progress has been made here.
Has Damascus shown any willingness to follow through
on the memorandum? The answer lies in the dreadful
sentence wejust heard from Mr. O'Brien - that civilian
suffering is a tactic of war.

Secondly, we are alarmed by the most recent
UNICEF report on the suffering of millions of children
in Syria, as well as the horrifying information just
provided by the Under-Secretary-General. More than
2 million children are living in besieged or hard-to-
reach areas around Syria, with little to no humanitarian
aid. Such a reckless and deliberate strategy carries
fundamental risks for the long-term stability of
not just Syria and the Levant but the entire Middle
East. Depriving these children of basic necessities is
equivalent to creating the best possible environment for
the recruitment campaigns of Al-Qaida and the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham. Leaving young Syrians
without hope and turning them into a lost generatio, will
end up creating a long-term safe haven for terrorists at
the very heart of the region.
Lastly, we are concerned about the continuing
forced displacement of civilians in the eastern districts
of Damascus and other regions of Syria, which is
leading to devastating demographic and humanitarian
consequences. Such actions may amount to violations
of international humanitarian law and an attempt to
change the demographic composition of modern Syria.
These and other outrages committed against civilians
by the Syrian regime with the help of its sponsors,
first among them the Russian Federation, must come
to an end.

