Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Prosecutor for her twenty-fifth report on the
situation in Darfur, the continued commitment of the
Prosecutor and her Office to the investigation and for
her briefing.

At the outset, let me express the United Kingdom's
full support for the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and for its vital work to challenge impunity and bring to
account those responsible for the most serious crimes of
international concern. We appreciate the important role
that the ICC plays, often amid difficult conditions on
the ground. That is clearly the case in Darfur. Fifteen
years of violence there have shown that there can be
no military solution to the conflict. Lasting peace can
be realized only with the agreement of a permanent
ceasfire and an inclusive political settlement that
addresses the root causes of the conflict.

The United Kingdom had welcomed the reduction
in military confrontation between the Government
of the Sudan and the Darfur armed movements. The
announcements of unilateral cessations of hostilities
by the Government, the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni
Minawi and the Justice and Equality Movement in
recent months. We were hopeful that that signalled
the parties' willingness to engage genuinely in the
peace process. Therefore, we are deeply concerned by
reports of renewed clashes in recent weeks between the
Government and the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni
Minawi. The ongoing risk of violence has a detrimental
impact to the safety of civilians and the overall stability
of Darfur.

We also continue to be extremely concerned about
the use of sexual violence in the conflict, although we
note the recent decrease in instances. We urge all parties
to show restraint, abide by the unilateral cessations of
hostilities and focus their efforts on the peace process
under the auspices of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel.

On a more positive note, the United Kingdom
welcomes the improvements in access for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and humanitarian actors in Darfur, in
particular to Jebel Marra. We urge the Government of
the Sudan to strive for unfettered access throughout
Darfur. That will enable the Prosecutor to carry out her
investigation and UNAMID to carry out its mandate to
protect civilians and facilitate humanitarian assistance.
Like the Prosecutor, we remain concerned by reports of
continued attacks against internally displaced persons
and that some access restrictions remain in place. In
the light of the fragile security situation in Darfur, the
United Kingdom urges that any changes to UNAMID
during the upcoming mandate renewal be done in a
manner that is gradual, flexible and retentive of the
nation's ability to continue to protect civilians.

Over the course of 25 reports, the Prosecutor has
consistently made it clear that the Court needs the
cooperation of States and the support of the Council
in order to move forward on the situation at hand. We
all need to look carefully at what more we can do in
order to ensure that the Court receives the support that
it deserves. The United Kingdom will continue to call
on the Government of the Sudan to meet its obligations
under resolution 1593 (2005) to cooperate fully with the
Court, execute outstanding arrest warrants and fulfil
its international obligations.

The United Kingdom is frustrated that fugitives
of the Court, including President Al-Bashir and
Mr. Hussein, continue to travel unhindered. We
appreciate that States may sometimes have conflicting
commitments to other regional and international
organizations, but we join the Prosecutor in urging
those States to consult with the Court.

For our part, we will continue to raise our concerns
with the relevant Governments with the ultimate goal of
achieving justice for the thousands of victims in Darfur.
We renew our call to all States parties to cooperate with
the ICC and to abide by their Rome Statute obligations.

We welcome the renewed vigour with which
the Office of the Prosecutor is approaching the
investigation. The Office should be commended for the
progress that it has made on the investigation despite
the fragile security situation, the access restrictions,
the continued clashes and the lack of cooperation.

Finally, the United Kingdom would like to offer
its appreciation for the effort that the Office of the
Prosecutor has put into making the most effective and
efficient use of the resources that it has available. I
take this opportunity to reaffirm the United Kingdom's
commitment to supporting the Court as both a State
party to the Rome statute and a member of the Security
Council.

