Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
welcomes the convening of this meeting to discuss the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It is our pleasure to thank Mr. Guehenno for
his comprehensive and exhaustive briefing on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
on the role of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

We also welcome Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Our delegation appreciates the efforts of the High
Commissioner during his recent visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We thank him for his
exhaustive information, which underlines the fragile
situation of human rights and the fact that some parties
have committed flagrant violations in many parts of the
Congo, particularly in Ituri.

The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
stresses the importance of respect by the various
Congolese parties for the Pretoria and Luanda
Agreements concluded between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda.

Our delegation calls on all parties to respect
human rights, to bring the perpetrators of those
violations to justice and to end the culture of impunity.
The delegation of Syria also stresses the importance of
proceeding with the process of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation, which
will help to broaden the scope of humanitarian
assistance and, at the same time, ensure the provision
of assistance to the Congolese provinces that are in
need. My delegation reaffirms that we must guarantee
the safety and security of all those who work in the
humanitarian assistance field and under the auspices of
MONUC and must shield them from harassment.

We express our concern at the human rights
violations, the indiscriminate killings, the deterioration
of the security situation and the situation of displaced
persons, and the food shortages experienced by a third
of the Congolese population, particularly in the Ituri
region and in neighbouring areas. We express our grave
concern at the increase in the number of displaced
persons as a result of the hostilities.

It is essential to stress the importance of
cooperation with the various United Nations agencies
and programmes, with the World Bank and with other
donors. We call upon the donor community to consider
providing assistance soon, so that we can alleviate the
suffering of this country's people. We encourage the
inter-Congolese dialogue and the finding of a proper
solution to the distribution of Government posts so that
the Government will represent all Congolese parties
and will be able to meet the people's expectations, to
establish an all-inclusive national army and to extend
the Government's authority throughout the country.

We praise the efforts of African countries to find
a solution to the Congolese crisis, particularly the
efforts of the South African leadership.

In conclusion, we express our appreciation for the
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Moustapha Niasse, of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Namanga Ngongi, and of
MONUC.

