The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
should like to thank France for having taken the
initiative to focus our attention on the crucial question
of the transition and exit strategies of peacekeeping
operations.

In the broadest sense, our objective should be
very clear. The Blue Helmets should themselves strive
tirelessly to bring their own work to an end, but of
course there is a great deal of time between the
beginning and the end of an operation and many phases
to go through. The road to follow is strewn with
difficulties, dangers, setbacks and problems.

(spoke in English)

Over the years, we have learned many valuable
lessons about how best to ensure the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding and, ultimately, to
societies that can function and maintain stability on
their own. Considerable work is under way to
strengthen our response to conflict. Last year, the
Security Council held a series of valuable debates on
mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Member
States, the United Nations system and our partners
have gained a common understanding of the challenges
involved.

I welcome today's debate as a further step in
making the best possible use of all our tools and assets.
The United Nations must be ready to help national
authorities to implement peace agreements, re-establish
10-23786
core Government functions, restore the rule of law and
achieve at least a minimum level of sustainable
security throughout their territory. We must promote
reconciliation and inclusive political processes, and
help to provide basic services and to generate
employment and economic activity. All of this is
essential to addressing the roots of crises, sustaining
peace and achieving a viable exit strategy for United
Nations peacekeeping missions.

The United Nations engagement in a country
emerging from conflict will closely track the path that
country takes. We are usually present well before a
peacekeeping operation is deployed. We will usually
remain well after the exit of our Blue Helmets. The
post-peacekeeping United Nations presence might be a
special political mission, a peacebuilding office or
some other configuration. It might be large and
multidimensional, or small and specialized. Whatever
the case, peacekeeping activities must pave the way for
what comes next.

For peace to be sustained, there must be an
overarching strategy that unites the efforts of all United
Nations actors and the international community, and
that strengthens national capacity. The past decade has
seen a continuous surge in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. No one can predict the
future, but in the years ahead we are likely to focus not
so much on new missions, but on ensuring that current
missions and their successor presences can help to
consolidate peace and support lasting stability so that
they can withdraw.

To achieve this, a peacekeeping mission requires
a good entrance. This was emphasized in the 2001
report to the Security Council entitled "No exit without
strategy" (S/2001/394). Allow me to recall that one of
the authors of that report, Andrew Grene, was among
those who perished in the earthquake in Haiti. His
legacy lives on in a report whose recommendations
remain valid today.

A good entrance means that the very mandate of
an operation addresses the root causes of a conflict. It
means charting a path out of Violence through a solid
and sustainable peace process. It means articulating a
clear goal that can be jointly owned by national
stakeholders and the international community. And it
means the timely allocation of enough human and
material resources - including, if necessary, the rapid
10-23786
deployment of standing police and other civilian
capacities.

Exits must be equally well considered from the
very outset of a mission. In assessing whether and
when a peacekeeping operation should be drawn down,
we must look at the strength of national governance
structures, including for security and the rule of law.
We must consider the prospects for socio-economic
recovery. We must examine the risk that a country
could backslide into conflict, and ask whether the
security guarantee provided by uniformed
peacekeepers is still needed. We must look at how to
reconfigure our presence. Drawing down in one area,
such as security, might require temporary strengthening
in another.

Peacekeeping missions should not stay longer
than necessary, but we should also be wary of
withdrawing prematurely only to have to return
because of renewed violence. A key lesson of the 1990s
was the need for some type of follow-on presence to
protect gains and continue the process of building
durable peace. In several recent cases, the transition
has been made to a United Nations peacebuilding
office, but other models, such as regional offices, could
also be considered. Such presences may have smaller
footprints, but still have complex and demanding
mandates. They require resources and the support of
the Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission
and the wider international community.

This year's review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture is thus very timely. We
should discuss the transition from the core security
components of a peacekeeping mission to longer-term
peacebuilding, and we should also reflect on how the
Peacebuilding Commission can engage early.

The engagement of United Nations country teams
is critical throughout all phases of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, but the United Nations is only one of
many international actors in peacebuilding. Regional
institutions, bilateral partners and international financial
institutions are also engaged. We need all these partners
to be working coherently, with a shared sense of
purpose. If stakeholders pursue competing individual
agendas, all our efforts will suffer. We must guard
against this risk. Our collective results will determine
when and how a peacekeeping operation can exit. I urge
that we explore how to ensure that the Security Council
has the necessary benchmarks and information -
3
including the advice of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the input of host Governments - to measure
progress.

(spoke in French)

Three of my Special Representatives are with us
today to give us the benefit of their great experience of
and their thinking on transition and exit strategies. The
countries whose missions they head illustrate the
different phases in which United Nations peacekeeping
and peacebuilding initiatives can find themselves, as
well as the different models that exist and the different
problems that they have to deal with. The activities of
these three missions are invaluable, for they allow us to
establish and build peace and give hope to millions of
men and women.

I hope that we will be able to learn the right
lessons and extract the full benefit of what there is to
be learned from all who will speak today.

