Ms. Loj (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The countries of
Central and Eastern Europe associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia - the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, and the European Free
Trade Association countries belonging to the European
Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein, align
themselves with this statement.

I should like to thank the Deputy Prime Minister,
Mr. Nebojsa Covie, and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Michael Steiner, for their
statements. The Special Representative's briefing,
together with the Secretary-General's report, reinforces
the impression of continued progress in Kosovo since
the update given by Mr. Steiner when he last addressed
the Security Council, three months ago. Nevertheless,
only through a sustained effort by all parties will we
succeed in fully implementing resolution 1244 (1999).
The international community has taken on a
responsibility for ensuring the long-term stability and
development of Kosovo, and the European Union
remains firmly committed to that goal.

An important element in implementing resolution
1244 (1999) is the creation of a culture based on the
rule of law. As reported by the Secretary-General, a big
step forward has been taken in this reporting period,
not least with the formation of Kosovo's multi-ethnic
Government. We have noted that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the provisional institutions have developed a
constructive relationship. Over the past two years,
Kosovo has successfully worked to achieve a more
open political environment. That trend must continue.

It is extremely important that members of all
communities, including those who boycotted the 2000
elections, participate in the municipal elections on 26
October. It is therefore encouraging that the recently
concluded political entity certification period provided
promising signals for increased minority community
participation. The European Union fully supports the
efforts of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe to ensure free and fair elections,
and we are confident that the authorities in Belgrade
will reiterate last year's appeal to the Kosovo Serbs to
participate in the election process.

The constitutional framework provides a clear
distinction between transferred responsibilities and
those reserved for the Special Representative. We fully
endorse the Special Representative's firm response on
recent matters relating to responsibilities for
international relations. It is natural that the provisional
institutions take interest in questions that have an
influence on the situation in Kosovo, but their focus
should be on issues under their jurisdiction. The
European Union notes with satisfaction that guidelines
have now been issued to the provisional institutions of
self-government on entering into agreements with
Governments and with international organizations.
The participation of minorities is vital to the
functioning and legitimacy of the judicial system in
Kosovo. Thus, the European Union welcomes the
recent understanding between UNMIK and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia on securing Kosovo Serb
participation in the multi-ethnic judicial system. We
hope that UNMIK will continue its efforts to increase
the number of judges and prosecutors from minority
groups.

The European Union expresses its strong concern
at the slow pace of the process of return to Kosovo. We
are therefore encouraged by the Secretary-General's
observation that a climate more favourable for the
acceptance of returnees is emerging in local
communities, thanks to UNMIK's commitment to
achieving sustainable returns over the course of this
year. The availability of adequate funding is crucial to
ensuring progress on returns, as is the continued
presence in Kosovo of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. The Assembly's
adoption, earlier this month, of a resolution on the
rights of communities and conditions for returns will, it
is hoped, contribute to the acceleration of the process.
The absence of reported grave ethnically motivated
assaults and the improved freedom of movement for
Kosovo Serbs are also positive developments.

Not knowing the fate of missing relatives
constitutes a serious strain on all communities in
Kosovo and is a major obstacle to reconciliation. We
therefore commend and support Special Representative
Steiner's endeavours in that field.

Moreover, the European Union urges the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
continue to cooperate with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

The situation in Mitrovica continues to be a major
concern to the European Union. The illegal parallel
structures in Mitrovica and in the northern part of
Kosovo should be dismantled and the full authority of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) restored. We call on the authorities
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to further
cooperate with UNMIK in ensuring that Mitrovica
becomes an integrated part of Kosovo society and
administration.

The European Union also encourages further
progress in the general dialogue between UNMIK and
the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
based on the UNMIK/Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Common Document, in fulfilment of resolution 1244
(1999).

In this statement I have touched upon most of the
areas for which benchmarks have been established. The
European Union confirms its strong support for the
benchmark process. As stated by Mr. Steiner to the
Council in April, those benchmarks represent
expectations for the Kosovo leaders and the wider
public. In order to be successful, the process must
involve a joint effort by UNMIK and the provisional
institutions to establish a common understanding on the
road map to the future.

