I welcome President Yusuf and thank him for his briefing. There exists a well-established link between justice and peace, and it has long been recognized that neither one is able to thrive in isolation from the other. In this new era of international disputes, which now encompass complex contemporary issues such as terrorism and climate change, a comprehensive, pragmatic, whole- of-system approach across the various organs of the United Nations is now more critical than ever. Seventy-five years since its establishment, the International Court of Justice, as the guardian of the rule of law, remains an integral and relevant component of the maintenance of international peace and security. The Charter of the United Nations, in Chapter VI, envisioned a symbiotic relationship between the Security Council and the International Court of Justice. It considered that the Security Council would effectively fulfil its critical mandate not on its own but bolstered by the valuable contributions of the Court. Yet in that regard, the Security Council has not taken full advantage of the Court's well-established jurisprudence, grounded in robust decisions and advisory opinions. Consequently, where the Court has jurisdiction, the Security Council ought to encourage Member States to utilize the principal judicial organ of the United Nations in the pursuit of the peaceful settlements of disputes. Member States have an obligation to engage constructively with the Court. Political will is needed to ensure that the decisions of the Court are not reduced to ceremonial pieces of paper. They must be fully respected and effectively enforced to promote and uphold the enduring principles of international law and strengthen the rule of law. Failure to do so serves to undermine the multilateral system and deters efforts aimed at conflict prevention, peacekeeping, conflict resolution and peacebuilding. As such, in instances where judgments are disregarded, it is imperative that the Security Council consider making recommendations to give effect to the Court's directions, in line with the Charter's guidance as set out in Article 94. We welcome President Yusuf's continued efforts to ensure that the Court's Judicial Fellowship Programme is inclusive and fully representative of all geographic regions and legal traditions. Indeed, the Programme is essential to capacity-building and can have a long-term positive impact on systems of justice globally. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines therefore firmly supports the establishment of a voluntary trust fund in support of the Programme to provide more legal practitioners, particularly from the global South, with an invaluable opportunity to enhance their knowledge at the world Court. The use of force, provocative rhetoric and other escalatory actions, such as unilateral coercive measures, should always be rejected in favour of rational and principled settlements of disputes. Similarly, we call on parties to disputes to pursue dialogue and mediation, including through suitable regional mechanisms and without prejudice to their rights to seek a judicial settlement. In that vein, the Court and the Security Council must seek to continuously revitalize their complementary partnership to build and sustain peace. We reaffirm our unwavering support for the Court and recognize its irrefutable contribution to peace and security through the ongoing development of the norms of international law, as well as its reinforcement of the principle of the sovereign equality of States. In conclusion, we congratulate Judges Yuji Iwasawa of Japan, Georg Nolte of Germany, Julia Sebutinde of Uganda, Peter Tomka of Slovakia and Xue Hanqin of China on their election to the Court. We have full confidence in their abilities and are certain that their contributions will be immense.
