I wish to congratulate Germany on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council this month and to thank France for its presidency in June. I would also like to thank Germany and Foreign Minister Heiko Maas for organizing this debate on the topic of pandemics and security. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has spared no one and has acted as a catalyst in many countries and regions of the world, aggravating their situation and, thus, threatening peace and security. Pandemics of this scale have shown that the need to address root causes is real and urgent, and not just some abstract concept. Without seriously addressing social injustice, inequalities and poverty, prolonged unresolved conflicts, foreign occupation and dire humanitarian situations can only be exacerbated. The world has learned during this pandemic that, if our house is not in order and humans are vulnerable, there is no peace or security on our planet and no immunity from viruses or lethal pandemics. It has also shown a need to reinvigorate the social contract between the governed and Governments, with more transparency and trust necessary between the two. Pandemics should not lead to a setback in the preservation of fundamental rights or be used to advance political agendas that are in complete violation of international law. It has also taught us that pandemics cannot be fought by curbing liberties, igniting conflicts or settling them through force instead of international legality, employing security or military options or rolling back gains in freedoms. The pandemic will not disappear if people are silenced; itis only people's ability to fight it that will be curtailed. That is why Lebanon, as well as the overwhelming majority of countries, has supported the call by the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire during the COVID-19 pandemic. Misinformation has spread and hit almost as hard as COVID-19, creating havoc and threatening security and stability in many parts of the world. Lebanon has co-sponsored a Latvian initiative on combating the infodemic and supports the Secretary-General's initiative to promote trusted and accurate information regarding this crisis. In Lebanon, the COVID-19 outbreak has further exacerbated the economic and financial crisis, as well as the humanitarian one. As the members of the Council already know, my country, which is heavily indebted, has been hosting the highest number of refugees and displaced persons per capita in the world. Lebanon is in need of multilateralism now more than ever because it is only through support from the international community and by working together that we and all countries under the stress of the pandemic can recover. With the support of the international community, Lebanon will continue to play its role as a source of peace and security not only for its people but for the whole region. It is absolutely essential that we all swim together, because, as this pandemic has demonstrated, if we do not, we will all drown together. Member States, regional organizations and the United Nations need to be better prepared for future crises of this scale. More cooperation is needed, because it is in the national and security interests of everyone to address this crisis globally. That no one is safe until everyone is safe is truer than ever. This is one of the most challenging times for the United Nations. Its credibility - our credibility - has already been tested. It will continue to be tested through our ability to draw the lessons by planning better and building comprehensive responses that encompass the various dimensions of a pandemic.
