Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Special Representative Kubis and
Executive Director Fedotov for their briefings. China
also listened carefully to the statement of Permanent
Representative Tanin of Afghanistan.

At present, the situation in Afghanistan is at a
critical turning point. China welcomes the holding
of the presidential election in Afghanistan in April
and commends the Afghan people for their active
participation in it. The high voter turnout fully
demonstrated the Afghan people's confidence in a
stable political transition. We hope that the presidential
election will be a new starting point for Afghanistan
towards unity and stability. China acknowledges the
efforts of the Afghan Government and the relevant
institutions in the election.

We have noted the recent turn of events with
respect to the counting of ballots for the second
round of presidential elections. We hope that the
parties concerned will resolve the pertinent issues
appropriately through dialogue. China will respect the
choice of the Afghan people. We are confident that a
stable and smooth conclusion of the election process
will help Afghanistan to embark on the track of peace,
stability and development at an early date.

The realization of the rebuilding of peace and
durable security in Afghanistan is primarily contingent
on the efforts of the Government and the people
of Afghanistan, with the vigorous support of the
international community. On the basis of full respect for
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Afghanistan, the international community should
support the Afghan-led and Afghan-managed process
and assist Afghans in their efforts to overcome various
challenges encountered in transition and transformation
so that they can realize national security and stability
sooner.

China is deeply concerned about the unabated
civilian casualties as a result of terrorist and violent
attacks in Afghanistan. The relevant parties should
effectively support the Afghan National Security
Forces in assuming their security responsibilities and
assist Afghanistan in strengthening its troop and police
capacity. We urge the international community to
play a positive and constructive role in Afghanistan's
realization of a broadbased national reconciliation and
support Afghanistan's High Peace Council in its efforts
to press for national reconciliation.

The continued enhancement of Afghanistan's
capacities in economic development is an important
basis for its durable security and stability. We hope
that the Afghan Government will continue to push for
economic and social development, continuously improve
people's livelihoods and enable the entire population
to enjoy the dividends of development in all areas and
gradually eradicate the security threats of terrorism,
drug cultivation and trafficking, and transnational
organized crimes. The international community
should effectively honour its relevant commitments
and strengthen its support for Afghanistan towards
the realization of economic development and social
progress.

The United Nations, regional organizations and
relevant initiatives have played an important role in
helping Afghanistan and its region achieve security,
stability and development. We support the United
Nations in its continued central and coordinating role
to help Afghanistan smoothly complete its transition
and transformation. We hope that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan will strengthen
its communication and cooperation with the Afghan
Government and play its positive role in supporting
the Afghan efforts for peace, stability and national
rebuilding.

Afghanistan is a good and friendly neighbour of
China. China hopes to see a unified, stable, developed
and friendly Afghanistan. China resolutely supports
Afghanistan in its efforts to maintain national
sovereignty and territorial integrity. As an active
supporter, participant and facilitator of Afghan peace
and rebuilding, China has, over a long period of time,
been providing Afghanistan with large amounts of
economic and social development assistance, helping
build hospitals, schools, roads and other infrastructure.
In addition, China actively participates in the
regional cooperation on Afghanistan and has made its
contribution in facilitating Afghanistan's peace and
rebuilding process.

The fourth ministerial meeting of the Istanbul
Process will be convened in Tianjin, China, in August.
China would like to closely cooperate with Afghanistan
and the international community and facilitate the
meeting so as to send a clear and positive signal of
support for Afghanistan's political, economic and
security transition. China would like to work with the
international community in our joint effort to push for
Afghanistan's early realization of durable peace and
sustainable development.

