Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome you, Sir, and Germany, in your
capacity as President ofthe Council, and we thank France
for a very productive presidency in March. We are also
grateful to our briefers, Mr. Lowcock, Mr. Maurer and
Ms. Modirzadeh, for their very interesting comments.

The formulation of a body of rules relating to
international humanitarian law is one of the major
accomplishments of the twentieth century. Humanity,
including in armed conflict - indeed, on the
battlefield - is a hallmark of civilized behaviour.
Unfortunately, in the almost 74 years since the end of
the Second World War, the Security Council has had
to address the issue of strengthening the institutions of
international humanitarian law again and again. It is
our job to make sure that the authority of international
humanitarian law is not undermined, and in order to
do that it is essential to refrain from adopting selective
approaches or double standards in which some parties"
violations are flagged and the crimes of others are
passed over in silence. Incidentally, the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
addressed that issue very eloquently.

It is also our job to work to constantly strengthen
the existing mechanisms in the area of international
humanitarian law. We believe there are enough of
them at present. That was also confirmed by the
outcomes issued two weeks ago, on 15 March, of the
intergovernmental process on strengthening compliance
with international humanitarian law based on the
resolution on the subject adopted at the thirty-second
Conference of the ICRC. We believe that the problems
with implementation that we are always hearing about
are not because international humanitarian law is weak
but because people are not prepared to put its principles
and standards into practice.

Against a background ofpersistent armed conflicts,
humanitarian assistance is of primary importance,
and protecting humanitarian and medical personnel
is one of the most crucial aspects of the issue of the
protection of civilians. Every party to a conflict is
responsible for their safety. Russia will continue to urge
the parties to conflicts to take all necessary measures
to ensure the safety of providers of humanitarian and
medical assistance.

However, we should point out that we should
exercise great precision and caution in discussing the
many proposals for involving the Security Council in
the architecture of ensuring that the perpetrators of
international humanitarian law violations are brought
to justice. A number of States have shown recently that
they are less and less interested in the reliability of data
determining the identity of perpetrators of various evil
deeds of one kind or another. What they are interested
in is something else entirely.

One of the main prerequisites for the effective
protection of workers from humanitarian organizations
and medical personnel is their compliance with the
guiding principles of international humanitarian
assistance, including respect for sovereignty and
the humanitarian, impartial and neutral nature of
their provision of humanitarian assistance. Medical
and humanitarian workers in areas of conflict must
abide by the laws of the country they are in. That is
a fundamental truth. It is unacceptable for medical
and humanitarian organizations to openly provide
assistance to terrorists and carry out their inhumane
plans, as the White Helmets are doing in Syria. Such
pseudo-humanitarian activities, which amount to a
manipulation of the topic of medical and humanitarian
assistance in armed conflict, will end up undermining
the systems of international humanitarian law and
will backfire by damaging the authority of genuine
humanitarian and medical workers.

Last week, when the Security Council was working
on the draft of resolution 2462 (2019) on combating
the financing of terrorism - which, incidentally, has
produced a big response * one of the main issues
discussed was that of ensuring unhindered access
for humanitarian organizations and the provision of
medical care in areas of armed conflict and counter-
terrorist activity. Through concerted efforts the Council
found a balanced way to word it. Protection, according
to paragraph 24 of the resolution, is to be given to

"exclusively humanitarian activities, including
medical activities, that are carried out by impartial
humanitarian actors in a manner consistent with
international humanitarian law".
By the way, we are very grateful to the International
Committee of the Red Cross for drawing attention to
this whole issue and for its contribution to the process.

