Mr. Holkeri: I would like to express my
profound appreciation for the support we have received
today for the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) as well as for the high
assessment of the activities of the Mission. Without the
Council's strong support, we would never have
achieved the progress that has been made so far, and
we would not have been able to complete our task. I
thank the Council for this. I am particularly grateful for
the support that the Council has provided for the
standards implementation process.

I shall now endeavour to respond to Council
members' questions.

The Permanent Representative of Pakistan and
other members of the Council justifiably urged UNMIK
to speed up the drawing up of the implementation work
plan. Let me say that we are well aware of the urgency of
producing that document expediently. UNMIK, in
consultation with the Provisional Institutions, is working
on this intensively. We need to have an effective
document of high quality, and this requires a very
thorough effort. We strongly hope to be able to present the
work plan to the Council very soon.

The representative of Benin, among others, raised
the issue of whether there was a study on the interaction
between the Kosovo Police Service and the Kosovo
Protection Corps (KPC). As the Council is aware, the
responsibility of the KPC is to prevent and deal with the
consequences of civil emergencies. In that respect, its
activities are supported by the Kosovo Police Service.
That was the case, for example, during the 2002
earthquake in anilane and the fire in Kosovo's so-called
"B" power station. The organizations occasionally share
the use of training facilities. We have not come across any
cases of relations of a criminal nature between the two
organizations.
As concerns the observation made by the Russian
representative, who stressed the crucial importance of
upholding the standards, allow me to assure the Council
that watering down the standards is not an option - not
for anyone, and especially not for me. The
implementation plan will spell out the actions needed to
reach standards and will not in any way alter the standards
as already announced in the "Standards for Kosovo"
document.

As regards the comment made by the representative
of Spain regarding the deadline for the production of the
implementation plan, let me make clear that work to
implement the standards is already ongoing; what is
missing is the plan on paper.

Nevertheless, I understand the Council's desire to
see a work plan as quickly as possible. I share that desire,
and intensive work in this respect is ongoing in Kosovo.

I hope also that it is understood that the best way
forward is partnership between UNMIK and the
Provisional Institutions. The reality is that we share a
Government in Kosovo, and I think it right that we should
work together to produce the implementation plan.

The representative of France specifically
highlighted the responsibility of the Provisional
Institutions for the implementation of standards. I should
like to emphasize that, while standards were developed to
assess the progress of the institutions, implementation
will be a joint UNMIK-Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government exercise, not least because a clear separation
exists between the reserved and transferred
responsibilities, both of which are essential for the
progress of Kosovo. At the same time, within the
implementation work plan, there will be a clear separation
of responsibilities between UNMIK and the Provisional
Institutions. This will also allow us effectively to monitor
their progress.

I turn now to the comment made by the
representative of Serbia and Montenegro. I have made
careful note of the concerns expressed by him. May I say
that those concerns are being addressed on the ground in
Kosovo on a daily basis. We would welcome constructive
cooperation from Belgrade in dealing with concrete issues
that affect the Kosovo Serb community, not least its
participation in the standards implementation process. On
that point, it is simply unjustified to argue that Kosovo
Serb concerns will be ignored in the production of the
standards implementation work plan. The Provisional
Institutions and I have repeatedly made it clear that
Kosovo Serbs are welcome in all the implementation
groups and we shall ensure that full and fair account is
taken of their concerns. I repeat that reassurance here
today. I would ask the representative of Serbia and
Montenegro to convey that to Belgrade, along with the
clear wish of the Council, expressed today, that they
should participate.

I very much welcome the confirmation by the
representative of Serbia and Montenegro of Belgrade's
intention to engage in direct dialogue with Pristina. I
really do hope that this will allow the talks to start without
delay.

Allow me once again to thank all Council members
for their support and I do hope that I, or somebody, will
be back before them very soon, presenting the
implementation working plan so that we can continue our
work and target the real outcome for mid-2005.

