Mr. Mladenov: Let me begin by presenting the
Secretary-General's report pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 2169 (2014) on the activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the
most recent developments in Iraq. I am honoured to
be joined here today by the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Valerie Amos, and the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra'ad
Al-Hussein.

Twelve months ago, the city of Fallujah fell into
the hands of the terrorist organization the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), setting off the
displacement of some 2 million people - currently one
of the largest such populations globally. From the very
beginning, ISIL's strategy has been obvious - to insert
itself into the ethnic and religious fault lines of Iraq,
to undermine legitimate authorities and to spread fear
among the communities. Its goals have also been clear
from the beginning - to destroy the Iraqi State and
replace it with a state of terror that is built on genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity. To this end,
it continues using parts of Iraq and neighbouring Syria
to advance on the rest of the region and threaten global
peace and security.

The crisis in Iraq has been further aggravated by
the unresolved political, social and economic problems
of the country's difficult transition to democracy; by
the lack of agreement on the full implementation of
the Constitution; by stalled reforms and sectarian
differences; and by the country's exposure to the broader
regional and global rifts. This explosive combination
has consistently undermined public trust in the new
Iraqi State for years, and it has driven communities
apart, ultimately creating fertile ground for violence.

As the crisis unfolded, Iraq almost collapsed. Its
western provinces were overrun by ISIL; the Kurdistan
region openly spoke of seceding; the southern
governorates struggled with poverty while producing
the country's riches; Baghdad was threatened on a daily
basis by barrage of suicide bombers and improvized
explosive devices; and Iraq's minorities have been
subjected to unspeakable horrors. Faced with a common
threat, the political, community and religious leaders
across the country focused on pulling back from the
brink and saving Iraq. A strategy emerged, which I am
honoured to report was supported and facilitated by the
United Nations Mission in Iraq. Leaders agreed that the
response to ISIL should be based on the Constitution,
national unity and reconciliation.

First came the election of a new Speaker, a new
President and a new Prime Minister. Despite the odds,
this process was completed within the constitutional
timeline. Then the focus shifted on ensuring a
peaceful transition between the outgoing and incoming
Administrations - a rare occurrence in Iraq's turbulent
history. Finally, an inclusive Government of national
unity was formed, based on national political agreement
and a new ministerial programme. In the past few days,
the Prime Minister has issued instructions preventing
the armed forces from hoisting banners or flags other
than the Iraqi national symbols, and discontinuing
the use of logos and insignia of parties or political
organizations. In a separate move, the Government has
decided to allow displaced students to attend schools
and universities in their current areas of displacement.
These are just a few examples of the first steps in a
broader initiative to restore confidence among Iraq's
communities.

Today I encourage the Iraqi Government to continue
moving forward with consolidating its political,
security and economic efforts in an inclusive and
comprehensive manner in order to kick-start national
reconciliation and dialogue and restore stability and
economic growth to the country. This will also entail
re-engaging all disaffected communities, particularly
those located in areas of current conflict.

The Iraqi Government's security strategy to counter
ISIL is predicated upon organizing, supporting and
integrating local communities into a national system
that will allow them to keep their homes safe from
terrorism; on restructuring and empowering the armed
forces to fight ISIL; on strengthening cooperation with
the Peshmerga; and on working with the international
coalition and Iraq's allies and neighbours. I particularly
welcome the Government's efforts to improve its
cooperation with local tribes and other residents who are
committed to protecting their communities from ISIL.
In this process, the payment of salaries, the provision
of weapons and training, and legal guarantees to the
volunteers should be treated as a priority.

Spurred by the growing brutality ofISIL, illustrated
most recently by the massacre of 322 members of the
Albu Nimr tribe, communities across the country are
beginning to push back. Most recently, the Anbar
and Ninewa Provincial Councils reached agreement
with the Government to form local forces. It is the
cooperation between the Iraqi Army, local volunteers
and outside support that has made the liberation of
towns like Amerli, Jurf al-Sakhar and Zumar possible.
Most recently, this morning the oil refinery at Beiji and
surrounding areas have been brought back under the
control of the Government.

Nevertheless, the presence of militia groups
operating outside State structures remains a challenge.
To deal with this, the Government is putting in place
measures that should prevent non-State groups from
bearing arms in public. I take this opportunity to
also urge all armed groups outside of ISIL to seek the
resolution of their grievances through serious dialogue
with the Government in order to achieve genuine
political reconciliation and to stand united against the
danger of terrorism and violence for a better future for
all Iraqis. UNAMI remains committed to assisting the
Government of Iraq in these processes in accordance
with its mandate.

The process of working with local fighters should
also go hand in hand with restructuring, retraining and
re-equipping the Iraqi army. I am pleased to report
that important initial steps have been taken, including
the appointment of a number of new commanders.
Moreover, the Government's programme provides for
the creation of the Iraqi national guard. This force would
allow people to volunteer and defend their homes, with
legal guarantees that the Government would provide
support in line with the standards of other branches of
the Iraqi security services. The United Nations Mission
in Iraq has been asked to provide advice and technical
assistance in the legal drafting process for the national
guard law, and we look forward to working with our
partners to conclude this process as soon as possible.

I am further happy to report some important
positive developments in the relationship between
Erbil and Baghdad. Four days ago, with the support
of the United Nations Mission in Iraq and the United
States, an interim agreement was reached that allows
public sector employees in the Kurdistan Region
to begin receiving their salaries. The Kurdistan
Regional Government will also resume partially its oil
contribution to the federal budget at a time of national
crisis. This important step breaks a deadlock that was
at the core of the most serious deterioration of relations
between Baghdad and the Kurdistan Region to date.
It also reflects a new-found willingness to engage in
dialogue and cooperation to tackle difficult issues.

On behalf of the Secretary-General, I want to
commend Iraqi Prime Minister Haidar Al Abadi and
Kurdistan Regional Government Prime Minister
Nechirvan Barzani for reaching this agreement,
which is to the benefit of all Iraqis. I would like to
encourage both leaders to seize the momentum and
swiftly move forward towards a comprehensive,
fair and constitutional solution to all outstanding
issues, including the enactment of oil and gas and
revenue-sharing laws. UNAMI, as always, stands ready
to continue providing its good offices, as well as legal
and technical support, to this process.

The Iraqi Government's efforts are being reinforced
by the support of the international community. I would
like to thank those among Iraq's neighbouring States
that have been responding with generous pledges and the
delivery of vital humanitarian and security assistance in
response to the crisis. I have recently visited with some
of Iraq's regional partners, which expressed readiness
to establish a strategic relationship with Baghdad. This
coincides with the Government's ongoing efforts to
engage its neighbours as part ofa comprehensive effort
to promote stability in Iraq and the region. I strongly
welcome the Government's efforts to explore the
elements of a common political and regional security
approach to combat ISIL. This has been a key feature
in the discussions that Iraq's leaders have pursued with
Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, the
United Arab Emirates and others.

From the beginning of 2014 and until the end
of October, at least 10,000 people have been killed
and almost 20,000 injured. These are devastating
times for the country. My colleagues Ms. Amos and
Mr. Al-Hussein will brief the Council on humanitarian
and human rights developments. I will just take this
opportunity to call on the Government to begin the
process ofreforming the criminaljustice system of Iraq
in order to promote accountability and strengthen the
rule of law and the protection of human rights. In line
with its programme, I also urge Iraq to move swiftly
forward on an amnesty law that is in line with the
Constitution.

As we remain focused on the critical humanitarian
situation, let us not forget or overlook the need for
development support in Iraq. The new Government
has inherited a dire fiscal situation; it is in need of
international support not only to confront the menace of
terrorism through military action, but to also implement
vital fiscal, economic and social reforms.

I wish to present briefly the fourth report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution
2107 (2013) on the issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-
party persons and property (S/2014/776). I wish that
I could report to the Council significant progress on
the missing Kuwaitis and the Kuwaiti national archives
since our last report (S/2014/485). The lack ofimmediate
results, however, should not be the only yardstick by
which we measure success. Iraq-Kuwait relations today
are at their peak. UNAMI's endeavours and Iraq's
persistence, especially in relation to the missing, have
been noteworthy. In the past four months, as in the 13
months before that, Iraqis have shown an unwavering
commitment to the search for the missing Kuwaitis.
Exploring leads, debriefing witnesses and informants,
and digging trenches have taken place in a purposeful
manner, despite the debilitating security situation. This
has been recognized and appreciated by Kuwait.

In September, a witness travelled to Kuwait; this
was only the second witness to come forward since
2004. Sadly, the visit and the identification of the site
that this witness had provided did not yield immediate
results. A second witness, who has approached UNAMI
volunteering to help, is going to travel to Kuwait in the
coming days. Our teams are also working on the case
of a third potential witness who may hold the key to a
site containing a number of remains. These sensitive
discussions on the subject show that we can continue
engaging with Kuwait, Iraq and the families of the
missing persons.

Last but not least, UNAMI has been unanimously
welcomed by the tripartite mechanism as an observer,
which I read as a vote of confidence in our impartiality,
trustworthiness and work. I assure the Council and the
families of the missing that UNAMI will continue to
do all that it can to live up to the trust that has been
placed in us.

Two days ago, on 16 November, an explosion
targeted a United Nations convoy in Baghdad. Thanks
to the professionalism of the United Nations security
teams, all our colleagues are safe. This incident
reminds us of the conditions of hardship under which
our staff must operate. As such, I would like to express
my appreciation for their daily sacrifice, and to express
appreciation to the Security Council and the Secretary-
General for their support and understanding of our work.
I also wish to express my appreciation and gratitude to
my political deputy, Mr. Gyorgy Busztin, for having
borne this responsibility with passion and commitment.
I also thank my humanitarian deputy, Ms. Jacqueline
Badcock, for her commitment and service in overseeing
the humanitarian and development operations at a
crucial time for Iraq. I wish both of them the very best
in their new endeavours after they leave UNAMI.

Once again, I express my deep and sincere
appreciation to the Government and people of Iraq for
their continued cooperation and assistance during these
difficult times.

