Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
fully endorses the statement made by the Ambassador
of Spain on behalf of the European Union. The
continuation of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is tragic.
The humanitarian situation and the suffering of the
people in the Palestinian territories are intolerable.
Civilians are paying for the present murderous
blockade with their lives, and this must urgently stop.

The international community, especially the
Security Council that represents it, has even set a very
clear framework to get us off this devastating treadmill.
Specific demands have been placed on the parties by
the Council in resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002)
and 1403 (2002), and in the Presidential statement
dated 10 April 2002. That statement endorsed the
Madrid statement made by the "quartet", composed of
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the
United States Secretary of State, the Russian Minister
of Foreign Affairs and the High Representative of the
European Union. France rejects any sequential or
conditional reading of these decisions. They must be
put into effect immediately and in their entirety.

Israel should immediately proceed to a complete
withdrawal from reoccupied Palestinian towns and
villages. Withdrawal of the Israeli army has been
recorded in Jenin; now Israel must withdraw from other
occupied towns and villages. In particular, Israel must
lift the siege on the Church of the Nativity in
Bethlehem and give back full freedom of movement to
the President of the Palestinian Authority, Yasser
Arafat.

On their side, the Palestinian Authority and the
President of the Authority must do everything to take
on their share of responsibility and meet their
commitments. In particular, they must put an end to
acts of violence and terrorist attacks. Such blind attacks
against civilians are morally and politically
unacceptable. That is the reason why France welcomes
the statement made last Saturday by the President of
the Palestinian Authority and his staff condemning
terrorism, especially the most recent attack in
Jerusalem.
Over and beyond declarations, France would like
to recall that the Palestinian Authority and the
President of the Authority can act only insofar as they
are given the means to do so. The destruction of
Palestinian infrastructure by the Israeli army is a
political fault that brings with it very grave
consequences. Once a ceasefire has been signed, it will
be necessary to start reconstruction of those facilities
with the assistance of the international community.
There is no other way than the conclusion of a
ceasefire and the resumption, without delay, of political
negotiations on a final and just political settlement.

We all know the general shape of such a
settlement: an end to Israeli occupation and the
peaceful coexistence of two independent States, Israel
and Palestine, living within safe and recognized
frontiers. It is a delusion to believe that such a
settlement can be concluded without Yasser Arafat; he
continues to be the legitimate and elected
representative of the Palestinian people.

France is greatly concerned by the humanitarian
situation of the Palestinian population, who lives under
a constant curfew and lockdown. France is particularly
concerned by the precarious plight of the people inside
the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem and in the
Jenin refugee camp.

Israel must take all the necessary measures under
international humanitarian law defined by the Geneva
Conventions of 1949, in particular with regard to the
protection of civilians and foreign nationals, but also
with regard to the treatment of detainees. Israel must
allow for the Palestinian population's immediate access
to medical care and humanitarian assistance.

The gravity of the humanitarian crisis throughout
the West Bank demands that the international
community provide immediate assistance. The major
humanitarian agencies have made urgent appeals.
France has already sent more than 20 tons of
emergency humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian
territories through the International Committee of the
Red Cross. Other emergency measures are being
undertaken for the benefit of the Jenin refugee camp.

The scenes of devastation, in particular those in
Jenin, as reported by the international press and the
major humanitarian organizations, are extremely
shocking. Every effort must be made to search for and
rescue any survivors. The extreme seriousness of the
eyewitness reports makes it absolutely necessary for us
to find out the truth, in an objective manner. An
international fact-finding committee must be sent to
Jenin.

The time has also come to move the parties away
from murderous confrontation. An international
presence on the ground is indispensable; there is almost
complete international consensus on that point. France
fully supports the approach of the Secretary-General,
who has made ambitious and courageous proposals for
the deployment of a multinational interposition force.
Such a force would work, together with the parties, to
put an end to the spiral of violence and would monitor
the ceasefire. It would establish a climate of security in
the occupied Palestinian territories so as to ensure, in
particular, that humanitarian assistance and economic
aid could be delivered without impediment, in
accordance with international humanitarian law. With
the assistance of the international community, the force
would contribute to the reconstruction of the
institutions of the Palestinian Authority, including its
security apparatus, which have been destroyed. It
would create conditions of calm conducive to the
relaunching of a genuine political negotiating process
aimed at a final settlement of the conflict, without
which there will never be a lasting ceasefire.

A collective and in-depth process of reflection
must now take place so that a well-considered and
effective decision can be speedily arrived at. The
international community should make clear its
readiness to deploy an international presence and
should immediately begin discussions on the practical
ways and means of doing so. It would, of course, be
appropriate to consult the parties; their cooperation will
be required. The composition of any international force
should be such that its impartiality would be assured
for both parties. A significant American commitment
appears to us to be indispensable.

The situation is tragic. We must not, however,
lose hope. The efforts of the international community
are continuing on an intensive basis. The United States
sent its Secretary of State to the region, where he was
able to meet at length with the leaders of the two
parties. That new American commitment marks a
positive turning point, however great the difficulties
encountered may be. France hopes that the Secretary of
State will continue his mission, which should benefit
from the continuing support of the Security Council
and of the international community as a whole. The
Secretary of State has the full support of the other
members of the "quartet" who, for their part, are also
playing an active role. We must persevere along the
path set out by Security Council resolutions. Only by
redoubling our efforts and through political will and
tenacity will the international community be able to get
the parties to see reason and, finally, to establish peace.

