Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): In spite
of the distressing nature of today's debate, I would first
like to use this opportunity to thank the Ambassador of
Indonesia for the way he presided over the Council
during November, to wish you, Mr. President, success
and to assure you of our support during your
presidency.

I would like to thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for the
detailed, very moving and concise report he has
presented to us in compliance with resolution
1593 (2005). Through that resolution, the Security
Council referred to the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) the situation in Darfur since
lJuly 2002. In accordance with Chapter VII of the
Charter, the Council thus intended to make the fight
against impunity for the crimes committed in Darfur a
key element in the solution to the threat to peace and
security in the Sudan and in the region, of which the
Council was seized.
07-6267

France welcomes the fact that the Security
Council has shouldered its responsibilities to ensure
that the fight against impunity does not remain a dead
letter, as the atrocities committed in Darfur are
contrary to the founding principles of the United
Nations. Twenty months later, the report presented by
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, a perfectly clear and precise
report, makes the following affirmations.

First, crimes that come under the jurisdiction of
the ICC and which come under the purview of
resolution 1593 (2005) continue to be committed in
Darfur, including against the 2.5 million persons who
have been forcibly displaced to the camps, and against
humanitarian personnel. The Prosecutor spoke of
massive crimes, and, like him, we note the extent of the
acts of sexual violence, arbitrary arrests and
assassinations. I also note the organized, voluntary and
concerted nature of those systematic acts of violence.

Secondly, the Sudanese Government is not
cooperating with the Court, nor is it implementing the
arrest warrants the Court issued on 27 April for war
crimes and crimes against humanity against Ahmad
Harun, the former Minister for the Interior and the
current Minister for Humanitarian Affairs, and
Ali Kushayb, the head of the militia. The Prosecutor
has indicated the direct involvement of these
individuals in the crimes committed in Darfur.

Thirdly, not only is the Sudanese Government not
executing the arrest warrants, but is in fact impeding
the work of the Court by denying the existence of the
alleged crimes and by appointing Ahmad Harun to a
post which has given him direct power over the
individuals whose displacement he ordered under his
previous functions, and - the height of irony or of
provocation - putting him in charge of the Sudan's
relations with the United Nations. As for Ali Kushayb,
his actions and freedom of movement have in no way
been impeded.

In paragraph 2 of resolution 1593 (2005), the
Security Council decided "that the Government of
Sudan and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur,
shall cooperate fully with and provide any necessary
assistance to the Court and the Prosecutor". This is a
decision taken by the Council.

Despite the in-depth investigation conducted by
the Prosecutor, which clearly detailed the manner in
which the crimes committed by Ahmad Harun and Ali
Kushayb were perpetrated, the Sudanese Government
7

denies the crimes and protects those individuals. The
Government has not followed up with the required
legal proceedings in view of the results of the
Prosecutor's investigation. The conditions for applying
the principle of complementarity, which permits the
Court to exercise its jurisdiction, have thus been
fulfilled.

The lack of cooperation by the Sudanese
authorities prevents the Court from exercising its
jurisdiction. As a result, France shares the conclusion
outlined by Mr. Moreno-Ocampo that the Sudanese
Government has not fulfilled its legal obligations in the
implementation of resolution 1593 (2005). The
Prosecutor has just recalled for us that Harun alone is
currently charged with 50 counts of war crimes and
crimes against humanity.

Our Council must react in view of these facts. We
must do our utmost to support the efforts of the Court
so that it is able to fulfil the task we entrusted to it
when we referred to it the situation in Darfur. Clearly,
that requires the execution of the arrest warrants
against Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb. The Sudanese
Government must be reminded of its obligations and
responsibilities. We owe that to the thousands of
victims and the 2.5 million internally displaced persons
who still live in the terror of the camps.

In its resolution, the Council encouraged the
Court to support international cooperation with efforts
to promote the rule of law, protect human rights and
combat impunity in Darfur. It underscored the need to
promote healing and reconciliation in order to
strengthen efforts to restore durable peace.

In that spirit that we must today forcefully
express our support for the International Criminal
Court in fulfilling its mission. It is the indispensable
complement of our actions to bring about political
reconstruction and to ensure security on the ground
through the deployment of a hybrid force - which, as
I recall, is still being impeded, in particular by
obstacles created by the Sudanese Government.

My Government wishes therefore to state very
clearly that the Security Council should adopt a
declaration reminding the Sudan very firmly of its
obligation to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court.

