Mr. Wali: May I take this opportunity, Sir, to
express my delegation's appreciation to you for having
convened this debate. I wish also to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and to wish you a successful tenure.

The African Union is also pleased to have been
invited to this debate, and I apologize for the inability
of the Chairman of the African Union, President
Olesegun Obasanjo of Nigeria, to be here personally
due to prior engagements.

The delegation of Nigeria is delighted to see you,
Sir, preside over the affairs of the Security Council. We
note that this debate is taking place at a time when the
Council has just concluded its consideration of the
report of its mission to West Africa, which, inter alia,
also focuses on the proactive role of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in the
quest for peace and stability in the subregion.

We thank you, Sir, for having organized this
meeting and are confident that this and other efforts of
the Security Council will lead to improved
coordination between the Council and regional
organizations in the management of conflict as well as
enhance the appreciation of Member States for the
Council - the organ with the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
in accordance with Chapter V, Article 24, of the United
Nations Charter. I wish to recall also that that Article
enjoins the Organization to take effective and
collective measures aimed at the prevention and
removal of threats to peace and at the suppression of
acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace.
Article 52 recognizes the relevance and the role of
regional and subregional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
noteworthy that that responsibility was reaffirmed by
General Assembly resolution 55/128.

The global village in which we live today
demands that the spirit of community and shared vision
should guide the actions of everyone on all issues of
concern to the international community. My country
has therefore followed with satisfaction the various
initiatives of the Security Council aimed at winning the
support of regional leaders and organizations for the
common goal of conflict prevention and resolution.

Permit me, in that regard, to refer to the Council's
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa. It reflects the Security Council's
determination to continue its engagement with Africa
by strengthening its cooperation with the African
Union and other regional and subregional organizations
in the area of international peace and security. The
appointment of special envoys by the Chair of the
African Union in areas where the Council is
operational is another important step in cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
the stabilization process. As a result of the
recommendations of the Ad Hoc Working Group, the
Security Council now pays regular attention to
challenges to stability in Africa.

As has been amply demonstrated, solutions to
these problems require comprehensive approaches.
They also require intimate knowledge of the terrain,
the politics and the complex interplay of forces in that
region. That is why regional organizations can play a
useful role.

The development of regional strategies that
involve regional actors in the resolution of conflicts
has been the primary approach of countries in our
region. The Constitutive Act of the African Union
upholds Article 33 of the United Nations Charter,
which enjoins the pacific settlement of disputes
through negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration and resort to regional agencies or
arrangements. The Act has a built-in mechanism for
conflict resolution through the Union's Peace and
Security Council. The responsibility for conflict
resolution is also undertaken by the heads of State or
Government of the African Union and, at the
subregional level, by the authority of heads of State of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Southern African Development
Community.

The role of regional and subregional
organizations in complementing the work of the United
Nations on issues of peace and security is therefore
self-evident. Within that context, the African Union,
through its central organ, the Peace and Security
Council, has been active in mediating conflicts. Today,
no conflict situation is outside its range of
consideration. In all these crisis situations, the African
Union has either taken direct action or worked closely
with subregional organizations and/or the United
Nations. It is an indication of its involvement in the
peace and security issues of the continent that the
Protocol relating to the establishment of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union entered into
force on 26 December 2003. Measures are now being
taken to operationalize all aspects of the Protocol.
These include the Panel of the Wise, the continental
Early Warning System, the African Standby Force and
the Union's Military Staff Committee.

In West Africa, considerable progress has been
made in retooling the machinery for conflict resolution.
The Protocol relating to the Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management, Resolution, Peacekeeping
and Security, adopted by ECOWAS in 1999, provided
for the creation of several organs, including the
Mediation and Security Council, the Council of Elders
and a department in the secretariat charged with
responsibility for peace and security issues.

In all those initiatives, African leaders have
sought the cooperation and input of the Security
Council, as the primary organ of the United Nations
charged with the maintenance of international peace
and security. For example, ECOWAS took steps to
inform the Security Council of intended measures and
canvassed for support and cooperation. In Cote
d'Ivoire, a delegation of ECOWAS Ministers for
Foreign Affairs made a strong representation to the
Security Council and persuaded it to establish a United
Nations peacekeeping operation in that country. Earlier,
it had been a contingent of ECOWAS forces and some
French troops that had managed to contain the volatile
political situation. The support of the Security Council,
through its resolution 1479 (2003), was instrumental to
the United Nations presence in the country.

It is equally noteworthy that all the decisions of
those regional and subregional organizations have been
promptly conveyed to the Security Council for its
information as input into its decision-making process.
That has been done in full appreciation of the Council's
primary role in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

Our experience in Liberia and in other conflicts
has clearly shown the important contributions that
subregional organizations such as ECOWAS have made
and can make towards peace and stability when dealing
with complex situations. It will be recalled, for
example, that the deployment of the first contingents of
West African peacekeeping troops in Monrovia, on 5
August 2003, promptly stabilized the situation and
facilitated the eventual deployment of United Nations
humanitarian efforts.

Obviously, there is much more that can be done
to reinforce such cooperation. In our estimation, the
political will demonstrated by African leaders in the
search for solutions to conflicts, as well as the
establishment of the basis for stability and
development, deserves to be backed by commensurate
resources. There is a need to mobilize the support of
the international community for post-conflict peace-
building and humanitarian challenges. Similarly,
assistance in the training of troops and the
standardization of equipment for peacekeeping duties
will continue to be needed. Above all, the United
Nations should cooperate with regional organizations
to address the root causes of conflicts and the factors
that exacerbate them. Most of them are cross-border
problems. Their solution, therefore, requires not only
regional or subregional approaches, but the active
support and cooperation of the international
community.

Finally, we note with satisfaction that the United
Nations Office for West Africa, as part of its efforts
aimed at enhancing cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations, is forging a close
working relationship with the Economic Community of
West African States. We welcome the cooperation with
the African Union which is being forged through the
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa,
especially in the implementation of the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD). In that
connection, we note with appreciation the Secretary-
General's decision to establish an advisory panel on
international support for NEPAD. That cooperation
should be enhanced through the deployment of
additional resources. We believe that the international
community stands to gain from such collaboration in
addressing the challenges of conflict and instability in
Africa.

