Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the presence among us of Mr. Rangin Dadfar
Spanta, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, to
whom we have listened with great attention, especially
in connection with the four categories of challenges
that his country currently faces. We also welcome the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey.
We thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his presentation of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2009/475) and for his
commendable efforts in the face of the challenges his
Office faces in contributing to Afghanistan's
development. We also appreciate the inclusion in the
report of indicators of progress, which we should duly
follow up.

A little more than a month since the holding of
elections for the presidency and provincial councils in
Afghanistan, despite the importance of the democratic
process of elections for the first time in many years in
that country, my delegation is concerned about the lack
of clarity with regard to the outcome of the process,
which is made even worse by the numerous complaints
of electoral irregularities and fraud. We are also
concerned about the existence of acts of intimidation
and violence, which significantly hampered the
participation of citizens, including women.

We trust that the Electoral Complaints
Commission will carefully investigate the numerous
allegations that have been made, so as to ensure that
the final results to be issued by the Independent
Election Commission are respected by all parties
involved, avert any recurrence of violence and, above
all, contribute to helping Afghanistan and its
institutions emerge strengthened from the process to
focus on social issues and the stability and security of
the entire population throughout the country, thereby
establishing, as has been suggested by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General himself, a new
contract between the Government and the people that
makes it possible for Afghanistan to take on its
responsibilities as a sovereign State. In that regard, we
support all the efforts made by the Special
Representative to ensure that the Afghan Government
can continue to count on international support, in
particular from the countries of the region, which is
necessary to work in an inclusive process that will lead
to peace. Out of the elections should emerge a
strengthened Afghanistan and reconciliation, rather
than new reasons for division, in that long-suffering
country.

With regard to security, Mexico regrets the
current increase in the number of violent incidents as
compared with previous years. Without a doubt, the
statistics illustrate that insecurity continues to be the
main factor affecting progress in Afghanistan. Just
today, there were new incidents of violence that
claimed numerous civilian victims in Kandahar. We
condemn those events. We believe that the actions of
international forces should include parallel efforts to
promote development, respect for human rights and the
strengthening of the rule of law, thereby combating the
root causes of violence. In that connection, we support
the focus that the International Security Assistance
Force has begun to adopt, by which the protection of
the Afghan civilian population should have the highest
priority.

Moreover, we acknowledge the achievements that
have been made to reduce the cultivation of opium
poppies, which is a strategic issue in ensuring the
country's security. We also acknowledge the progress
that has been made by Afghanistan in the process of
dialogue and bilateral cooperation with Pakistan and
Iran. That is a step forward in addressing common
challenges to regional stability such as terrorism, illicit
drug trafficking and organized crime. We hope that that
process will lead to long-term strategic planning that
includes concrete measures that contribute to speeding
up and expanding the progress that has been made.

Mexico welcomes President Karzai's signing of
the law on the eradication of violence against women,
which criminalizes sexual violence, including rape and
forced marriage, including underage marriage. We
support all the Government's efforts to ensure the
implementation of that law throughout the country. We
also acknowledge the work done by the United Nations
alongside institutions of the justice system with a view
to comply with international human rights norms
relative to detention and due process.

Special attention should be given to the fight
against corruption and impunity. We urge the
Government of Afghanistan to provide the necessary
impetus to address that challenge and achieve results,
which would bolster its authority and legitimacy,
increase confidence on the part of the population and
strengthen the Government's hand in counter-
insurgency efforts.

In conclusion, Mexico would like to reiterate its
condemnation of attacks against humanitarian
personnel. We would also like to underscore our
concern about the serious threat posed to civilians by
mines and other explosives and remnants of war. We
commend the efforts on the ground by the Government
of Afghanistan and the international community to
make progress in unearthing and destroying those
devices.

Lastly, I too would like to express our gratitude
and appreciation to Ms. Norma Chan. We wish her
every success in the future.

