Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his comprehensive briefing
on the strategic review of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We
take this opportunity to commend the work that the
mission is carrying out on the ground. We welcome
the conclusions that the African Union and the United
Nations mention in the strategic review with respect
to the overall improvement in the security situation
in Darfur, which should make it possible to readapt
UNAMID and prepare for the withdrawal of the mission
in the next two years.

It is clear that the weapons-collection campaign and
the deployment of security forces that the Government
of the Sudan has conducted in recent years to ensure
stability in the area have made it possible to create the
necessary conditions for stability. It is vital to continue
to cooperate with these initiatives so that peacebuilding
activities can be carried out in a sustainable manner.
We also must promote the institutional capacity of the
security forces as well as the rule of law in the area
and make structural adjustments in the security sector
that will dovetail with prevention and reconstruction
activities following the conflict. We welcome the
decision of both the Government and armed groups
to unilaterally extend the ceasefire to all areas of
operations until 30 June and 6 August, respectively. It
is imperative, however, that at this stage steps be taken
to ensure that a permanent ceasefire is agreed.

The political situation clearly remains one of
the main challenges. We welcome the efforts of the
Government to promote the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur and stress that the only
possible solution to the situation in the area is through
a political process that addresses the root causes of
the conflict, mainly conflicts over natural resources
and land ownership. In this regard, we welcome the
initiatives launched by United Nations agencies and
programmes and to assess the progress that has been
made in terms of land ownership.

We also highlight the fact that efforts must be
made to resolve differences on the Doha Document
and urge the non-signatory movements to enter into
a constructive dialogue with the Government so as to
bring about a definitive cessation of hostilities. We
reiterate that it is important for the Security Council to
consider the measures necessary to bring pressure to
bear on those that are undermining the peace process.

However, and despite the progress made in the
Sudan, the humanitarian situation there remains a
significant challenge. The living conditions ofinternally
displaced persons is extremely concerning, and the
cooperation of the international community is urgent in
order to ensure the implementation of the humanitarian
response plan for the Sudan developed by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

With regard to the reconfiguration of UNAMID,
we commend the progress that has been made with the
successful culmination of phase one and with phase
two under way. We are pleased to note that the planned
withdrawal of UNAMID from certain sites has not led
to negative consequences. We stress the good relations
between the Government and UNAMID and urge them
to increase their cooperation so that the mission can
carry out its work without impediment.

In general terms, we believe that the strategic review
of UNAMID accurately reflects the current situation
and the short-, medium- and long-term challenges in
Darfur. We support the repositioning of the priorities
of the mission to focus more closely on support for the
political process, which is particularly important, and
to promote activities that will prevent conflict from
breaking out again and address comprehensively the
root causes of the conflict.

Mine-clearance activities, particularly the clearing
of explosive remnants of war, are essential to ensure
the safe return of internally displaced persons to their
homes and ensure the future safety of the mission.
It is clear that in order to ensure success in this new
phase, funding mechanisms must be created in order to
prevent the recurrence of conflict. Here the cooperation
of the international community will be vital to
promoting sustainable development in Darfur, building
the capacities of the country team and ensuring the
successful withdrawal of the Hybrid Operation.

Finally, we take this opportunity to express our
gratitude to and acknowledge the outstanding work done
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,

Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo; UNAMID; the United Nations
country team; and the members of African Union High-
level Implementation Panel with a view to bringing
about sustainable peace and development in Darfur.

