Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations for his illuminating
briefing. We fully support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2018/16).

I would like to express, on behalf of France, our
firm condemnation of the violence utilized by the
security forces during the 31 December protests in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which claimed
several victims. France once again calls for respect for
fundamental human rights and freedoms, including
the freedom of expression and the right to information
and peaceful protest, which are essential components
of a democracy. We highlight the need for proportional
use of force in the context of law enforcement. In that
connection, we call on the Congolese authorities to fully
investigate the violence in order to hold its perpetrators
accountable before the law. The Congolese authorities
have already shown that they can be proactive in
fighting impunity, as seen recently in the conviction, in
South Kivu, of 12 individuals for sexual violence.

Credible, transparent and peaceful elections
that ensure a peaceful and democratic transition are
necessary for the stability of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the entire region. In that regard, we
call for the effective holding of elections, as scheduled
in the electoral calendar published on 5 November 2017
and in line the Constitution and the spirit of consensus
that prevailed during the signing of the Comprehensive
and Inclusive political Agreement on 31 December 2016.
We call on the Congolese authorities and Independent
National Electoral Commission to take all necessary
measures, particularly those that would enable the rapid
deployment of a joint team of international experts to
support the electoral process in the Congo.

The 31 December 2016 agreement is more important
than ever, as it is the latest embodiment of Congolese
national consensus. Its full implementation is urgent,
as it contains the key measures to ease tension so as
to enable credible and peaceful elections. As the
Secretary-General points out, no credible electoral
process can take place in a context of repression.
It is therefore essential that all conditions be put in
place so that all candidates can run for office without
obstruction. This is all the more important given that
security and humanitarian situation remains troubling,
as Under-Secretary-General Lacroix noted, and that the
blocking of the political process would only exacerbate
the instability that threatens the region.

The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) is carrying out remarkable work in
this difficult context, and I commend the Mission's
reconfiguration efforts in order to adapt to the security
situation and to the priorities of the mandate. MONUSCO
is facing significant challenges, such as the attack in
Semuliki. On behalf of France, I once again express our
condolences and our solidarity with Tanzania following
the tragedy that beset those Blue Helmets. That
incident makes it all the more important to reaffirm our
support for MONUSCO and its development. France is
encouraged, in that connection, by the clear guidelines
set in place, and I warmly commend the exceptional
work of Mr. Maman Sedikou. We also extend our full
support to his successor, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, with
whom we have worked closely in her previous position
and who we trust completely.

