Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, let me
express our gratitude to the presidency of the Republic
of Lithuania for organizing today's open debate and for
the concept note (S/2014/74, annex) distributed earlier,
which has significantly contributed to our deliberations
today.

Georgia fully associates itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union. In
addition, I would like to make some comments in my
national capacity.

One of the purposes of the debate today is to see
the United Nations more engaged in addressing all
the relevant challenges. Therefore, the ability of the
international community to monitor and assess the
human rights situation in the areas where the authorities
ofa given State cannot exercise their sovereign rights is
of the utmost importance. Safe and unhindered access
for humanitarian actors is essential not just for much-
needed humanitarian aid, but also as an early-warning
mechanism for assessment and evaluation of the
human rights situation on the ground to avoid further
deterioration of an already grave situation.

Fifteen years have passed since the Security
Council held its first open debate on this issue (see S/PV.4046). But while reflecting on our endeavours,
we have to confess that innocent civilians continue to
be the overwhelming majority of victims, deprived of
existential necessities and basic human rights. Such
is the reality in many corners of the world. It includes
my country as well, which had to endure yet another
wave of refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs) as an aftermath of a military aggression from a
neighbouring country a few years ago.

As I make this statement, 20 per cent of my
nation's territory remains under Russia's illegal
military occupation, and the number of refugees and
IDPs is over 400,000. Despite serious concerns raised
by the relevant United Nations agencies, hundreds of
thousands of Georgian IDPs and refugees continue
to be denied their internationally recognized right to
return to their homes - a right reaffirmed on numerous
occasions by the community of nations.

The people residing in the occupied regions and in
the adjacent areas are deprived of their fundamental
rights and freedoms, including the freedom of
movement, family life, the right to education in their
native language and other civil and economic rights.
Furthermore, the installation of barbed wire fences and
embankments and the so-called "movement detectors"
by the occupation forces along the occupation line in
the Tskhinvali and Abkhazia regions of Georgia f in
itselfa gross violation of fundamental human rights and
illegal under international law - significantly affect
the livelihoods of the local population by dividing
families and communities, preventing people-to-people
contacts that are essential in building confidence
among communities. The local population - being
fenced off from arable lands and grazing fields,
potable and irrigation water systems and from local
cemeteries - are now compelled to flee their places
of residence, which creates a new wave of IDPs. We
see this as a continuation of a deplorable practice of
forcible demographic change.

Much of what I have just mentioned could have
been averted if the international community had had
a presence in the conflict area. Unfortunately, the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia was terminated following its blockage by
a Security Council member in 2009. The European
Union Monitoring Mission (EUMM) is now the only
international mission on the territory of Georgia. It
plays a key role in averting the deterioration of the
situation on the ground, but being denied the access
to the occupied territories, the EUMM. cannot fully
implement its mandate.

I brought here the case of my country as yet another
example of the urgent need to take concrete steps to
alleviate the consequences of armed hostilities for
civilians and to safeguard their rights and freedoms.
Strengthening our common efforts to protect civilians
in armed conflict has no alternative, and I would like to
join other speakers in calling on all the relevant actors
to ensure rapid, safe and unimpeded humanitarian
access to conflict-affected populations worldwide. For
our part, we stand ready to contribute to concerted
international efforts to ensure more efficient protection
of the civilian population.

