Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Kubis
for his briefing today. As always, we are grateful to
the staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and to the United Nations
country team for the hard and challenging work they do
in helping Afghans lay the foundation for a more stable
and prosperous country. We remain solid supporters of
the United Nations role in Afghanistan today and to its
enduring role beyond 2014.

We thank Ambassador Tanin for joining today's
discussion. As always, we value his close cooperation
with the Security Council, and the United States is
of course committed to supporting a fully sovereign,
democratic and united Afghanistan.

Let me touch on four issues this morning: security
transition, political transition, human rights and what
the international community needs to do to help
Afghanistan be successful going forward.

First, I should like to recognize the continued
progress being made in Afghanistan's security
transition. The Afghan National Security Forces have
successfully taken the lead in security nationwide, with
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
moving into a support role this past June. I commend
the quick response of the Afghan and ISAF security
forces who secured our consulate and personnel in
Herat after the 13 September terrorist attack, and I
offer our condolences to the Afghan victims and their
families. We thank the Government of Afghanistan for
its support and ongoing partnership. Today, it is Afghan
forces who are defending the Afghan people and the
Afghan Government. That is at it should be, and it is
also appropriate that we continue to support them in

that role, especially with the onset of elections next
year.
That leads to my second point. We cannot stress
enough that the next few months will be critical to a
peaceful and constitutional political transition. A
transparent, credible and inclusive electoral process
is essential to Afghanistan's stability and democratic
development, as well as to sustaining international
assistance to the Afghan Government, which has been
very clear about its intention to hold the elections as
scheduled and is already constructively engaged.

In that regard, we commend Parliament's passage
of elections laws, which President Karzai signed at
the end of July, and the ongoing implementation of
those laws, including the seating of the independent
election commissioners and the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission. The support and engagement
of the international community, both bilaterally and
through the United Nations, remain essential.

But these political and security transitions are
not happening in a vacuum. Human rights matter,
and my third point is that as we progress through the
transition period and beyond, it is imperative that
human rights - particularly the rights of women and
girls - be protected and promoted. The improvements
in human rights, especially the rights of women, made
since 2001 must not be reversed.

We are deeply disturbed, as others have indicated
as well, by recent reports oftargeted and, in some cases,
deadly attacks on Afghan female police officers, civil
servants, Government officials and others. Afghan
women have a tremendous contribution to make to
the future of their country, and they must be part of
Afghanistan's civic life as leaders and decision-makers.
The role and participation of civil society actors and
other women's rights advocates in decision-making
processes is critical to ensuring peace and stability.
There can be no overall progress in Afghanistan without
women's progress.

Regarding the appointment of commissioners to
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission
in July, we want to stress how essential it is that the
Commission's independence and integrity be upheld,
that the commissioners themselves be independent, and
that the Commission be seen as credible in the eyes of
the Afghan people.

Fourthly and finally, regional and international
support must be sustained even beyond the transition
process to give Afghans a chance to build this better
future. We look forward to the International Contact
Group and Heart of Asia meetings in the next few
days here in New York. The United Nations must play
a central role as Afghanistan undergoes important
political, security and economic transitions. UNAMA's
leadership should continue to provide support to the 2014
Afghan elections, including close engagement with the
Independent Election Commission on tranining, public
information campaigns and fraud mitigation efforts.

A pivotal period lies ahead for Afghanistan.
The United States remains committed to a lasting
partnership with Afghanistan as it goes through
transition and approaches its decade of transformation.

