Mr. Owada (Japan): Permit me, Mr. President, to
begin by extending a hearty welcome to the Foreign
Minister of the Republic of Korea in the seat of the
President of this Council this morning. I wish to express
my pleasure at seeing a former colleague preside as
President over this important meeting of the Security
Council.

Every one of us who has been watching the tragic
developments in the humanitarian situations in the former
Yugoslavia, the Great Lakes region, the Central Asian
regions and many other parts of the world in recent years
will readily agree that the problem of how effectively to
offer protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations is one of the burning issues that
the international community should address with a keen
awareness of the gravity and urgency of the present state of
affairs. I wish to pay tribute to the Government of the
Republic of Korea for taking the initiative of holding an
open debate of the Security Council on this important
subject.

At the same time, in our treatment of this issue, we
should constantly keep in mind that the protection of
humanitarian activities is a problem with multifaceted
dimensions, requiring careful examination from diverse
angles, including its legal, political, social and
humanitarian implications. It should also be kept in mind
that as far as United Nations activities in this field are
concerned, the problem concerns the area of activity not
only of the Security Council, but also of the General
Assembly and other organs. There are no easy answers or
ready solutions; utmost wisdom and insight will be
required each time we deal with a concrete situation,
taking into account the overall context of the relevant
factors affecting the situation.

We have witnessed in recent years a dramatic
change in the nature, the cause and the modality of the
armed conflicts that have been plaguing various parts of
the world. As a rule, these conflicts tend to be fought
more often within the national borders of a State than
between States. In many cases they stem not so much
from clashes of national interests arising out of political,
economic and ideological differences as from ethnic or
tribal rivalries within a State, or from the chaos that has
come to prevail in a so-called "failed state". In many of
the extreme cases, we have seen this lead to the abhorrent
practice of "ethnic cleansing".

The humanitarian emergencies resulting from such
conflicts have likewise changed, both in nature and in
scope. The most direct and dramatic consequence of such
conflicts is the massive displacement of people.
According to statistics provided by the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs, there were an average of five
humanitarian emergencies a year in the 1980s; in the
1990s the ratio has quadrupled, to an average of 20
emergencies a year. Moreover, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) tells
us that the number of refugees, internally displaced
persons and other affected people within the purview of
UNHCR has risen from 17 million in 1991 to 26 million
in 1996. While in 1991 most of these people were cross-
border refugees, in 1996 nearly half were internally
displaced persons, reflecting the increase in intra-State
conflicts.

There is another, even more important, change in the
nature of conflicts that demands our concerted attention.
Traditionally, the displacement of people has been a
phenomenon incidental to an armed conflict between
regular national armies, in which civilians try to seek
refuge from the calamities of war. In the new type of
conflicts that have come to erupt in recent years,
however, it is more likely to be the civilian population
itself that becomes the target of an attack. Even where
this is not the case, armed units of the parties to the

 

conflict are often bands of guerrillas, militias and other
non-regular combatants who do not always possess military
discipline and allegiance to a commander and thus lack a
basic sense of respect for international humanitarian law
and human rights. As a result, not only has the treatment of
refugees and internally displaced persons in these situations
become a source of serious concern to us from the
viewpoint of how to protect these victims, but, even more
ominously, the guarantee of safety and security in which
humanitarian activities can be carried out by humanitarian
agencies - whether United Nations-affiliated or
otherwise - has come to be jeopardized.

These quantitative and qualitative changes in
humanitarian emergencies require commensurate changes in
our response. To meet this new challenge, efforts must be
intensified to strengthen coordination and cooperation
among the various humanitarian agencies. Indeed, it was in
order to respond more effectively to this new situation in
humanitarian crises that the Department of Humanitarian
Affairs was created in 1992, with a view to bringing about
a more effective coordination among various agencies,
which until then had tended to operate independently of
each other.

Nevertheless, this clearly is not enough. Thus an
innovative new attempt has been introduced in the practice
of the Security Council to meet these new challenges. I am
referring in particular to the recent practice of the Security
Council of entrusting peacekeeping operations with the
additional task of protecting and assisting humanitarian
operations, a mandate that goes beyond the traditional scope
of peacekeeping operations. The United Nations Protection
Force in the former Yugoslavia, the United Nations
Operation in Mozambique and the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia are among the operations that have been
entrusted with such a task.

This innovation introduced in the practice of the
Security Council raises new questions, however, particularly
concerning the relationship between the traditional mandate
of the Security Council in peacekeeping operations and the
new task of providing assistance to humanitarian operations.
It is thus legitimate that we should ask ourselves the
following question: according to which criteria and to what
extent should the Security Council be involved in the
protection of humanitarian assistance efforts? Since
refugees and many other humanitarian problems are the
consequence of political or ethnic conflict, they cannot be
fundamentally eliminated unless and until the root causes of
the conflict are resolved. At the same time, it is also true
that the international community cannot stand idly by as
tragic humanitarian crises erupt in an emergency situation
and that the Security Council, as the only international
body with the authority and legitimacy to take action, has
to respond to such crises.

In the light of these factors, it would seem clear that
while the primary task of the Council is to bring about
the resolution of the conflict and of the underlying
political problems that gave rise to such humanitarian
crises, it is often necessary to engage in activities on an
emergency basis aimed at providing assistance to
humanitarian relief activities under way in the midst of
such conflicts that are facing grave difficulties in carrying
out their mission.

Nevertheless, a word of caution would seem to be in
order: even in those circumstances where United Nations
peacekeeping forces are used as instruments for the
protection of humanitarian efforts, it is essential that the
following conditions be met.

First, the mandate of such an operation must be
clearly defined, and its terms of reference precisely
specified; secondly, the actual situation on the ground
must be such that the mission of offering the cover of
protection under this mandate may realistically be
expected to be accomplished through the means offered;
thirdly, the operation must be equipped with the necessary
human and material resources to accomplish the mission;
and fourthly, the Security Council must closely monitor
the situation so that the operation can adapt to the rapidly
changing situation on the ground.

These are the minimal requirements that must be met
before such an operation may be authorized. It is also
important that consideration be given to the roles that
regional organizations may play in such an operation in
cooperation with the United Nations.

One of the most fundamental questions to be
considered in thinking about the role of the Security
Council in relation to the problem of the protection of
humanitarian activities is whether an intervention by the
Council would be consistent with the basic principles
under which humanitarian activities are carried out and
thus be conducive to ameliorating the situation. It is
almost axiomatic that the humanitarian agencies, whether
intergovernmental or non-governmental, will have to
adhere to the principles of humanity, neutrality and
impartiality in order to be effective in their mission.
Indeed, it is essential that humanitarian assistance
activities be carried out in a neutral, impartial and strictly

 

non-political manner in order for them to be truly effective.
Seen from this angle, the involvement of such a highly
political body as the Security Council, through the
provision of protection by peacekeeping forces or other
forces authorized by the Council, will have to be
meticulously weighed and tailored in such a way that the
humanitarian operations themselves are not jeopardized.

Another fundamental point to consider is the
implications of the change in the nature of conflict that I
touched upon earlier. In traditional conflicts between
regular armies, where one could safely assume that the
combatants would respect the principles and rules of
international humanitarian law, the humanitarian activities,
based on the principle of strict separation of combatants
and non-combatants, could be safely carried out as long as
those three principles were strictly adhered to. However, as
I indicated earlier, the recent conflicts and combatants do
not fit this profile. In a situation where the parties to a
conflict are more likely than not to ignore and disregard
this distinction between combatants and non-combatants
engaged in a humanitarian mission, and lack the discipline
or the will to respect such international norms, the
provision of some forceful protection for humanitarian-
relief operations becomes an inevitable option.

It is in this context that my delegation feels that
particular attention of the members of the United Nations
will have to be drawn to the need for securing the safety of
international personnel who are engaged in providing
humanitarian assistance under extremely difficult and, at
times, life-threatening circumstances. As we have recently
witnessed in Tajikistan, where United Nations military
observers were repeatedly taken hostage, or in Sierra
Leone, where United Nations personnel came under attack,
deliberate acts of sabotage are becoming a recurring
problem. Thus the need to provide effective means to
protect the safety of these personnel is increasingly
becoming a source of serious concern to the entire
membership of the United Nations, and in particular to the
Security Council.

As one of such means to cope with the situation, the
international community should seriously consider the
possibility of reinforcing the mechanism for ensuring the
safety of such personnel through legal instruments. It is
recalled in this connection that the General Assembly, at its
forty-ninth session, adopted the Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel. It is important
that all Member States ratify this critically important
document as quickly as possible, so that it will come into
force without further delay. More importantly, however, my
delegation wishes to reiterate the point made by Japan at
the time of the Convention's adoption, that the scope of
this Convention does not cover personnel engaged in
humanitarian-assistance activities. Some modest
improvement was introduced in Article 1 of the
Convention, at the insistence of Japan, so that the
Convention may be expanded when the Security Council
or the General Assembly declares that there exists an
exceptional risk to the safety of participating personnel.
In the view of my delegation, however, this is not
sufficient. As a first step, my delegation would like to
suggest that the Security Council declare, as a matter of
course each time it launches an operation, that there exists
an exceptional risk to the safety of personnel. Such a
declaration would serve a useful ancillary purpose of
raising international awareness of the importance of the
issue of the safety of personnel engaged in humanitarian-
assistance activities.

Furthermore, Japan believes it is necessary to redress
the deficiency of the Convention by revising it to cover
in its scope the personnel of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and other, non-governmental,
organizations, who are not covered at present by the
Convention. My delegation stands ready to cooperate
closely with like-minded Member States in our joint
efforts to enhance the safety of all international personnel.

The provision of humanitarian assistance to the
victims of armed conflicts is a vitally important
responsibility of the international community and of the
Security Council in particular. But I would be remiss if I
concluded my intervention today without stressing the
point that, in the final analysis, the problem of refugees
and other humanitarian crises will not completely go
away unless and until the underlying political crises are
solved. For this reason, there is always a greater need for
us in the international community, and especially in the
Security Council, to try to address each crisis situation
affecting the peace and security of the region in a holistic
manner. In addressing a situation of conflict, we should
tackle all the related issues together, including diplomatic
action, ceasefire, protection of refugees and humanitarian
assistance, as well as economic reconstruction and social
rehabilitation, as an organic and comprehensive whole.

My delegation believes that the new roles of the
Security Council in this regard are increasingly great.
