Mr. Savua (Fiji): The Republic of the Fiji Islands
subscribes to what was stated by the Secretary-General
during the opening of the general debate of the fifty-
ninth session of the General Assembly on the subject
of the rule of law. As Members of the United Nations,
we ought to look again into our collective conscience
and ask whether we are doing enough to promote and
preserve this universally accepted principle. We would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2004/616) of 3 August 2004. We express our strong
support for the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
its plans to make a significant contribution to advance
justice and the rule of law.

Fiji, like many others, has had its own experience
with the breakdown of law and order; our country and
our people suffered, and we are still recovering. We
therefore appreciate the value and need for the
upholding and preservation of justice and the rule of
law.

In that regard, Fiji will draw guidance from
paragraph 40 of the Secretary-General's report, which
states that: "domestic justice systems should be the
first resort in pursuit of accountability". The principle
of complementarity is indeed at the heart of the Rome
Statute. In addition, in paragraph 49, by encouraging
States parties to implement the Rome Statute in their
national legislation, the ICC serves as "a catalyst for
enacting national laws against the gravest international
crimes" and thereby strengthens national legal and
judicial systems and their capacity to respond to justice
and rule of law-related challenges.

We see the United Nations involvement in
conflicts and post-conflict reconciliation and
transitional justice as the execution of its obligations as
enshrined in the Charter. However, given the
complexity of the problems of today's world, a lot
remains to be done. The United Nations requires our
total commitment and support in order for it to
satisfactorily achieve its obligations.

While Fiji acknowledges and commends the good
work so far exerted by the United Nations in this field,
we are at the same time cautiously aware that the
challenges it faces are often compounded by the fact
that the United Nations is frequently called upon to
plan the restoration of the rule of law in peacekeeping
and peace-making operations on extremely short
notice. Consequently, only short assessment visits -
carried out with minimal human and financial
resources - are made to the host country, although it
is on the basis of those visits that the United Nations
formulates its plans. There is, in our respectful
assessment, a pressing need to address those
impediments we have identified. Fiji would therefore
support any suggestions for the strengthening of United
Nations capacities in that regard. The early
identification and close monitoring of countries or
regions with the potential for conflicts to break out, the
setting up of necessary measures and the determination
of the appropriate mechanisms for addressing the root
causes of differences, can and will assist in the
prevention of any escalation of violence that may
ultimately lead to horrific acts of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes.

Admittedly, some of our people, given the
splendour of our geographical isolation, often see the
role of the United Nations in the field of the rule of law
and transitional justice as being one of restoration.
Heinous and despicable acts of violence are committed
and numerous human lives are lost before we insist on
restoring order and normalcy. Justice and the rule of
law are sacred when they are experienced by the living.
We agree with the Secretary-General when he said that
"in matters of justice and the rule of law, an ounce of
prevention is worth significantly more than a pound of
cure" (S/2004/616, para. 4).

The safety of United Nations personnel and
premises has been a key question surrounding the
return of the United Nations to Iraq ever since two
bomb attacks against the Organization's offices in
Baghdad last year led to the eventual withdrawal of all
international staff. The envisioned security structure
would consist of four elements, namely, international
security staff, protection coordination officers, personal
security details and guard units. In that regard and in
response to the call by the Secretary-General for the
participation of Member States, Fiji is preparing
soldiers for deployment this month as personal security
details and guard units to the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq.

