Mr. Cekuolis: I wish to thank the Russian
presidency of the Council for convening today's
07-22632
meeting and for inviting me to this debate, which,
together with other relevant steps, will help us to
improve the contributions of the United Nations bodies
to the success of the Peacebuilding Commission, in
line with their specific competencies and mandates.

Time and again it has been noted that there is a
strong correlation between low levels of development
and violent conflict. Nine out of 10 countries with the
lowest human development indicators have
experienced conflict at some point or another since
1990. According to World Bank estimates, a civil war
lasts at least seven years on average, with the growth
rate of the local economy reduced by 2.2 per cent each
year. This downward spiral of poverty, conflict and
added impoverishment is difficult to reverse.

In broader terms, given the linkage between
development, peace and security, more focused efforts
should be made to advance and oversee the
implementation of internationally agreed goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals. The
Economic and Social Council was given the mandate
by the 2005 World Summit to focus on this
implementation through its annual ministerial reviews.
In doing so, the Council intends to continually assess
how conflict is affecting the implementation of the
United Nations development agenda.

International assistance can play a major role in
addressing the challenges faced by conflict-prone
countries and in filling some of their capacity gaps.
The recommendations made by experts on the volume
and sustainability of international aid to fragile States
and countries emerging from conflicts, therefore,
deserve our full consideration. In particular, research
suggests that the optimal period for absorbing
increased aid is about six years after a peace
settlement, by which time donors tend to move on to
another country in crisis.

The Economic and Social Council is ready to
assist the Peacebuilding Commission in utilizing these
insights in its plans and activities. We believe that our
respective intergovernmental bodies should exchange
views, analyses and policy recommendations on these
and other matters.

Another example of the perspectives the
Economic and Social Council can share with the
Peacebuilding Commission is related, for instance, to
policy actions on youth employment, because
unemployed young people in countries where this
07-22632

phenomenon is massive are an easy target for
recruitment into armed groups. As recently as last year,
the Council considered the issue and developed policy
recommendations regarding the mainstreaming of
youth employment into national development plans and
development cooperation programmes. The Council
continues to be concerned about the situation in some
regions of the world, particularly in Africa and the
Middle East, where the two phenomena of youth
unemployment and conflict continue to feed on each
other.

Through increased interaction and readiness to
share relevant experience, we can contribute to
strengthening the value added by the Peacebuilding
Commission. In this respect, the Economic and Social
Council is ready to share its lessons learned, especially
given that the pioneering work of the Council's ad hoc
advisory groups on countries emerging from conflict
was, in a way, a forerunner of this qualitatively new
organ - the Peacebuilding Commission, a body meant
to ensure an integrated approach to peacebuilding on
the basis of the links between security, development,
rule of law and human rights.

The Economic and Social Council's Ad Hoc
Advisory Groups on Haiti, Guinea-Bissau and Burundi
have been successful in promoting coordinated support
to post-conflict countries through a comprehensive
approach to relief, peace and development. In an effort
to assess and constantly improve its work, the Council
has carried out a lessons-learned exercise through the
experience of the ad hoc advisory groups, including the
one on Burundi, which is now being considered by the
Peacebuilding Commission. I would like to share some
of these lessons learned with members of the Security
Council.

First of all, the experience of the Ad Hoc
Advisory Groups on Burundi and Guinea-Bissau
highlighted the need for appropriate mechanisms to
mobilize donors and to promote the translation of
pledges into disbursements. Secondly, there is a need
to go beyond immediate problem-solving in the
countries considered to defining, from the very
beginning, a vision towards longer-term rehabilitation
and support, in order to ensure that assistance is
sustainable and is not undermined by organizational
and functional problems encountered on the ground.
Thirdly, the international community should maintain
concrete development support to a country in question,
even when factors on the ground - for example, an
3

electoral process - may incline donors to adopt a
"wait and see" approach. Fourthly, it is essential to
make good coordinated use of the work of United
Nations entities to complement the policy approach of
the intergovernmental body through strong support at
the technical and operational level. Fifthly and finally,
a good articulation must be ensured between United
Nations actors and regional partners of the countries
concerned, including regional and subregional
organizations, regional development banks and the
United Nations Regional Commissions.

These and other lessons emerging from the
continued work of the Economic and Social Council's
ad hoc advisory groups can be further discussed and
brought to bear on the future work of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

We hope that we can further explore practical
modalities for interaction between the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission, in
line with General Assembly resolutions. Our common
objective should be to mobilize the whole institutional
machinery of the United Nations to promote across-
the-range policy approaches and best practices to
develop answers to the complex and difficult needs of
post-conflict countries and prevent their relapse into
conflict. The meeting today is a good step in that
direction.

For its part, the Economic and Social Council is
ready to contribute to the best of its ability, collectively
or through its individual members on the Peacebuilding
Commission's Organizational Committee, to
developing the strategic goals and defining a viable
peacebuilding strategy of the Commission, thereby
ensure its lasting added value.

