The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its resolutions
1265 (1999) of 17 September 1999 and 1296
(2000) of 19 April 2000 on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and the letter of 21
June 2001 from the President of the Security
Council to the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2001/614).

"The Security Council reaffirms its concern
at the hardships borne by civilians during armed
conflict and recognizes the consequent impact
this has on durable peace, reconciliation and
development, bearing in mind its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and underlining the
importance of taking measures aimed at conflict
prevention and resolution.

"Having considered the reports of the
Secretary-General of 8 September 1999
(S/1999/957) and of 30 March 2001 (S/2001/331)
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and welcoming the close cooperation with the
Secretary-General in preparing the aide-memoire
attached to this statement, the Security Council
adopts the aide-memoire contained in the annex
to the presidential statement as a means to
facilitate its consideration of issues pertaining to
protection of civilians. The Council further
emphasizes the need, when considering ways to
provide for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, to proceed on a case-by-case basis,
taking into account the particular circumstances.

"The Security Council will review and
update the contents of the aide-memoire as
appropriate and will remain actively seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2002/6.

It was suggested during our discussions that the
aide-memoire might need to be updated. Let me say
that the innovative manner in which the aide-memoire
was developed, through close cooperation between the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the members of the Council, might also usefully be
utilized when we update it.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.25 19.171.
