Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
thank the Foreign Minister of Colombia for coming to
New York to join us today and to preside over this open
meeting of the Security Council. I congratulate him and
his colleagues on Colombia's assumption of the
presidency of the Council. I want also to acknowledge
the presence of the Secretary-General. His attendance
and his comments today reinforce the importance of
this issue for all of us.

All of us in this Chamber today are well aware of
the agonizing impact of the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons, especially in areas of conflict,
where the problem is most acute. We commend
Colombia for its initiative to convene this meeting,
which continues the momentum of the successful
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. I want to
join the Secretary-General in commending Ambassador
Reyes for his leadership of the Conference.

The Conference reached consensus on a
comprehensive Programme of Action: a solid
foundation for dealing with this issue. The Programme,
if diligently carried out by Member States, will
engender significant progress towards curbing this
illegal and deadly trade.

The United States believes that steps to tackle the
problem of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons must be practical and effective. The most
effective way to prevent small arms and light weapons
from getting into the hands of those who would misuse
them is through strict export and import controls and
strong brokering laws, and through ensuring the
security of stockpiles of small arms and light weapons.

The United States has one of the strongest
systems in the world for regulating the export of arms.
Small arms and light weapons made in the United
States cannot be exported without the approval of the
Department of State. Nor can arms of United States
origin be re-transferred without the approval of the
United States. We rigorously monitor arms transfers
and routinely investigate suspicious activities. In the
past five years we have interdicted thousands of illicit
arms, and we have cut off exports to five countries that
failed to comply with United States law. Moreover, all
commercial exporters of arms in the United States must
be registered as brokers and must submit each
transaction for Government licensing approval.
The United States has also been active
internationally in stemming the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. We offer bilateral financial
and technical assistance to help countries develop
national export and import controls, to improve border
security, and to secure and destroy illicit stocks of
small arms and light weapons in conflict-prone regions.
We remain ready to continue that support.

My Government believes that the focus of the
Conference, as reflected in the Programme of Action,
was properly on Member States and on their obligation
and their efforts to eliminate the illicit small arms
trade. Thus, the Security Council's role is
circumscribed. We do not believe that the Security
Council should seek a more elaborate role beyond its
competence; but it does indeed have an important role
to play.

The paper (S/2001/732, annex) submitted by the
Government of Colombia in advance of this meeting
very thoughtfully focused on a number of important
issues. The issue of the flow of information to the
Council is a key theme. Information on the role of
small arms and light weapons can be of great value in
helping us evaluate specific areas of conflict, including
decisions to establish or enforce Security Council arms
embargoes. Also, as called for in the Programme of
Action, the United States urges Member States to use
all appropriate legal and administrative means against
violators of Security Council arms embargoes.

Thus, while the function of the Security Council
in accomplishing the Programme of Action is limited,
we have the opportunity, through the leadership of
Colombia, to thoughtfully define our role.

The Programme of Action of the first United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects is just over one
week old. Ensuring its success should be a priority;
that success depends on the will and effort of Member
States. The United States has a history of demonstrated
commitment to finding practical and effective ways of
curbing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. We look forward to working with other
Member States, and with you, Mr. President, to fulfil
the Programme of Action.

