Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Today's open meeting
on the report of the Security Council mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a clear expression
of the Security Council's commitment to reinvigorating
the process of peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Only last week, the Security Council had the
opportunity to critically assess the progress of
peacekeeping efforts in Kosovo, following the dispatch
of a similar mission. It is obvious that these missions
are effective in creating a better understanding of
issues before the Council and in facilitating its
decision-making.

It is against this background that my delegation
commends the members of the mission for their
instructive findings and Ambassador Holbrooke for his
leadership of the mission. The Jamaican delegation
welcomes the mission's analysis and recommendations,
which will inform the Council's actions on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The report is comprehensive, addressing, inter
alia, the military and security situation, the inter-
Congolese dialogue, cooperation between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo Government and
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), as well
as human rights and humanitarian issues. I will
therefore confine my comments to some of the issues
raised in the report to which my delegation attaches
importance.

First, the tone of the report is guardedly
optimistic. Significant events include the signing of the
status-of-forces agreement on 4 May, the proposed
timetable for the withdrawal of Rwandan and Ugandan
troops from the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the ceasefire agreement of 8 April. We are mindful,
however, that peace remains fragile.

Secondly, we are pleased that the mission was
able to meet with a wide cross-section of Congolese
society, including members of civil society, religious
leaders and leaders of political parties. The points of
view they expressed in the meetings with the members
of the mission served to underscore the clear desire of
the Congolese people for peace.

In this regard, the holding of the inter-Congolese
dialogue is of paramount importance. The report cites
numerous instances of discussions on the issue among
various parties, noting, however, the divergent views
on the venue. We note that there appears a greater
degree of understanding between the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
facilitator of the inter-Congolese dialogue, which we
hope will augur well for the dialogue's success. Indeed,
without a political track, all parties will inevitably
focus on the military track. This would have tragic
consequences for the long-suffering people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Security Council, for its part, must continue
to send a strong message of support for the facilitator
of the dialogue, Sir Ketumile Masire. We concur with
the proposal made in the report that the facilitator, with
the assistance of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the active backing of the
Security Council, could address the issue of the venue
in the first stages of the dialogue.

Thirdly, the readiness of some armed groups to
engage in dialogue with the mission must be seen as a
sign of hope for the future. My delegation notes,
however, that the leader of the Movement for the
Liberation of the Congo (MLC), Jean-Pierre Bemba,
did not meet with the members of the mission, due
reportedly to logistical difficulties. My delegation
wishes to emphasize that compliance by all armed
groups with the Lusaka Agreement is a sine qua non
for its successful implementation. It is also
encouraging that all the parties to the conflict
demonstrated their desire to achieve sustainable peace,
and they appealed for rapid deployment of phase II of
MONUC.

My delegation, in supporting the rapid
deployment of MONUC, wishes to emphasize that the
Mission must be equipped to deal with any eventuality.
There is also a need for all parties to provide credible
security guarantees to enable MONUC to fulfil its
mandate to monitor the ceasefire and to ensure that
life-saving humanitarian assistance reaches the civilian
population throughout the country.

At the same time, mechanisms must be put in
place to address the issues relating to refugees and
internally displaced persons. We wish to join the
Permanent Representative of Namibia in calling for
swift investigation of reported violations of human
rights. My delegation was particularly appalled by the
response of Mr. Ilunga, cited in paragraph 51 of the
report, regarding the incident in Mwenga in which 15
women were reportedly buried alive.
My delegation remains concerned that the issue
of co-location of MONUC and the Joint Military
Commission (JMC) continues to be a source of
contention. We also note that the report supports the
view that the core structure for ceasefire monitoring, as
outlined in resolution 1291 (2000), has to involve
MONUC and the JMC working jointly from a
co-located headquarters. We believe that the
coordination of the activities of MONUC and the JMC
is a functional one, and that every effort should be
made to resolve the problem of location. Given the
crucial role assigned to the JMC in the implementation
of the Lusaka Agreement, we firmly believe that it
must be provided with the resources to support its
operations.

The process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants must be speeded up.
The report observes that there is a rough, provisional
figure of some 15,000 members of armed groups which
still exist, but that the members of these groups are
very hard to identify. There is obviously considerable
work to be done if the ceasefire is to hold. Also, the
proliferation of arms and access to arms by the
populations throughout the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will continue to undermine the peace process
and inevitably perpetuate the cycle of conflict. We wish
to support the initiative taken by France to invite the
Political Committee to meet in New York in June, and
we are sure that this will in no doubt serve as a
stimulus to the peace process.

In our view, the Council also needs urgently to
address the establishment of the panels on illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. As we have said on other
occasions, the illegal exploitation of minerals
throughout Africa is a cause of severe conflict and, in
fact, is providing the resources for continuing conflict.

Finally, my delegation joins in paying tribute to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the Force Commander and the men and women of
MONUC for their work under very difficult
circumstances.

