Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation congratulates Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
Mr. Andrew Gilmour for their enlightening assessments
of the current situation in Darfur. We also welcome
their relevant recommendations.

Despite the joint efforts of the United Nations and
the African Union within the framework of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), the political and security situations in the
region remain volatile and are a matter of major concern
for the international community.

While we are seeking ways and means for an
orderly withdrawal of UNAMID, the political crisis
and recent events in the Sudan have only exacerbated
our concerns. It is undeniable that the current situation
in this brotherly country is particularly concerning, as
the Sudan is an essential element in the frameworks of
efforts to establish lasting peace, security and stability
in Darfur.

Fully aware of the Sudan's essential role as a
subregional actor, my country urges all Sudanese
parties to engage in an inclusive dialogue in order to
achieve a bold solution to the crisis that transcends
short-term political interests. In that regard, my country
expresses its full support for the African Union's
initiatives, as well as for the mediation and good offices
of His Excellency Mr. Abiy Ahmed, Prime Minister of
Ethiopia, and truly hope that their efforts will allow
us to create the conditions for a peaceful transition in
the Sudan.

My delegation believes that any deadlock in the
current crisis is likely to undermine the fragile peace
process and reconciliation process in Darfur and will
significantly diminish the prospects of a UNAMID
withdrawal in June 2020.

With regard to the situation in Darfur, my delegation
notes that, despite encouraging progress, the parties
have not yet reached a final agreement on a cessation
of hostilities, which would constitute an important
step towards peace. While my country welcomes the
progress made in power sharing, it remains convinced
that the diligent implementation by all Sudanese parties
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur is critical
to breathing new life into the current political process.
Only then will the quest for peace in Darfur continue to
mobilize the multifaceted support of the international
community, particularly that of the United Nations and
the African Union.

Like all peacekeeping missions worldwide,
UNAMID is not intended to drag on indefinitely
in Darfur. However, cote d'Ivoire believes that any
decision on a reduction of UNAMID's presence and a
permanent withdrawal from Darfur should be taken in
the light ofa realistic assessment ofthe sociopolitical and
security situation. Given the current fragility in Darfur,
that position is in keeping with the gradual approach
proposed by the African Union Peace and Security
Council and confirmed by its latest communique,
adopted on 13 June i in which the Council insists that
any decision to reduce troops or withdraw UNAMID
must be based on a sober evaluation of the situation
on the ground in order to avoid a security vacuum that
would expose civilians to the risk of violence from
armed groups.

C6te d'Ivoire therefore supports the conclusions
of the strategic assessment team and calls for an
orderly withdrawal. We are in favour of a phased
approach, reflecting security trends and allowing
reserve capacities to be maintained until the end of
the mission. With that view, my delegation urges
UNAMID to continue to support the political process
of crisis resolution and reconciliation, and to continue
its conflict prevention and civilian protection activities,
with a focus on priority actions in Jebel Marra.

UNAMID remains a virtuous model of cooperation
between the United Nations and a regional organization.
The political and security challenges that remain
in Darfur cannot hide the specific and encouraging
progress, albeit fragile, that UNAMID has made.

Cote d'Ivoire sincerely hopes that the gains that
have been made are maintained and that we do not
move hastily, but rather step by step with UNAMID,
and we call upon the United Nations, the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
to remain firmly committed to peace and stability in
the Sudan and Darfur.

