Mr. Galouzeau de Villepin (France) (spoke in French): Justice and the rule of law are emerging as the
cornerstones of building peace and democracy. They lie
at the heart of United Nations action. That is why I am
pleased that our debate today focuses on this question,
and I thank the United Kingdom for its initiative.

The defence of justice and the building of the rule
of law are central to the United Nations mission of
peace. The United Nations, by its universal vocation,
promotes the many aspects of the rule of law. One fact
has to be recognized: restoring peace does not mean
just silencing the weapons of war through the use of
force. It is also about protecting persecuted minorities
in Timor or Kosovo, assisting victims who have been
humiliated to the core; enforcing respect for human
rights in Liberia and in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; freeing repressed aspirations to democracy in
Cambodia; solidifying fragile national institutions and
restoring life to democratic citizenship in Haiti;
offering nations weakened by war the means to recover
their political sovereignty through the establishment of
a constitutional process, as in Afghanistan; and setting
up an independent and effective police force and
judicial system in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

To pursue these objectives, the United Nations
system has developed a whole range of resources
adapted to each situation: special representatives, Blue
Helmets, police, United Nations Development
Programme experts, High Commissioner for Human
Rights personnel, United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) staff, international judges, civilian
executives, electoral observers and so on.

I would like to pay a solemn tribute to all of
them. I am thinking in particular of Sergio Vieira de
Mello, of his courage and dedication to peace, from
Cambodia to Iraq. He knew better than anyone that
building a State based on the rule of law is a difficult
and challenging task.

I will mention two challenges.

The first challenge is to reconcile, on the one
hand, the promotion of the universal values of
democracy and human rights with, on the other, the
need to take into account the specific character of each
society, its culture and identity. The rule of law is not
an abstract concept. Aside from the juridical rules it
implies, it presumes a practice, a state of mind which
are subject to learning and gradual ownership,
according to each situation. A model is learned, not
imposed. The United Nations must make no mistake in
the course to be taken.

The second challenge is to ensure that justice and
the values of peace prevail wherever crime and
arbitrary acts have sown terror and hatred. This is what
led the Security Council to create the international
criminal tribunals. In the ongoing, difficult quest to
achieve a balance, the International Criminal Court
represents a major stride forward. The Court is not
directed against any country. It does not represent the
justice of the victors, but is a recourse against unlawful
or unjust situations. It is not intended to take the place
of national courts. It has the advantage of permanence,
universality and the scope of its powers. It is the best
possible instrument of the primacy of law and justice.

Aside from the force of the verdict, truth and
reconciliation commissions can be a useful instrument
for reviving the hope of coexistence among
neighbouring communities that are still enemies.

Iraq presents all of these challenges. After 30
years of Ba'athist dictatorship and three wars, a lasting
stabilization of the country will require more than
soldiers and money. For the Iraqis fully to take their
destiny in hand once again will require the
establishment of the rule of law, which their country
has known all too rarely.

The duty of justice will be an important building
block in this edifice. The criminals of the former
regime must answer for their crimes in order finally to
turn the page. But it is equally imperative to place the
restoration of sovereignty at the centre of our action
and to rally all sectors of the Iraqi population around a
mobilizing political project. Only the Iraqi people will
be able to find the internal balances it needs. But for
that it must be able to count on the solidarity and
assistance of the international community embodied
foremost by the United Nations.

The importance of what is at stake requires us
today to strengthen our Organization and its means.
There are many aspects to action to promote the rule of
law: legal and political, of course, but also financial,
economic and social. That calls for the mobilization
and coordination of our efforts. The whole United
Nations system must be in the vanguard. Let us
improve the coherence of the efforts of its components
as a whole, in particular the General Assembly. All the
complexity and richness of the democratic process
must be harnessed.

Innovative ideas have already been implemented.
The Economic and Social Council has established ad
hoc groups for strengthening peace in Burundi and
Guinea Bissau. The United Nations Development
Programme is responsible for disarming and
reintegrating former armed combatants, in particular in
Afghanistan.

We must go even further, in particular by working
to ensure effective coordination on the ground among
all the actors of the United Nations system. We must
also work to develop synergies with the international
financial institutions and regional organizations that
have expertise and specific capacities in this field such
as the European Union, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the Council of Europe.

Finally, the Security Council has an essential role
to play. Together, let us seek how to enable the Council
better to shoulder its responsibilities and to ensure
respect for the values enshrined in the Charter. In order
to further improve our action in the area of rule of law,
let us ask the Secretariat to carry out a more systematic
assessment of the lessons learned. Let us make ready a
pluralistic and representative pool of experts in the
areas of justice and the rule of law who can be called
upon in emergency situations. Let us prepare early
warning and observation mechanisms in order to
ensure that the support given continues over time with
the necessary intensity.

The United Nations has a great capacity for
action and considerable experience in the domain of
the rule of law. It is up to us to make the most of those
faculties and ensure that they bear fruit. More than
ever, it is our collective responsibility to work for the
effectiveness of efforts to that end and, together with
the Secretary-General, collectively to consider concrete
directions. France is prepared to take its full part in that
mobilization. Together, let us work to advance the
objectives of the rule of law wherever justice and
solidarity require our common efforts.

