Mrs. Viotti: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
invitation to brief the Security Council in my capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I extend a warm
welcome to the Permanent Representative of Guinea-
Bissau to the United Nations. I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Joseph
Mutaboba for his remarks and his work as head of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau. I also extend a very warm welcome to
the representative of the African Union to Guinea-
Bissau.

The events of 1 April and the Government's
response to them raised concerns in the international
community. Guinea-Bissau's partners believe that it is
important for the country to show stronger commitment
to the principle of civilian control of the military, the
fight against drug trafficking and effective reform of

the security sector. At the same time, there seems to be
consensus that continued engagement with Guinea-
Bissau is necessary to assist the country in building
democratic governance and effectively addressing key
challenges. What is needed now is to identify the kind
of support that the international community can
provide under the current circumstances to help
enhance national political stability, promote
reconciliation and combat impunity and organized
crime.

During the past few months, the Peacebuilding
Commission has sought to remain engaged with
Guinea-Bissau on the basis of the principle of mutual
accountability. We have attempted to clearly convey to
the authorities the need to effectively and promptly
address some issues of grave concern to the
international community, while reiterating our
willingness to continue to support the country in its
efforts towards political stability and socioeconomic
development.

On 16 July, the country-specific configuration
held a meeting in New York with the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Adelino Mano
Queta. On that occasion, he reiterated that security
sector reform was his Government's top priority and
the only way to achieve stability in the country. He
also deplored the scourge of drug trafficking. He
indicated that his country cannot address these
problems by itself and requested the continued support
of the international community. Members of the
configuration expressed their concern with the events
of 1 April, the continued detention of Admiral Zamora
Induta and other officers, as well as with subsequent
appointments in the military. They stressed the need for
civilian control of the armed forces. Members also
emphasized the need to stay engaged with Guinea-
Bissau and extend to it the necessary support in an
atmosphere of mutual accountability.

Other initiatives are also noteworthy. Bilateral
meetings, consultations with the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP) and a
meeting of the International Contact Group have
discussed the situation in Guinea-Bissau and possible
avenues for international engagement.

Security sector reform continues to be critical to
addressing the recurrent political instability in the
country and strengthening civilian control over the
armed forces. At the same time, efforts in this area
cannot ignore the current circumstances. A reflection is
currently under way as to how we can best help
Guinea-Bissau move forward in security sector reform
at this juncture. In any case, it will be important to
continue to support regional efforts conducted by
ECOWAS and CPLP, as was just described by
Mr. Mutaboba.

Another issue of grave concern to the members of
the PBC is drug trafficking. An effective fight against
illegal drugs requires functioning State institutions,
especially in the areas of justice and security, as well as
firm political will. The latter is key to securing the
international assistance that Guinea-Bissau needs to
increase its national capacity in this domain. Those
efforts must be reinforced by a regional approach. We
therefore emphasize the importance of the role played
by ECOWAS. Also, in this regard, both as individual
Governments and collectively, we must all do more and
better to support the implementation of the ECOWAS
regional action plan and the West Africa Coast
Initiative.

International efforts to help consolidate peace in
Guinea-Bissau should not rest solely on security-
related cooperation. In order for peace to take hold, the
foundations for socio-economic development must be
strengthened. We need to support capacity-building and
help the country revitalize its economy. At the end of
the day, it is a dynamic economy and the creation of
job opportunities that will generate the revenues
needed to provide basic services to the population and
allow the State to function in a sustainable manner.

In spite of the challenges remaining, Guinea-
Bissau has made significant progress in managing its
economy and promoting development. In 2008 and
2009, export revenues increased and the Government
was able to pay civil service salaries on time. As
indicated by the Secretary-General in his latest report
(S/ZOlO/SSO), tax revenues increased by an impressive
46.9 per cent in the first quarter of 2010. Important
infrastructure was completed. With the support of the
International Monetary Fund, Guinea-Bissau has
advanced fiscal management in a way that is expected
to lead the country towards the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative (HIPC) completion point. I invite
all concerned parties, including the Peacebuilding
Fund, to reaffirm, in concrete terms, their support for
that goal.

Despite the recurring challenges, we must
persevere in our collective efforts to support Guinea-
Bissau. That requires that international partners look
beyond current setbacks and support long-term
political and economic stability. It also means that the
national authorities, including the military, must fully
restore international confidence.

