Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to join previous speakers in
thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Saren Jessen-Petersen, for his thorough
briefing on activities carried out by the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
in accordance with Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), and on events in Kosovo between 1 November
2004 and 31 January 2005.

My delegation wishes to underscore positive
signs highlighted in the Secretary-General's report on
progress in implementing a comprehensive and
integrated strategy. We agree with the report's
assessment that increased attention to standards
implementation on the part of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government and efforts to ensure
that implementation is carried out - such as the
establishment of a coalition government following the
October 2004 elections and public demonstrations in
support of the standards - are all encouraging signs.

That not withstanding, we cannot fail to mention
that the same report says that none of the eight
standards has been completely fulfilled. We, therefore,
urge the Provisional Institutions, political leaders and
members of all communities to make every effort to
ensure effective fulfilment of the standards. In that
context, we join in the Secretary-General's appeal to
the Kosovo Serbs to participate constructively in the
institutions and processes of Kosovo and that the
Serbian authorities encourage this participation so that
Kosovo Serbs will participate in the local government
reform process.

In addition, we believe that the Provisional
Institutions must take visible measures to facilitate the
return of displaced persons. The majority community
must create a climate in which members of minority
communities, in particular the Kosovo Serbs, feel safe
enough to return and to stay in Kosovo. The Serbian
authorities must also encourage this process. Moreover,
we believe that the majority community must facilitate
and ensure actions that would create the conditions
required for broad participation on the part of minority
groups in all aspects of life in Kosovo, particularly by
promoting their trust in the political and administrative
systems and their participation in the political process.
We feel that this is essential.

It is also worrying to see that there are still
parallel structures in the health and education sectors.
We, therefore, appeal for compromise and cooperation
among those who are responsible for creating and
promoting a stable multi-ethnic society.

We know that this cannot be achieved while
minority communities are still concerned about their
safety and their freedom of movement, and until
interaction with members of the majority community is
encouraged. The lack of such interaction inevitably
heightens existing ethnic division. In addition, those
fears and concerns become greater as a result of
isolated incidents that are not always condemned. Once
again, we call on the government to take the measures
necessary to punish ethnic crimes, to set up a system
that will penalize violations of the language laws and
promote a culture of human rights, and to faithfully
implement the guidelines and standards established by
UNMIK on respect for the rights of minorities.

Finally, my delegation wishes to draw attention to
the need to meet the remaining priority standards goals
in the economic area. The marginalization of minority
communities in terms of access to employment and in
terms of income will not help create a sustainable
multi-ethnic Kosovo. In this context, we trust in the
commitment of the new government and in Prime
Minister Ramush Haradinaj to maintain their political
will to deliver standards for Kosovo as a priority and
thus to correct the inequalities that still persist.

