Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
the presidency of New Zealand for convening this open
debate. My delegation also welcomes the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of New Zealand, His Excellency
Mr. Murray McCully, and thanks him for presiding
over the debate earlier today. Our gratitude also goes
to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his useful briefing.

Before I make a few remarks in my national
capacity, I wish to align myself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and the
statement to be delivered later by the representative
of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.

We are meeting at a bleak time in the situation
in the Middle East, which needs a fresh and closer
look as well as renewed commitment, especially from
the Security Council, to address the problem in an
integrated manner, not only on the political front, but
also from the humanitarian aspects of the crisis. Allow
me to focus on the issue of Palestine.

Indonesia's advocacy of the rights of the Palestinian
people is a long and unflinching one. We support their
right to live in peace as one people in a State of their
own. To that end, we strongly stand by the vision of
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security. In that regard, we are pleased by the
growing recognition of the State of Palestine by various
countries and entities, the accession of Palestine to
various international treaties and its admission to
international organizations. We consistently support
Palestine's efforts towards its eventual full membership
in the United Nations, which will make Palestine an
equal member of the community of sovereign States.

Indonesia is deeply concerned about the continued
stalemate on the road towards peace. We stress the
urgent need to revive the peace process, and possibly the
convening of an international conference to deliberate
on the issue. In that connection, the need to review
the role and mandate of the Quartet has also become
glaring. Indonesia supports ideas and initiatives that set
a framework for the resumption of the peace process
and include clear parameters and a time frame. We
believe that such ideas and initiatives have the potential
to give us a new opportunity and approach to break the
impasse in the peace process.

There are clearly deteriorating humanitarian
conditions in the occupied Palestinian territory. It
is now one year since Israel's last assault on Gaza in
2014. When it was over, well over 2,200 Palestinians
were dead. They included more than 550 children and
299 women. The injured, many of them critically,
numbered more than 11,000. When the 51 days of
bombardment ended, much of Gaza lay in ruins, with
critical infrastructure 4 such as schools, roads and
hospitals 4 levelled to the ground. An unprecedented
humanitarian nightmare arose with 100,000 people
rendered homeless. Up until today, Gaza has little
electricity or water. According to the World Bank, its
unemployment is the highest in the world at 43 per cent.
Nearly 80 per cent of the population is dependent on
aid. The youth of Gaza face a bleak future.

On many occasions, we have called for the reversal
of this situation and for the international community
to redouble its efforts to prevent the recurrence of
Israeli aggression. That includes taking steps to hold
accountable those responsible for the aggression that
resulted in a great number of casualties among the
Palestinian civilian population.

Regrettably, since the ceasefire of2014, Israeli forces
have continued to execute a reign of terror throughout
the occupied Palestinian territory. Israel is continuing
with its construction of the separation wall, confiscating
Palestinian land, demolishing homes and properties,
forcibly displacing and evacuating Palestinian
families, and shooting and arresting Palestinians, with
absolutely no concern for human rights. In addition,
Israel is continuing its illegal settlements throughout
occupied Palestine, especially in and around occupied
East Jerusalem, trampling on international law and the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the Legal consequences ofthe construction ofa wall
in the occupied Palestinian territory (A/ES-10/273).

Indonesia reiterates its call upon the Security
Council to assume its responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations and bring the conflict to an end
without further delay. The Council should renew efforts
towards the resumption ofthe peace process, beginning
with ensuring the compliance of Israel with the relevant
international laws and United Nations resolutions,
particularly those of the Council. We believe that the
extensive work of various organs and bodies within the
United Nations with regard to finding a comprehensive
solution to the Palestinian conflict would add value in
that regard.

Lastly, my delegation wishes to welcome the
agreement reached by the P5+1 with the Islamic
Republic of Iran on its nuclear programme. That is
indeed a historic achievement, which we hope will
create momentum for the international community to
make progress in finding a comprehensive solution to
the situation in the Middle East. We call on the Council
to capitalize on that momentum in order to boost its
endeavours to achieve a comprehensive settlement
of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Peace has eluded
the Middle East for too long, and it is our collective
responsibility to ensure that we discharge this historic
burden.

