Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to thank the President of the Security
Council for this opportunity to address the Council. I
would like to wish the Ambassador and the delegation
of Equatorial Guinea every success at the helm of the
Council for this month. I would also like to thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Martin Griffiths, as well as General Lollesgaard,
Chair of the Redeployment Coordination Committee,
for the efforts that they have made to support the
Stockholm Agreement. I thank also Mr. Mark Lowcock
and his team for working to ease the humanitarian
suffering of the Yemeni people in the wake of the Houthi
coup, which was supported by the Iranian regime with
a view to destabilizing the region by supporting armed
militias and fomenting hatred, triggering conflict and
stoking intercommunal tensions by sowing hatred,
chaos and violence.

The Yemeni Government aspires to peace given
its full responsibility for all the Yemeni people. We
support United Nations efforts, as represented by the
Special Envoy for Yemen, to achieve peace according
to the three agreed terms of reference: the initiative of
the Gulf Cooperation Council and its implementation
mechanism; the outcome of the National Dialogue
Conference; and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015).

The Yemeni Government is committed to achieving
peace and to putting an end to the coup and to the
suffering of the Yemeni people, as well as rebuilding
State institutions and a new federal Yemen. In that
regard, the Yemeni Government has participated in
all relevant talks and made many concessions in order
to reach a political solution that meets the aspirations
of the Yemeni people in terms of security, stability
and peace.

However, the coup party has not shown a real
desire for peace or faith in dialogue. Today we are
seeing obstruction by the militias, which is clear
evidence of the fact that they are ignoring the need for
peace and the demands of the international community
and the United Nations to implement what was agreed
in Stockholm and to abide by the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

The Yemeni Government reiterates its full

commitment to implementing the Stockholm Agreement
and also approved the first stage of the redeployment
in Saleef, Ras Isa and Al-Hudaydah. The second phase
involves measures concerning the return of the security
and administrative authority, the coast guard and the
Red Sea Port Authority to manage ports and cities under
Yemeni law, as well as implementing the spirit and the
letter of the Stockholm Agreement itself. The Yemeni
Government is willing to assist in facilitating access to
the Red Sea Mills and to open routes for humanitarian
assistance because it wishes to alleviate the human
suffering ofthe Yemeni people. Indeed, we welcome all
efforts to implement the Stockholm Agreement so as
to achieve a lasting and comprehensive solution based
on the aforementioned three terms of reference, which
constitute a solid foundation for a fair, comprehensive
and lasting solution to the conflict in Yemen.

Although the Yemeni Government is committed
to implementing the Al-Hudaydah Agreement and
remains positive towards all proposals submitted by the
United Nations to implement it since it was announced,
the Houthi coup militias, for their part, continue to
violate the ceasefire and to deliberately carry out even
more attacks and violent acts to ensure the failure of
the Agreement and peace efforts, which would have
promoted opportunities for building confidence. From
18 December 2018 to 12 February 2019, we saw 1,177
violations of the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah, and 80
civilians were killed and 503 wounded. The militias
are continuing to use weapons of all kinds to target
houses, public spaces, companies and army barracks.
They are redeploying in cities, laying mines, trenching
and building blockades so as to provoke the national
army and coalition forces with a view to undermining
the Stockholm Agreement.

The Houthi militias are also using mortar shells
against the Red Sea Mills as barbaric tactics to
exacerbate the suffering of the Yemeni people, while
ignoring the efforts of the United Nations.

The Yemeni Government shares the grave concern
of the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs with regard to the inability of the United
Nations to access the Red Sea Mills since September
2018. There are significant stocks there that could feed
3.7 million people for a month, but the Houthi militias
are not allowing the United Nations to go beyond the
front lines to get to the Mills. This has been going on
for five months, which means that the stocks are now
in danger of spoiling. In addition, 20 per cent of the
stocks have been burnt by fires started by Houthi shells,
according to the former Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee, Mr. Cammaert. We therefore
call on the Security Council and the international
community to ensure that the responsibility is met to
save the Al-Hudaydah Agreement and put pressure on
the Houthi militias so as make sure that the Agreement
is fully implemented within a clear, agreed time
frame. We also call on them to identify those who are
hindering the Agreement and to ensure the delivery of

humanitarian aid to all regions now under the control
of Houthi militias.

The Yemeni Government also stresses the need to
free all prisoners, locate all missing persons, release
victims of arbitrary detention and house arrest and
find those who were subject to forced disappearance.
We will leave no stone unturned in our attempts to
achieve this humanitarian goal. We also need to put an
end to the arrests of civilians carried out by militias.
Even some Yemeni women have been arrested, which is
unprecedented in our history. We call on those militias to
lift the blockade in Taiz so as to let citizens move freely
and to allow the delivery of humanitarian assistance in
order to alleviate the suffering of the people. We hope
that the meeting of the special committee on the Taiz
declaration of understanding, to be held at the end of
this month, will lead to the hoped-for results.

Our families in the Hajour regions are suffering
barbaric and savage attacks by Houthi militias. All
kinds of weapons are being used against them. These
regions are suffering under siege, and the aim is to get
the militias' hands on the property of civilians. This
is a flagrant violation of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. Such attacks
must cease; the areas must be liberated; and civilians,
including women and children, must be saved.

Yemeni banks recently witnessed a campaign in
which bank executives were arrested because they had
opened lines of credit for traders at the Yemeni Central
Bank in Aden in order to import commodities. The
Houthi militias were compelling bank executives not
to provide any amount of money to the Central Bank in
Aden, but were instead asking them for profits, which,
according to their estimate, would reach 30 per cent.
One of the largest banks had to cease its activities
in Sana'a and in all other branches located in areas
under the control of Houthi militias. This is therefore
a stumbling block for regular banking and trading
activities, as well as a factor further deteriorating the
national economy.

According to the directives of the President of the
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Abdrabbuh Mansour Hadi,
the Yemeni Government is prioritizing the improvement
of the economic and humanitarian situation of civilians
throughout Yemen. The Government has made efforts
and taken measures in that connection, notwithstanding
the militias, which are exploiting the resources of our
national economy in regions they control in order
to finance their destructive activities, prolong the
suffering of the Yemeni people and further degrade the
situation in those regions.

Government efforts have led to positive results,
such as the payment of monthly pensions to retirees and
salaries to civil servants in Al-Hudaydah governorate,
as well as to those working in the education and health
sectors. The prices for commodities, such as oil and
fuel, have stabilized in regions under the control of the
Yemeni Government, in addition to improvements in
health, educational and electricity services. The Yemeni
Government intends to adopt this year's budget, finance
the deficit and pay the wages of all civil servants as soon
as Government revenues have been collected, including
in the regions under the control of the Houthi militias.

We are working to find ways to finance the deficit.
We hope that the international community will help us
in that endeavour so that we can honour our obligations
to our citizens. We call on the international community
to support our efforts to stabilize the exchange rate and
improve the economic situation so that we can alleviate
the suffering of the Yemeni people.

The Yemeni Government also welcomes the
holding ofthe high-level conference to finance the 2019
humanitarian response plan for Yemen, to be held in
Geneva on 26 February. We once again call on sisterly
and friendly donor countries, as well as international
organizations, to provide greater support and honour
their obligations. In that regard, we would like to
thank the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab
Emirates, the State of Kuwait, the United States and
the United Kingdom for their generous support, which
is helping to alleviate human suffering in Yemen in the
wake of the armed Houthi militias' coup.

Today we are at a critical juncture that requires
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities in
order to preserve the significant momentum created in
Stockholm and to condemn the party that wants only to
see our efforts fail. The momentum we have achieved
is a positive step forward on the path towards attaining
comprehensive and lasting peace in Yemen.

