Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Mr. President, allow
me to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this first month
of the new year. In addition, Sir, I thank you for
convening this debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, an issue which should never be far
from our attention. Here, at the beginning of a new
year, let us renew our conviction that no civilian
anywhere should bear the costs of war.

As we speak, our thoughts are with the thousands
of men, women and children who have been killed and
who have suffered in Gaza in the last 19 days.
Civilians have been largely affected by this conflict,
and the brutality continues. We call for an immediate
ceasefire, as requested in resolution 1860 (2009). This
conflict must end now.

In Afghanistan as well, a new wave of violence is
destroying the lives of innocent civilians. More than
2,100 civilians died in 2008 alone. Women, men,
students, teachers, aid workers, farmers, tribal leaders
and clergy are all victims. The issue of civilian
casualties strikes at the heart of Afghanistan.

In the past few years, the Taliban, Al-Qaida and
other terrorist elements have embraced tactics that
target civilians with increasing deadliness. In 2008,
terrorists accounted for the majority of civilian
casualties. The numbers of victims of the terrorists are
sobering. In 2008 alone, at least 250 civilians were
executed, and an additional 725, or more, were killed
by suicide attacks or by improvised explosive devices
(IEDs). This targeting of civilians by the Taliban has
accomplished several terrible objectives.

First, the terrorists have demonstrated their
complete disregard for the sanctity of human life.
Suicide bombs kill more civilians than military
personnel. The Taliban regularly abduct, torture and
execute civilians, particularly targeting Afghans and
foreigners who are perceived to be cooperating with, or
receiving services from, the Government or the
international community. They behead doctors,
teachers, clergy and tribal leaders, recruit children as
suicide bombers and spray acid in the face of
schoolgirls. Taliban harm to civilians and the creation
of an environment of distrust and fear impede the
ability of the Afghan Government and the international
community to deliver services to the people who need
them most.

Secondly, the Taliban are using civilians as
human shields, hiding in towns and villages and using
men, women and children as cover for attacks on
Government and international forces. As a result, over
60 per cent of civilian casualties have occurred in the
south and east of the country, where the Taliban and
Al-Qaida are most active.

Unfortunately, many civilians have also suffered
and lost their lives during counter-terrorist operations.
This is a matter of grave concern for the Government
of Afghanistan. His Excellency President Karzai has
recently and repeatedly raised concerns and has asked
the international forces to find ways to prevent civilian
deaths. Our Government believes that we need to work
together with the international community in a spirit of
open dialogue and cooperation to find a workable
framework in which to address this problem, and we
are discussing the issue with our partners. NATO and
American-led forces have already introduced new
strategies aimed at minimizing civilian casualties, and
we have seen some positive results. However, any life
is precious, and as a Government we have a particular
responsibility to safeguard the lives of our citizens and
not rest until every Afghan is safe.

To decrease the harm to the Afghan people, there
are three measures for us to consider. The first is to
avoid tactics that cause significant unintentional
civilian deaths. Air strikes in particular result in
enormous casualties among innocent people. We must
minimize reliance on those methods of warfare. The
second measure is to work more in cooperation with
the Government of Afghanistan and with law
enforcement on the ground. Home searches and
detention practices should operate within the
guidelines set out in the Afghan Constitution. The
Afghan national army and police should assume
responsibility for home searches. Thirdly, we
encourage the international forces to operate with
greater cultural sensitivity. In conducting searches and
arrests, they should avoid heavy-handed tactics and
operate with respect and minimal force. And where
civilian casualties do occur, there should be apologies
and accountability.

With the increasing violence of the Taliban, it has
become even more imperative that the Afghan
Government and the international community work
together to effectively eliminate terrorism. The
terrorists are responsible for the large majority of
civilian casualties, but the Government of Afghanistan
and the international forces bear a heavier burden: we
must provide security and protection to the people who
need it. Our energies must be channelled collectively to
prove to the Afghan people that we consider their
welfare to be central to the endeavour for peace and
stability in the country.

