Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I thank you,
Mr. President, for personally presiding over this open
debate. We welcome this exchange in the light of
developments in different parts of the Middle East and
hope that the Security Council will engage in open
debates on other countries' situations as well.

We repeat our view that the two-State solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains the only
viable avenue leading to sustainable peace between
Israelis and Palestinians and for the entire region. Our
position remains unchanged: settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including in East
Jerusalem, are illegal under international humanitarian
law. The decisions taken by the Council in that regard,
including resolution 2334 (2016), must be respected and
fully implemented by all parties and relevant actors.

With respect to recent developments concerning
the Golan, Liechtenstein stresses that the prohibition of
the annexation of territory is a cornerstone of the rules-
based international order. The annexation of territory
as a result of any use of force runs counter to the
established norms of international law. Annexation also
amounts to an act of aggression - the worst form of the
illegal use of force - which is not only forbidden by
international law but also subject to individual criminal
accountability, including under the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court.

Last month marked the eighth anniversary of the
beginning of the war in Syria. Hundreds of thousands
of people have been killed and many more have been

injured and displaced. The country has suffered
large-scale destruction. There is an entire generation
of children who have not known life without war.
The entire region has been destabilized by an armed
conflict shaped by foreign actors. The Security Council
has failed in the task of addressing the crisis and human
suffering in any meaningful manner. Six single and six
double vetoes have been exercised, with tremendous
human costs and far-reaching negative consequences
for the United Nations as a whole.

By creating the Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, the General
Assembly stepped in to counter the Council's inaction
and ensure that the worst crimes committed will not
go unpunished. The mechanism is operational and
fully part of the institutional framework of the United
Nations, as a subsidiary body of the General Assembly.
Last week's submission of the report of the Mechanism
(see A/73/741) to the General Assembly made it clear
that the Mechanism currently represents the best hope
that the Syrian people will one day see justice served.

There can be no sustainable peace without justice,
in particular not for a conflict characterized by the use
of chemical weapons, the systematic use of torture and
summary executions, as well as sexual and gender-based
violence and the indiscriminate shelling of civilian
areas. Justice must be an integral part of any political
settlement, and we welcome the strong signal to that
effect emanating from the third Brussels Conference,
held in March. Despite the sobering track record of the
Council, we continue to call on it to finally refer the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.

Like many, we consider the Stockholm Agreement
of December 2018 on Al-Hudaydah a milestone that
brought hope to the people of Yemen for progress
towards an end to the conflict. Its swift and effective
implementation is crucial to reaching a sustainable
political settlement. Like many as well, we are
disappointed by the painfully slow progress to date
and call on the Council to put its full weight behind
the efforts of the Secretary-General's Special Envoy
to ensure that all parties and stakeholders deliver on
their commitments.

The Council has a crucial responsibility to
protect civilians from the most serious crimes under
international law, including the deliberate targeting of
civilian populations and infrastructure and preventing
the delivery of urgently needed humanitarian aid. With
more than 20 million people in need of assistance, that
responsibility is more acute than ever. We call on the
members of the Council, in particular the 10 signatories
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
Group code of conduct on mass atrocity crimes to live
up to that responsibility.

