The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by three ambassadors who led the Security Council
mission to Africa: first, by myself in my capacity as
Permanent Representative of Uganda and leader of the
Uganda leg of the mission, and then by Her Excellency
Ms. Susan Rice, Permanent Representative of the
United States of America and His Excellency Sir Mark
Lyall Grant, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, who together led the Sudan leg of the
mission.

I would like to welcome the return of the
members of the Council and the Secretariat who took
part in the Council mission to Africa.

I now wish to make a briefing in my capacity as
Permanent Representative of Uganda about the trip.

I want to start by thanking the Secretariat, the
Security Council team and the authorities in Uganda
for organizing the visit to Uganda. The Security
Council mission arrived in Uganda in the late hours of
Tuesday, 5 October. The purpose of our visit to Uganda
was fivefold: to reiterate the Security Council's support
for the improvement of relations among the countries
of the region and to encourage their strengthened
cooperation in all fields; secondly, to emphasize the
Security Council's support for action against armed
groups in the region, particularly the Lord's Resistance
Army; thirdly, to reiterate the Council's support for the
Djibouti peace process and for the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in the stabilization of
Somalia; fourthly, to stress the Council's firm
commitment to the cause of peace in the Sudan, to the
full implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and to the successful negotiation of a
comprehensive and inclusive peace agreement for
Darfur; and fifthly, to examine the important
contribution by the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe
2
to the work of the United Nations missions in our
region.

On the morning of 6 October, Council members
visited the Entebbe Support Base. They were received
and briefed by the Director of Mission Support for the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
Mr. Paul Buades. He explained that operations
commenced at Entebbe in May 2003 and that his Base
was a distribution and storage centre for MONUSCO in
support of MONUSCO operations in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Since that time,
cargo and passenger services have steadily increased,
and savings have been made accordingly.

Council members were also informed that, in
addition to MONUSCO, the Base now provides
support for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT, the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi, the
United Nations Peace-Building Support Office in the
Central African Republic and United Nations agencies,
including the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. Other stakeholders
include the Regional Service Centre and the Regional
Procurement Office.

Mr. Buades said that the Regional Service Centre,
as a component of the global field support strategy,
responds to the demands received both from Member
States and from the field. He elaborated that these
demands can be summarized in three categories: first,
to deliver services faster to help support missions
implement their mandates; secondly, to improve the
quality of the services delivered; and thirdly, to
increase efficiency and achieve a more cost-effective
use of resources. This framework allows the
consolidation of mission resources for the purpose of
achieving service improvements and efficiencies at the
regional level.

Council members were briefed on the shared
services, which include evacuation and safe haven for
the regional missions; entry points for cargoes destined
to missions; aircraft handling, receipt and inspection
services; and the rotation and training capability of
troop-contributing countries.

After the briefing, Council members were taken
on a walking tour of the base by the Deputy Base
Manager. Council members noted the logistical support
being provided to peacekeeping operations in the
region, which contribute to enhancing efficiency and
10-58084
responsiveness. They expressed keen interest in the
consequences resulting from the potential closure of
missions such as MINURCAT.

After the briefing and the visit to the Base,
Council members proceeded to meet with President
Yoweri Museveni. During that meeting, they held frank
discussions. The meeting was also attended by senior
officials of the Government of Uganda.

On the Sudan, President Museveni recalled that
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement was a
compromise reached between the parties in the Sudan
after years of conflict, and that it was therefore was
imperative that it be implemented fully. He stressed the
importance of supporting the efforts of the parties to
ensure peaceful, credible and timely referendums that
would reflect the will of the people concerned in the
Sudan. He said that he was relieved that, during the
high-level meeting on the Sudan convened by the
Secretary-General on 24 September in New York, both
parties reaffirmed their commitment to holding the
referendums on time. He cautioned that any attempt to
interrupt the process could be a recipe for the
resumption of conflict. He urged the United Nations to
be proactive and ensure a credible process that would
be respected by all and consistent with the United
Nations playing its rightful role in conflict prevention.

On the role of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), he recalled that, as one of the
guarantors of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
IGAD still had a critical role to play and that its Chair,
Prime Minister Meles Zenawi of Ethiopia, was playing
that role on behalf of the organization.

On Somalia, he was confident that security and
stability in that country were achievable if the
international community provided the support
necessary for the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) and AMISOM. to stabilize the country. The
African Union (AU), he said, would continue to
support the Djibouti peace process because it was a
political process agreed upon by the Somali people. He
pointed out that the decision of the African Union to
deploy up to 20,000 troops in AMISOM. was a
demonstration of the continent's commitment to
supporting peace and stability in Somalia. He
cautioned, however, that success would depend on the
availability of financial resources and equipment to
support the TFG in stabilizing the country, and that the
support of the international community, and the United
Nations in particular, was critical.
10-58084

On regional cooperation, President Museveni
stressed the importance of strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of peace
and security. He was of the view that, where the United
Nations has worked closely with the AU, the results
have been good. He cited the example of Burundi,
where the United Nations had supported a regionally
led peace initiative.

On the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), he
expressed satisfaction at the level of cooperation
among countries of the region in addressing the
menace it represented. He was confident that the
Lord's Resistance Army was not a long-term problem,
since countries of the region were now working
together to solve it. He called once again on the
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, to support regional efforts to end the LRA
menace.

On the Entebbe Support Base, he assured the
Council of Uganda's readiness to continue hosting and
supporting the United Nations missions in the region.

In conclusion, the Security Council mission to
Uganda was useful and fruitful. Council members had
an opportunity to interact with President Museveni on
issues of concern to regional security and to see first
hand the important work being undertaken at the
Entebbe Support Base in support of United Nations
missions in the region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Susan
Rice to make her statement.

