Mrs. Hassan (Djibouti) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Chinese presidency for organizing
today's open debate on the important issue of
strengthening African capacities in the area of peace
and security.

I am grateful to the Secretary-General and the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union (AU) for their contributions to our discussion.
I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
concept note (S/2018/1004, annex) prepared for this
meeting, which once again demonstrates how important
your country considers our continent to be.

Djibouti associates itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

(spoke in English)

This year marks the seventieth anniversary of
United Nations peacekeeping and one in which we
have achieved several key milestones, including the
approval of reform of the Organization's peace and
security architecture, the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, which my delegation has endorsed, and the
implementation of the action plan to strengthen the
safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers.
Djibouti welcomes the Secretary-General's reform
initiatives aimed at making peacekeeping more effective
and efficient, as well as achieving a more coherent and
coordinated approach to conflict prevention, mediation
and peacebuilding.

(spoke in French)

Of the total of 16 United Nations peacekeeping
operations, nine are deployed in Africa and account
for more than 80 per cent of uniformed personnel and
approved financial resources. Of the 30 countries that
are the main contributors of uniformed personnel to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, 19 are African
States. Furthermore, 50 per cent of peacekeeping
personnel come from African Union member States.

Today's debate is being held in the wake of the
eleventh Extraordinary Summit of the African Union,
held in Addis Ababa three days ago. At the Summit
our Heads of State and Government made important
decisions aimed at accelerating institutional reform
of the organization, particularly through the launch
of the Peace Fund, which will enable the institution
to advance the irreversible steps it is taking towards
financial autonomy and greater efficiency.

I want to emphasize Djibouti's commitment to
peacekeeping operations through our contribution of
nearly 2,000 men serving in Somalia and a formed
police unit in Darfur, as well as women and men in other
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Djibouti's
presence enables us to make a concrete contribution to
the peace and stability of our continent. In that regard, I
would like to focus on the following three points.

First, the United Nations and the international
community should promote greater cooperation
and strategic coherence in the context of conflict
prevention in Africa. Establishing a process for
planning and defining the joint mandates of African
Union peace operations authorized by the Security
Council is essential to their effectiveness. More
real-time consultations with the African Union and
other relevant regional organizations, along with joint
assessments and reviews, among other things, are vital
for recommending coherent options to decision-making
bodies for the timely prevention of conflicts, including,
but not limited to, preventive diplomacy. Greater
flexibility in the interpretation of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations would substantially
reduce divergent approaches in areas related to peace
and international security. The United Nations-AU
Joint Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security, signed in April 2017, provides a good
basis for institutionalizing that practice.

Secondly, we must work together to resolve
seemingly intractable conflicts by building resilience
through sustainable post-conflict reconstruction and
development initiatives. That means supporting the
African Union's efforts to combat violent extremism
by increasing investment in political, humanitarian,
human rights and development strategies. In addition,
the African Union Special Fund on the Prevention and
Combating of Terrorism, the African Centre for the
Study and Research on Terrorism and the Nouakchott and
Djibouti processes constitute important coordination
platforms for supporting the African Union in its fight
against terrorism.

Thirdly, funding for African peace support
operations continues to be the subject of endless
discussion. With the progress that has been achieved
in Somalia, the Sudan, Mali and the Central African
Republic, the African Union and its subregional
organizations have demonstrated their capabilities
in acting as first responders to African conflicts. In
complementarity with the United Nations, they are
contributing to collective security as provided for in
the Charter of the United Nations. We hope that the
draft resolution to be introduced next month under
Cote d'Ivoire's presidency of the Security Council, on
behalf of the three African countries that are members
of the Council, will lead to a more harmonious AU-
United Nations partnership in preventing, mediating
and managing violent conflicts, as well as in more joint
efforts to increase resource mobilization.

Lastly, I would like to reiterate that the growing
need for women in peacekeeping operations today is
more evident than ever if we are to be able to prevent and
resolve conflicts, support complex political transitions
and maintain peace through national stakeholders.

(spoke in English)

Finally, I would like to conclude by paying tribute
to the brave women and men who are working to
implement their peacekeeping tasks, as well as to the
Malawian and Tanzanian peacekeepers who recently
lost their lives in the field while defending the cause
of peace.

