Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset, Mr. President, to welcome your well-
advised and very timely initiative to convene this

ministerial-level meeting. We welcome also the fact
that this debate is taking place under the presidency of
Qatar - your country - which is playing a stabilizing
role in the region. I should like also to thank the
Secretariat for the relevant information and analyses
which it has made available to us, and the Secretary-
General for his outstanding presentation this morning.

In my delegation's View, we cannot have yet
another debate in this forum that leads only to fruitless
discussions. On the contrary, given the critical situation
we are facing, in which any acceptance of the status
quo or paralysis would be intolerable and
unacceptable, it appears that the time is ripe for the
Council to give fresh impetus to the peace process,
which, tragically, has been at a standstill for several
months.

The strong message that the Council, in its
capacity as the primary body entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security, must
send today to the international community as a whole,
and primarily to the main protagonists in the conflict,
is that of our clearly expressed will that there be an
immediate and unconditional resumption of
negotiations leading to a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

Specifically, the Council must unambiguously
and firmly support the idea of convening promptly an
international conference aimed at putting back on track
the measures advocated within the framework of the
agreed comprehensive settlement. Such an initiative
must involve careful preparations.

In that context, we reaffirm the key role of the
Quartet in the resumption of the process. We reaffirm
also the validity of all painstakingly negotiated
international documents and instruments, such as the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the Oslo accords,
the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference, the
Quartet Road Map and the Arab Peace Initiative. In
this context, the principle of land for peace remains
fundamental.

In order for those goals to be attained, such an
initiative must break new ground by ensuring that all
regional actors are deeply involved. We must recognize
the interaction and interconnection among the various
crises in the Middle East: the conflict in Palestine, the
crisis in Iraq and the crisis in Lebanon.
There is a need, therefore, for a comprehensive
approach involving contributions on the part of all
neighbouring States in the quest for lasting solutions.
We urge the involvement of all regional actors that
could help to ease tensions, and we believe that the
positive role played by the League of Arab States
should be taken into account. The outcome of the
meeting held last weekend is testimony of the firm will
of the Arab States to find a political solution.

Today it is clear to all that there can be no
military solution to this 60-year-old conflict, whose
ramifications threaten to engulf an already destabilized
region. We thus call for the convening, in the coming
months, of an international conference aimed at
revitalizing prospects for a comprehensive, just and
lasting solution leading to the coexistence of two
States - Israel and Palestine - in accordance with the
Vision set out in the Quartet Road Map, which was
endorsed by the Security Council.

We expect the main protagonists henceforth to
display the greatest restraint by refraining from
Violence and from any unilateral acts that could
compromise preparations for the proposed international
conference, for it is ultimately up to the parties to make
the final decision.

Mr. President, it is on the basis of that conviction
that my delegation supports the contents of the draft
presidential statement prepared by your delegation.

