Mr. Rifkind (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
thank you for your welcome. It is a great honour to be
present at this important debate. The fighting over the last
two days between Palestinians and Israelis has shocked us
all. The casualties suffered by both sides are very high.
We have not seen violence on this scale since the Oslo
agreements were reached and brought such hopes of
peace.

Sadly, violence was predictable. Despite progress in
some important areas, fires of frustration have been
smouldering because of the lack of progress on Hebron,
the continuation of the closures, which Palestinians see as
collective punishment and which carries a heavy
economic penalty, and the moves to develop settlements.
And the decision to open a tunnel in the Old City of
Jerusalem, following on the earlier demolition of a

 

Palestinian community centre, added the fuel that produced
conflagration.

But the incidents of the last few days are only
symptoms of the wider deterioration of the peace process,
which has now reached grave and serious proportions. Our
priority must be to put out the blaze. Only then can we
work to help the parties to engage seriously in real peace
negotiations, which are the only way to avoid such
outbursts in future.

Urgent action is needed to deal both with the
immediate problem and with the underlying deterioration in
the peace process. And what is required is first of all, I
would suggest, a moratorium on the opening up of the
tunnel to tourism; secondly, a meeting between the two
leaders, Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Arafat, at
which agreement can be reached on immediate steps to
cease the fighting; thirdly, the earliest possible engagement
to bring about the implementation of outstanding issues
under the Interim Agreement, starting with Hebron - this
would demonstrate by deeds and not just by words an
unequivocal commitment to the peace process; and fourthly,
as King Hussein has proposed, agreement to an
international commission to work out ways of dealing with
the sensitive questions that arise in Jerusalem on
archaeological matters. The United Kingdom would be
happy to participate.

N 0 one can pretend these steps are easy. The fighting
has made negotiating much more difficult, but it has also
made it more necessary. The United Kingdom urges the
leaders most closely concerned to make the leap of faith
that is needed to snatch progress back from the jaws of
such a setback. And this calls for statesmanship of a high
order. It is a great challenge, but it is not an impossible
one. Who can forget that in even more difficult
circumstances in South Africa, Nelson Mandela and F. W.
de Klerk were able to rise to an even greater challenge?
And so Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Arafat can,
and ought to be able to, count on the support of the
Security Council and the international community if they
bring the violence of the last days and hours to an end and
then engage with renewed determination and urgency in the
work for lasting peace, to which both have committed
themselves. The way forward is clear. It needs courage to
take it. But the alternative is not one to contemplate.

