Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me also
thank Special Representative Staffan de Mistura for his
briefing today and for his continued strong leadership
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). I am also pleased to welcome
Foreign Minister Rassoul; we thank him for his
leadership and for his statement.

The staff of UNAMA has the full support of the
United States in their challenging and important work
in assisting the Afghan people. We applaud them again
for their service and sacrifice.

Our goal in Afghanistan remains unchanged: to
disrupt, dismantle and defeat Al-Qaida and to prevent
its return. More international forces are focused on
reversing the Taliban's momentum and providing
security for the Afghan people. We are working in
partnership with the Afghan security forces, so that
Afghans themselves can assume more and more
responsibility for their country's security. The United
States is committed to ensuring that this transition to
Afghan-led responsibility for security is conditions-
based and irreversible and managed through a process
agreed to by the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community at the Kabul Conference.

Some parts of Afghanistan are nearly ready for
transition now; others will require more time and effort
on all of our parts. We are providing civilian experts
and mentors for the police and the army, which are
critical to ensuring that the transition occurs smoothly.
Based upon Afghanistan's transition plan, we will help
Afghanistan meet its goal of taking the lead on security
by 2014.

This transition does not at all lessen our
commitment to the Afghan people. The United States
will continue to provide assistance to help build the
capacities of Afghan institutions to withstand and
reduce the threat posed by extremism. We are also
helping to build up the Afghan institutional capacity to
delivery high-impact economic assistance, especially
in the agricultural sector, to create jobs, improve
governance, fight narcotics and draw insurgents off the
battlefield. Our support is focused, at the national
level, on Afghan ministries that can most directly affect
service delivery, particularly in the geographic heart of
the insurgency: the south and the east. We are also
adapting our programmes to account for local realities
and broadening our support at the provincial and
district levels to enhance the visibility, effectiveness
and accountability of the institutions that can improve
Afghan lives the most.

When representatives of more than 70
Governments and international organizations gathered
in Kabul in July, we made clear our lasting
commitment to our partnership with Afghanistan. The
Kabul Conference launched an ambitious process to
chart a vision for Afghanistan's future. The Kabul
process reflects a commitment to accountability,
including clear benchmarks and milestones, and the
United States fully supports the priorities and goals
identified by the Afghan Government. We welcome, as
well, UNAMA's commitment to aligning aid behind the
Government of Afghanistan's priorities and UNAMA's
support for the Government's push for greater aid
coherence and effectiveness. We look forward to seeing
the United Nations integrated strategic framework, as
mentioned in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/463), and its definition of priority areas for
United Nations engagement in support of Afghanistan's
transition.

Let me now turn to the key role that the Security
Council's Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions Committee -
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) - can play in fostering stability in Afghanistan.
We commend the 1267 Committee for its recent
de-listing of 10 Taliban individuals who are either
deceased or reconciled, as well as the Committee's
designation of three individuals who possess strong
links to the Taliban. We continue to believe that
individuals who have ceased violence against the
Afghan State, cut ties to Al-Qaida and accepted the
Afghan Constitution should be considered reconciled
and removed from the 1267 sanctions list. We must
ensure that the 1267 list keeps pace with the evolving
threat, and we encourage the Government of
Afghanistan and all Member States to provide updates
to the 1267 Committee, as well as well-documented
listing and de-listing requests, to ensure the list's
accuracy. Recent improvements to the Committee's
listing and de-listing procedures will make the 1267
regime a stronger, more credible tool in our overall
efforts to combat terrorism and bolster peace and
security in Afghanistan.

Finally, let me also comment on the elections just
concluded in Afghanistan. These elections, held under
extremely difficult circumstances, were the first
parliamentary elections to be run entirely by Afghan
institutions since the fall of the Taliban in 2001. The
Secretary-General's report and the briefing we have
just heard describe the extensive electoral preparations
by the Afghan Independent Electoral Commission and
the Afghan Electoral Complaints Commission, and the
important support provided by the United Nations.
These preparations resulted in a historic step for the
Afghan people. We applaud the courage, resolve and
patriotism of those who voted, male and female,
despite Taliban threats, intimidation and violence.
These elections would not have been possible without
the Afghan National Security Forces, which bravely
protected the Afghan people from the foes of the
democratic process. We condemn the Taliban's attacks
on members of the security forces and on innocent
civilians seeking to do nothing more than cast their
democratic ballots. On behalf of the United States, let
me pass on my profound sympathies to those who were
injured and my deepest condolences to the families of
those who were killed.

As Special Representative De Mistura said, it will
be some time before the results of these elections are

finalized. Independent Afghan electoral institutions
will now count the votes, respond to complaints and
allegations of fraud and ultimately announce results
that reflect the will of the Afghan people. The United
States supports this Afghan-led process. These
elections must be credible and transparent in the eyes
of the Afghan people, who will be the ultimate judge of
their success. We support UNAMA's plans to remain
closely engaged with Afghan institutions as they count
and tabulate results over the next few weeks.

We must not lose sight of the need for long-term
electoral reform. This must remain an important
priority, and my Government supports UNAMA's plans
to focus on this area after the election as well.

These elections are but a single but important
step towards a stronger, more stable Afghanistan. The
United States remains steadfastly committed to helping
Afghanistan achieve the peaceful and prosperous future
that the people of Afghanistan so deserve.

