Mr. Thiebaud (France) (interpretation from French):
The situation in Angola has deteriorated considerably in
recent months, characterized in particular by increased
violence and crime, the lack of any dialogue between the
Government and UNITA - for which UNITA is to blame
- the re-emergence of a general climate of fear in the
civilian population and the forced displacement of more
than 120,000 people since March 1998. The report of the
Secretary-General also highlights the growing insecurity
that is seriously hampering the activities of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA).

The delegation of France deeply deplores this
development, which works against the peace and
reconciliation efforts to which Maitre Beye so tirelessly
devoted himself. The delegation of France would again
like to pay tribute to the work of Maitre Beye and his
colleagues and to welcome the appointment of Mr. Diallo,
the new Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
whom we assure of our support.

We particularly deplore the attitude of UNITA,
which has still not respected its main commitments under
the Lusaka Protocol: complete demobilization of its troops
and the acceptance of the extension of State
administration over the entire national territory. By
stepping up its delaying tactics and failing to meet the
obligations and deadlines that it had undertaken to
respect, UNITA bears the primary responsibility for
current developments.

The draft resolution before us today demands that
UNITA comply immediately with its obligations under
the Lusaka Protocol and refrain from any activity that
undermines the process of national reconciliation.

In this context, we welcome the commitment of the
Government of Angola, reiterated today before the
Council, to continue to seek a political and peaceful
solution and to ensure the full implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol. We assure the Government of Angola
that it has the support of France in its work of
reconstruction and national reconciliation.

We hope that the current mission of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Brahimi, will give us
a full assessment of the situation on the ground and
provide us with ways and means to rekindle the peace
process and to fully assess the future role of the United
Nations. Accordingly, we support a one-month extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Mission and will
therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.

