Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I thank the Security
Council for inviting Germany to this discussion today.
We are participating here as part of the 4+2 group that
negotiated the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) and also as part of the Joint Commission that
is overseeing the implementation of the JCPOA.

I would like to echo others' thanks for the briefings
by Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, the Head of the
Delegation ofthe European Union, and our colleague the
representative of the Netherlands. We are particularly
grateful to Karel van Oosterom for the work that he has
put into this.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/602) and do not believe that it is malicious. We
think it is constructive, and that its concentration on
annex B is legitimate. I also support the proposal that
perhaps next time around it should focus more on annex
A, but I think it is legitimate that while looking at the
overall picture, the report should concentrate on annex
B, because we believe that there are serious things to
report in that regard.

But before I come to annex B, I would also like to
address generally the question of the JCPOA, endorsed
by resolution 2231 (2015). On that topic I can be brief.
Indeed, I can only echo the words of everybody around
the table, with one exception, and that is that they all
support the JCPOA and regret that the United States
has left it. We believe that the JCPOA builds on and
strengthens the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. It prevents a potential nuclear arms
race in the region. It is essential for our national and
European security that there not be nuclear proliferation
or a nuclear arms race in the region. We believe that the
European security situation has become worse. We also
believe that leaving the JCPOA undermines effective
multilateralism and the rules-based international
order, of which the nuclear-non-proliferation regime
is a very important pillar. It is therefore clear to us
that Germany, together with its European partners,
will remain committed to the JCPOA as long as Iran
is in compliance, and we urge Iran to abide by all the
nuclear-related restrictions that it is committed to
under the JCPOA. The latest report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency has just confirmed that it has
been doing so.

I will now to turn to annex B. In our view, its full
and effective implementation is very important for the
maintenance of regional and international security.
We encourage everyone to ensure respect for annex B
and compliance with it. The findings of the Secretary-
General on arms transfers and ballistic-missile
activities, which are documented in the report, give rise

to serious concerns. In that regard, we are particularly
concerned about the missile attacks on Saudi Arabia,
Iran's non-compliance with the arms embargo against
Yemen and the transfer to Yemen of ballistic-missile
technology. The report also points to Iranian arms
deliveries in the Middle East. We call on Iran to put
a stop to all of this, as such actions violate binding
provisions of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015).

Germany is also deeply concerned about the
development of Iran's ballistic-missile programme, and
we call on Iran to end the programme and all testing.
Iran's arms-transfer and missile-programme activities
in the region are destabilizing and have negative effects
for European security. Instead of investing in violations
of resolution 2231 (2015), we again appeal to Iran to
invest in building trust in the region and in abiding by
the resolution.

The meeting rose at 5.20 pm.
