Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I thank you, Sir, for
giving us the opportunity to participate in today's
debate. I would like to take up what you said earlier
in your national capacity with regard to Afghanistan,
namely, that, first and foremost, the peace process and
elections have to be driven by Afghanistan and Afghan-
owned. I fully support that.

I thank Mr. Yamamoto, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
for his briefing. I want to join my Italian colleague in
commending Mr. Yamamoto and his team for working
in circumstances that are not easy, and we are full
of admiration and support. We therefore support his
agenda with regard to reforming the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, as well as the
priorities that he is setting - as he explained earlier
this morning i with regard to concentrating on the
elections, which will be key. We share his belief that the
goal of holding transparent, fair, credible and inclusive
elections is essential to strengthening trust in Afghan
democratic institutions. They will be indispensable for a
peaceful and stable future. Furthermore, in that context,
as others said earlier, including my French colleague,
I support the Special Representative's emphasis on
women's participation in the elections. Holding the
elections as quickly and smoothly as possible will also
be very important so as to provide the opportunity for
the comprehensive political process to succeed, and
that is where he placed his second priority, which we
fully support.

We appreciate that Afghanistan has taken the
lead in efforts to bring about peace by launching the
Kabul Process for Peace and Security Cooperation.
We fully support a credible, comprehensive and
inclusive political process. Once again, I believe it is
very important that women, youth and civil society
be included, in the peace process. Furthermore, it is
very important that regional players are involved. In
that regard, I would like to congratulate my Kazakh
colleague for his activities and increased regional role
and for his intention to put that situation at the centre
of his presidency of the Security Council in January,
including through a trip to the region.

I would also like to return to what the briefers said.
I was struck, as were many others, by the fact that both
Mr. Fedotov and our Kazakh colleague in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) highlighted the increase in
opium production. That is a very serious development.
If that trend continues, it will have even more
detrimental effects on terrorism, organized crime and
corruption, and it will undoubtedly impact the peace
process, because, of course, Da'esh and, in particular,
the Taliban benefit from it. I can therefore only support
what the Ambassador of Kazakhstan said in appealing
to Member States to play a more active role in listing
persons who are responsible for the opium industry.

I would like to echo my British colleague in
recognizing the work of and statement by Ms. Wazhma
Frogh. I can only support what she said in strongly
highlighting the need for greater women's participation
in Afghan public life. Their stronger participation
in Government, the National Security Council, the
armed forces and all institutions is key. The Afghan
Ambassador mentioned that they are working hard
on getting more women into Government, but I think
much more can still be done. I can only point to my
own country as an example, where women serve as the
Chancellor and as the Minister of Defence. Perhaps in
a few years we will see the same thing in Afghanistan.

The second point raised by Ms. Frogh regarded
children. We are witnessing, as we have in other areas
such as Iraq and Syria with the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIS), that the Taliban are recruiting
children. That is something that we have to stop. We
must see to it that we create alternatives so as to ensure
that children receive education and are not drawn
into terrible tasks. We know the brutality of the ISIS
fighters. We know that from the fate of the Yazidis.
Likewise, with regard to violence against women: what
we now see in Afghanistan, we have already seen to
a terrible degree in Iraq. I would therefore commend
the Afghan Ambassador for what his Government has
achieved. My British colleague just highlighted all the
progress that they have achieved. I can only commend
that and yet encourage them to improve in a number
of areas, such as Afghan-Pakistani relations, which are
very important and should be further improved.

I would also like to highlight and commend
Afghanistan's election to the Human Rights Council.
What the Ambassador said in that context was very
encouraging. There are, however, two concrete points
that I would like to make in that regard: Afghanistan
should abolish the death penalty, and it should join the
Convention against Torture. Though the Ambassador
said that a lot is being done in that context, I believe
that formally subscribing to that Convention would be
an important development.

I should like to turn briefly to my country, Germany.
We will remain very committed to Afghanistan. Our
Ministers of Defence and for Foreign Affairs just
visited Afghanistan. We continue to be a major troop-
contributing country to NATO's Resolute Support
Mission, with 1,000 German troops on the ground. In
that context, I would like to explicitly commend the
United States for its renewed engagement, which is
key, as is what was said with regard to not setting an
artificial timeline. That is key because such timelines
encourage the Taliban to simply watch the clock waiting
for us to leave. That is very important. We continue to
support the Afghan Police. We have spent considerable
sums on stabilization efforts, contributing $250 million
annually for development and more than $20 million
for humanitarian aid.

Germany remains firmly committed to advancing
stability, peace and development in Afghanistan and
the region. We co-hosted the Arria Formula meeting in
November. We work with the Afghan Government and
national partners but, at the same time, I would also
like to say that we need to see more, Visible progress
so as to convince our people in Germany to continue to
commit soldiers and money to Afghanistan.

In conclusion, I would like to align myself
with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union.

