Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): The inter-Tajik peace
process has come a long way in recent months. The signing
of the Moscow General Agreement on the Establishment of
Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan last June was a
turning point in the bumpy road to peace. Despite
occasional incidents of hostage-taking and terrorist attacks
by disgruntled armed groups here and there, the process of
national reconciliation is beginning to take firm root. The
convening of the Commission on National Reconciliation,
the exchange of prisoners of war and detainees between the
Tajik Government and the United Tajik Opposition (UTO),
the registration of UTO fighters inside Tajikistan and the
process of the repatriation of refugees from Afghanistan are
all encouraging developments that testify to the firm
commitment of the Tajik parties to the success of the
process of peace and national reconciliation.

We pay tribute to President Rakhmonov and to the
UTO leader, Mr. Nuri, for their courage and wisdom in
coming to terms with each other in the broader interests of
the nation. We sincerely hope that their commitment to
peace and political goodwill will soon be translated into
benefits of peace for the Tajik people. We express our
appreciation to the Russian Federation and to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Merrem, for
their successful mediation efforts. We also commend the
personnel of UNMOT for their dedicated service under
difficult and often dangerous circumstances.

Needless to say, and like anywhere else, a climate of
security is essential to the monitoring by the United Nations
of peace in Tajikistan. In this connection, we welcome the
decision of the Tajik parties to form a joint security unit
with a View to providing necessary security to UNMOT.
We believe that this arrangement, together with the
protection to be provided by peacekeepers from the
Commonwealth of Independent States, will now make
possible the strengthening and expansion of the mandate of
UNMOT to meet its responsibilities of monitoring the peace
agreements.

We believe that the commitment of the Tajik parties
to peace and national reconciliation also deserves the
financial support of the international community. In this
regard, we welcome the Secretary-General's initiative to
convene an international donor conference at Vienna later
this month. The Republic of Korea will participate in this
conference.

Korea attaches great importance to the success of the
inter-Tajik peace process. We believe that peace in
Tajikistan is vital for the peace and stability of the entire
Central Asian region, which is inhabited by nearly
300,000 ethnic Koreans. My Government is encouraging
our business community to actively participate in the
reconstruction of the Tajik economy. We are also ready
to contribute military observers to the expanded UNMOT.

In conclusion, the Republic of Korea believes that
the efforts of the Tajik parties themselves to make peace
deserve the full support of the international community.
We therefore support the extension of the mandate of
UNMOT and its expansion, as recommended by the
Secretary-General in his report of 4 September 1997, and
we will vote in favour of the draft resolution before the
Council.
