Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
would like first of all to associate myself with the
statement to be made later by the representative of
Germany on behalf of the presidency of the European
Union.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and your
country, Belgium, for having provided us with this
opportunity to discuss once again the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We welcome the
Secretariat's continued involvement in this matter. I
would also like to thank John Holmes for his
introduction to our debate.

I would like to focus on four points. The first
concerns respect for international humanitarian law.
How could we fail to note that civilians are the first
victims of conflict? Even more serious, they are
increasingly being targeted. Parties to conflicts are
showing increasing disdain for international
humanitarian law. Indiscriminate attacks against
civilians and humanitarian actors carrying out their
missions have become increasingly common. Thus,
humanitarian space is now no longer a sanctuary. That
phenomenon is disturbing, and we believe that it is the
duty of the Council to remind all parties that they may
not, under any circumstances, fail to comply with
international humanitarian law, including, of course,
the four Geneva Conventions, as well as the two
Protocols additional to those Conventions, whose
thirtieth anniversary we have just celebrated. We
should not forget that 167 States are parties to those
Protocols, and we invite all those States that have not
yet done so to ratify them as soon as possible.

Compliance with international humanitarian law
requires rigorous action against impunity for violators.
The Council emphasized, in resolution 1674 (2006), of
April 2006, "the responsibility of States to comply with
their relevant obligations to end impunity" (para. 8)
and recognized the relevance of "the full range of
justice and reconciliation mechanisms including
national, international and 'mixed' criminal courts"

(para. 7).

In that regard, the International Criminal Court
has a pre-eminent role to play in trying those
principally responsible for the most serious crimes
when national courts are not in a position to do so. The
cooperation of States and the United Nations with the
International Criminal Court is essential. The
obligation to cooperate following on from the Rome
Statute and from Council resolutions must be
respected.

Finally, I wish to recall that international
humanitarian law also applies, of course, to forces
engaged in peacekeeping operations. France welcomes
the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy regarding
sexual abuse. We further recall the important principle
of the non-refoulement of persons seeking refuge with
the United Nations.

My second point concerns the protection of the
most vulnerable populations. We note that sexual
violence is now used regularly as a weapon of war.
Such abominable crimes affect millions of individuals,
and they must be prevented and punished. Resolution
1325 (2000) must be closely followed up in this regard.

Children are among the most vulnerable groups
in that regard. The recruitment of children to serve in
armed forces is equally unacceptable. On this front,
however, some initial progress has been made thanks to
the Security Council's action in the context of
resolution 1612 (2005). We are pleased that the Sudan
Liberation Movement has just signed a plan of action
committing it to the demobilization of children. Also as
a result of resolution 1612 (2005), other similar plans
of action have already led to the release of several
hundred child soldiers, in particular in Cote d'Ivoire.
But that scourge still affects about 250,000 children
throughout the world. We call on all the States
mentioned in the annexes to the Secretary-General's
report on this issue to fully commit to tangible
cooperation with the Security Council, the Secretary-
General's Special Representative and inter-agency task
forces.

From Darfur to Iraq and Sri Lanka, millions of
displaced people need protection. They are now more
numerous than refugees, and the phenomenon is
growing. We must afford them the greater protection
they need owing to their vulnerability, with due respect
for the Charter and the right of voluntary return.

Still with respect to the situation of the most
vulnerable populations, I would add that we are
concerned at the number of humanitarian personnel
who have been killed. It is particularly inadmissible
that those who come to help a population in distress
should be targeted. Here, we must ensure compliance
with resolution 1502 (2003).

Likewise, we are shocked to observe month after
month that those who seek to shed light on situations
of armed conflict, journalists, are being attacked while
doing their job. At the initiative of France and Greece,
the Security Council recalled, in resolution 1738
(2006), that journalists are civilians like others. The
attacks against journalists must not go unpunished.

I turn now to the question of access to
humanitarian assistance by vulnerable populations. As
the Under-Secretary-General has just underlined, the
question of access is central with respect to the
protection of civilians. Without access, nothing is
possible. Full, unimpeded access of humanitarian
personnel to civilians who need aid is a central demand
which the Council made in resolution 1674 (2006). We
believe that the Council needs to be fully informed of
obstacles to humanitarian assistance. In this
perspective, my country would see only advantages in
the Secretary-General's next report on the protection of
civilians containing information on specific
developments on this question, including in the form of
an annex if necessary.

My fourth and last point deals with the
contribution of peacekeeping operations to the
protection of civilians. In resolution 1674 (2006),
adopted by consensus in March 2006, the Council
reaffirmed its practice of ensuring that the mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping, political and
peacebuilding missions include, where appropriate and
on a case-by-case basis, provisions regarding, first, the
protection of civilians, particularly those under
imminent threat of physical danger within their zones
of operation; secondly, the facilitation of the provision
of humanitarian assistance; and, thirdly, the creation of
conditions conducive to the voluntary return of
refugees and internally displaced persons. I would
recall that the Council stipulated in the same resolution
that the protection of civilians should be given priority
in decisions about the use of available capacity and
resources and that protection mandates should be
implemented.

Clearly, the Council has made demands with
regard to United Nations operations, and those
demands are ambitious when such operations are
assigned a protection mandate. How do we assure that
these demands are met? In our view, there are several
possible approaches. First, it seems useful to enhance
the doctrine of peacekeeping with a debate on the
protection of civilians in the context of peacekeeping
operations; this could perhaps also lead to a debate on
rules of engagement. Secondly, we think it is important
to take into consideration, in the context of the regular
reports to the Security Council on the implementation
of the mandates of peacekeeping operations, the
civilian protection aspect when it appears in such
mandates. And finally, we wonder whether it might not
be useful for the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to contribute to the Secretary-General's
general reports on the protection of civilians and to be
associated with the briefings the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs makes to the Security
Council, at least with a view to responding to questions
regarding the theatres of activity of certain operations.

These proposals are intended to give practical
effect to the demands made in resolution 1674 (2006).
They lead us to express our wish for further
enhancement of the cooperation that already exists
between the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. We would appreciate it if,
during his next briefing to the Security Council,
Mr. Holmes would report to us on progress in that
cooperation.

