Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Your Excellency, the
Foreign Minister of Cote d'Ivoire, to this Chamber to
preside over this open debate. Our thanks also go to
Secretary-General Guterres, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and
Mr. Jean-Claude Kassi Brou, President ofthe Economic
Community of West African States Commission, for
their briefings.

As we look around the world today, we see
complexities that are in a state of flux. We are confronted
with a range of challenges that are intertwined, many
of which have spilled beyond the borders of a given
country, or for that matter, a given region. Regional
countries and the international community must work
together to address them. In recent years, the United
Nations has steadily strengthened its cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, which
has significantly contributed to the prevention
and resolution of conflicts, peacebuilding and the
maintenance of regional and global stability.

Meanwhile, non-traditional security threats and
risks, such as terrorism and transnational organized
crime, are on the rise. Some countries and regional and
subregional organizations are faced with inadequate
security and governance capabilities, as well as an
acute lack of funding. Much remains to be done on their
long journey towards lasting peace and development.
In the context of those new circumstances, threats
and challenges, how are we to further strengthen
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, within the framework
of the Charter of the United Nations, for better conflict
prevention and resolution and more effective post-
conflict reconstruction? The answer lies in a range of
imperatives. Please allow me to elaborate.

First, we must continue to strengthen multilateralism
and hold fast to the notions of mutually beneficial
cooperation and common development. The United
Nations is an emblem of multilateralism. Strengthened
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations is an important part
of supporting multilateralism. All parties should
actively encourage regional countries to subscribe to
the philosophy that cooperation should yield win-win
results, both bilaterally and multilaterally - that is, one
party must consider another's interests when pursuing
one's own interests and promote common development
while seeking one's own development. They should
uphold the vision of common, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security; encourage all
efforts to find solutions through dialogue, good offices,
mediation and other peaceful means; and enhance
mutual understanding and trust.

Secondly, we must fully leverage the unique
role of regional and subregional organizations, as
well as regional countries, in tackling topical issues
concerning a given region. Regional and subregional
organizations and regional countries have the benefit
of more intimate knowledge of the history, culture
and realities of their own region. They are uniquely
positioned to address regional topical issues, and their
role is irreplaceable. The international community
would be well advised to fully respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the countries
concerned and support the role of regional and
subregional organizations and regional countries in
leading mediation efforts. There is ample proof of the
effectiveness of that approach. Just recently, thanks
to collaboration among the African Union (AU), the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
regional countries, the South Sudanese parties signed
a new revitalized peace agreement and significant
progress was achieved in the relations of the countries
of the Horn of Africa. That is a case in point.

Thirdly, we must fully leverage the United
Nations advantages to lend more support to regional
and subregional organizations. The United Nations
should make better use of the mechanisms, resources
and capabilities at its disposal to give regional and
subregional organizations more assistance for training,
institutional development, logistical support and
funding. Coordination should be strengthened to enable
complementarity of comparative advantages, while
avoiding overlap, and to bring the best out of each
other, rather than inhibit each other. A true synergy
will emerge from such an approach.

Recent years have seen remarkable progress in
the cooperation between the United Nations, on the
one hand, and the African Union and subregional
organizations in Africa, on the other, which has
culminated in the successful resolution of issues
concerning cote d'Ivoire, Sierra Leone and Liberia.
The peacekeeping mechanisms of the United Nations
in the African region have played an important and
irreplaceable role in some hotspots, including Somalia,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic.

In 2017, the United Nations and the African Union
signed the Joint Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, under which there has been an
expansion of the areas of cooperation between the two
organizations as well as improved levels of cooperation.
That sets an example for cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations. It
is also the best exercise in implementing the provisions
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and
harnessing the advantages of regional organizations.

China supports the strengthened cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
and subregional organizations in Africa and has made
active efforts to that end. During China's presidency
of the Council in November, China convened two open
debates - one on strengthening multilateralism (see S/PV.8395) and the other on strengthening peacekeeping
operations in Africa (see S/PV.8407) - to promote
greater support from the United Nations and the
international community at large for the African Union
and other regional and subregional organizations.

As the second-largest contributor to the United
Nations peacekeeping budget, I would like to
underscore once again, in no uncertain terms, that
China unequivocally supports the use of United
Nations peacekeeping contributions to provide
stable, predictable and sustainable funding for AU
peace operations and supports the adoption of a draft
resolution by the Council to that end. We are keen
for the Council to reach consensus promptly. China
will continue to actively support the United Nations
cooperation with the AU and other regional and
subregional organizations through a combination of
channels, including direct donations and the China-
United Nations Peace and Development Trust Fund.

Last but not least, I would like to reiterate
that as a staunch and consistent supporter of
multilateralism. China stands ready to work with the
rest of the international community to help foster
closer cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, with a View to
reinforcing and enhancing the international collective
security mechanism and to maintaining international
peace and stability. Together we shall build a community
of a shared future for humankind by charting the way
towards a more secure and better future.

