Mr. Hoshino (Japan): This month marks the second
anniversary of the unanimous adoption of resolution
2286 (2016), on health care in armed conflict, on
which Japan was a co-penholder. The resolution was
sponsored by more than 80 Member States. I would
like to express my gratitude to Poland for holding this
ministerial-level open debate and thereby providing
an occasion to draw the attention of the international
community to this important issue once again.

Resolution 2286 (2016), the first-ever Council
resolution addressing attacks on health services,
reconfirmed that all parties to armed conflicts have
obligations under international law to protect civilians.
We welcome the fact that subsequent Council resolutions
refer to resolution 2286 (2016).

Since then, however, as fighting born of conflict is
increasingly taking place in densely populated areas,
the state of the protection of civilians is bleaker. We
witness increased use of air strikes in urban areas,
resulting in large numbers of civilian casualties. We
have also been hearing continuous reports of attacks
against health-care providers and facilities. This
deplorable reality underscores the urgent need to
promote respect for international humanitarian law by
all parties to a conflict.

When Japan was a member of the Council, we
worked hard on humanitarian issues in Syria as a
co-penholder. It is regrettable that fighting continues
in many cities in Syria; humanitarian access is often
hindered or blocked; medical workers are regularly
attacked and even medical evacuation is perilous. While
we know the differences in position among Council
members and the wider United Nations membership, it
is nonetheless the Council's responsibility to emphasize
the importance of protecting civilians, thereby
delivering a clear message to parties to conflict that
they must respect international humanitarian law, even
in a war against terrorism.

Japan welcomes the latest report of theSecretary-
General (S/2018/462), which provides practical ideas for
the implementation of resolution 2286 (2016), including
the urgent necessity of enhancing compliance by
non-State armed groups. The Council should commit to
enforcing the resolution and to seek ways to encourage
Member States to take concrete actions to implement it.
Japan will be closely watching the development of the
implementation process and will continue to engage in
the full implementation of resolution 2286 (2016) within
the broader context of conflict prevention, namely, by
assisting political processes towards conflict resolution
and promoting peacebuilding.

Japan has been undertaking efforts to alleviate
the suffering of people living in various conditions,
including during conflict and in post-conflict
situations. By viewing individuals as the foundation
of a country and community, we see the importance of
investing in people. We would like to emphasize once
again the importance of promoting human security
through the empowerment and protection of people
in all circumstances, including, and especially during
armed conflict.

