Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): May I, through
you, Sir, thank the Foreign Minister of the Transitional
National Government of Somalia for his statement this
morning.

The representative of Spain will be speaking
shortly on behalf of the European Union and my
delegation naturally endorses everything that he will
say. I just want to make a few points in my national
capacity.

The Nairobi peace and reconciliation conference
will be crucial, but we should all be realistic about
what it can achieve. Even if the parties are able to
resolve only some of their differences, we would
reckon that the Nairobi peace conference will have
been a success. We must, however, regard it as the first
stage in a process and not the endgame and be realistic
in assuming that agreement at Nairobi is unlikely on a
broad-based Government. Instead, the focus of Nairobi
should be on resolving differences among the parties in
the South and on finding a political settlement that may
result in the formation of a broad-based Government in
due course. The United Kingdom is contributing
£25,000 to the expenses of the Nairobi conference.

It is important that the United Nations and,
indeed, other international bodies do not make any
statements before Nairobi that might prejudice the
outcome - for example, statements that push a
particular constitutional model for Somalia. As many
delegations have already said, the only stable outcome
will be one that is generated and agreed by the Somali
people and parties themselves.

A number of delegations have commented on the
question of a peace-building mission in Somalia. We
believe that a United Nations office there would be
useful, but we also believe that it is important that we
all respect the Secretary-General's judgement on the
safety of personnel, which is clearly the most important
priority.

We are also concerned by the proliferation of
arms supplies to Somalia. Countries that are engaged in
the arms trade to Somalia are not only in breach of
Council resolution 733 (1992) but are also further
destabilizing the country, fuelling the gun culture and
undermining regional efforts to reduce the flow of
arms. Like others, we are in favour of reactivating the
arms embargo.

We also encourage the United Nations, in
conjunction with the lntergovernmental Authority on
Development (lGAD) and other regional bodies, to do
more to solve problems that would bring practical
benefits for the people of Somalia. In this context, it
may be worth encouraging the Government of Saudi
Arabia more energetically to lift the livestock ban, to
make a serious attempt to stop the flow of illegal arms
and to take tough action against the dumping of toxic
waste into legal fishing areas in Somali waters.

Finally, if the Nairobi Conference fails and
hostilities increase, the international community will
need to consider appropriate action against those who
are responsible.

