Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I wish
to congratulate the United States of America on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also wish to recognize your skilled
leadership, Madam President, including the current
efforts being exerted to advance peace and ensure
a more stable and secure Middle East. We also
express our appreciation to the United Kingdom for
its efficient leadership of the Council in June. And I
thank Mr. Robert Serry, Personal Representative of
the Secretary-General and Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing and tireless
efforts on the ground.

We meet at a critical juncture in the long
history of the international community's attempts to
peacefully and justly resolve the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Despite decades of initiatives, processes
and legislation - including firm resolutions of the
Security Council based on clear tenets of international
law, primarily the inadmissibility of the acquisition
of territory by force and the right of peoples to self-
determination - the Palestinian people continue to be
denied freedom and peace remains elusive.

Yet, we are now at a turning point. Thanks to the
current international and regional efforts, foremost
by United States Secretary of State John Kerry, in
coordination with the Arab partners of the ministerial
committee for the Arab Peace Initiative and with the
support of concerned States from every continent of
the globe, there is an opportunity before us to make
peace a reality. The decisions made at this time will
determine whether the solution of two States - the
State of Palestine and the State of Israel, living side by
side in peace and security on the basis of the pre-1967
borders will be achieved - or whether that solution
will be brought to an end by Israel's illegal policies.
The consequences in that regard would be far-reaching,
including the onset of alternative efforts - political,
legal and popular - to end this injustice and to realize
the inalienable human rights and legitimate national
aspirations of the Palestinian people.

The Palestinian leadership is cognizant of the
significance of this moment and is ready to seize
this opportunity. Under the leadership of President
Mahmoud Abbas, it has responsibly cooperated with
Secretary Kerry's initiative and the global efforts
to relaunch the peace process for the achievement of
the two-State solution, based on the parameters of
the process enshrined in the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map.

The international community has acknowledged,
on numerous occasions, that the Palestinian side has
fulfilled its obligations and consistently acted in good
faith, despite facing enormous challenges under Israeli
occupation. Moreover, the Palestinian leadership has
never placed conditions on the peace process. It has
only called, rightfully, for the respect of international
law and the United Nations resolutions that constitute
the foundation of the process.

The State of Palestine believes firmly in the rule of
law. All States, including Israel, the occupying Power,
have an obligation to respect the rule of law; no pretext
can justify a breach of the law. Such respect is vital to
overcoming the obstacles that have constantly caused
the peace process to fail, exacerbating conditions on the
ground. It will ensure that talks to resolve all remaining
status issues - on Jerusalem, refugees, settlements,
borders, security, prisoners and water - ultimately
result in the conclusion of the just and lasting peace
that we have sought for decades. Moreover, we would
like to stress - as has been repeatedly affirmed by
the international community - that it is imperative to
set clear parameters and a time frame for a successful
peace process.

Indeed, the consensus international position in
support of the two-State solution based, inter alia, on
the parameters of the 1967 borders as the basis for the
two States, with Jerusalem as the shared capital, and
a just agreed solution to the question of Palestinian
refugees, on the basis of the relevant resolutions, is
what the Palestinian people and their leadership have
been committed to for decades in word and deed. In
fact, on 15 November the Palestinian people will mark
25 years since they formally accepted the two-State
solution with the adoption of the Palestinian declaration
ofindependence, in 1988. That significant compromise
to establish our State on only 22 per cent of our historic
homeland, for the sake of restoring our rights and
ending the conflict, is among the boldest reflections of
our commitment to the path ofpeace and compromise in
spite of the historic injustice inflicted upon our people.

That commitment has been at the core of our
pragmatism, from the signing of the Oslo accords,
20 years ago in September, to our engagement in all
incarnations of the peace processes since the Madrid
Conference, and to our legitimate actions on the
international arena to safeguard and advance the rights
of the Palestinian people throughout the decades.
Remarkably, that commitment has prevailed in spite
of the many setbacks caused by Israel's unlawful
policies in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, the territory constituting the State of
Palestine. Those illegal actions and the international
community's failure to hold Israel accountable have
continually undermined the peace process and the two-
State solution, causing great hardship for our people.
Yet, the Palestinian leadership has patiently adhered
to the noble goals of peace and coexistence while
reaffirming its commitment at all junctures, including
today before the Council.

However, in order to sustain a truly meaningful
process, realities on the ground must be redressed.
Although we commend the initiative currently under
way, we must act responsibly to ensure that such an
environment is compatible with and supports the
goals of the process. How can we all succeed while
Israel persists with the illegal policies of its 46-year
military occupation, reaffirming daily to our people
its unwillingness to make peace? We cannot. Tensions,
mistrust and instability will consequently continue
to rise, popular belief in the possibility of peace will
continue to decline and this final opportunity to realize
the two-State solution will be lost.

As we emphasized in letters to the Council, since
the most recent open debate Israel has regrettably
continued its policy of aggression, colonization,
collective punishment and oppression, deepening the
occupation and the suffering of the Palestinian people,
in flagrant violation ofthe law and disregarding calls for
it to comply with attempts to revive the peace process.
That has included the construction of settlements
and the wall, particularly in and around occupied
East Jerusalem and Bethlehem, as well as the Jordan
Valley; the announcement of plans to build thousands
of settlement units; the confiscation of hundreds of
dunums of land; the forced displacement and transfer of
civilians, particularly Bedouin families; the demolition
of homes; violent military raids by the occupying forces
in Palestinian towns, villages and refugee camps;
the excessive use of force against civilian protesters;
daily arrests and the detention of civilians, including
a five year-old child; the continued imprisonment of
nearly 5,000 Palestinians, who are enduring horrific
conditions and abuse, with several prisoners on hunger
strike who are gravely ill; the obstruction of the
freedom of movement for most; the illegal blockade
of the Gaza Strip, which has entered its seventh year,
causing huge humanitarian suffering; and aggravating
religious sensitivities, with holy sites being threatened,
especially at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, the detention of
the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem, and the assaults and
harassment of worshippers, including during Christian
Easter Observances and the holy month of Ramadan.

Meanwhile, extremist Israeli settlers continue their
criminal rampage throughout our country, terrorizing
civilians, attacking homes, destroying farmland
and thousands of trees, vandalizing churches and
mosques with vulgar displays of hatred and racism, and
threatening the sanctity of Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The
settlers act with sufficient support and encouragement
from Government officials, who continue to encourage
settler colonization and the unlawful annexation of
Palestinian land. Recent statements by Israel's Deputy
Foreign, Housing and Economy Ministers and members
ofthe Knesset expose the extremist positions ofparts of
the Government of Israel, revealing their rejection of the
two-State solution and of the rights of the Palestinian
people. That is cause for real concern, as we seek to
overcome this dangerous political impasse.
In that regard, we must reiterate that the two-State
solution and Israel's settlement campaign are completely
irreconcilable. Settlement activities are illegal and
constitute the major obstacle to peace. Speaking
of peace while engaging in its destruction makes a
mockery of the international community's support for
the two-State solution and sabotages all efforts towards
a peaceful solution. So does claiming a readiness to
negotiate without conditions, while imposing conditions
on the ground such as illegal measures that entrench
the occupation, diminish the viability of two States and
obstruct a peace agreement. Regrettably, that has been
Israel's policy to date, with settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, having
increased by 355 per cent in the first quarter of 2013
alone.

We furthermore reiterate that the seizure of
other people's land, their forced displacement and
colonization are war crimes under the Fourth Geneva
Convention, its Additional Protocol 1 and the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court. We also
recall that the consensus on the illegality of Israel's
settlement activities goes back decades, from the first
Security Council resolution on settlements - resolution
252 (1968) f to the first General Assembly resolutions
on the subject, namely, resolutions 2252 (ES-V) and
2254 (ES-V), of4 and 14 July 1967, respectively.

The international community must not waver and
must continue to demand an end to these illegal actions.
There can be no excuse for continued settlement
activities, regardless of how they are manifested. This
message must be made clear to Israel, as was recently
reaffirmed by the important guidelines adopted by the
European Union, which are in line with international
law and the global position regarding Israeli settlement
activities in the lands occupied since June 1967,
including East Jerusalem. The Europeans are to be
highly commended for this step, because it can tangibly
contribute to promoting compliance with the law and
thus to advancing a peaceful solution.

The facts are sobering, yet we are hopeful. As
stated earlier, we recognize that we are at a crossroads.
We are ready to seriously engage in direct negotiations
in good faith. If the opportunity for peace before us
is lost, it will not be for lack of commitment by the
Palestinian side or for lack of effort by the international
community, including the Arab States, whose Peace
Initiative stands.

For a genuine process and real progress, it is
imperative that Israel affirm its proclaimed commitment
to peace and the two-State solution not just in words,
but in deeds. Settlements must be stopped, prisoners
must be released, all collective punishment and military
operations must be halted, and Israel must come to
the negotiating table in good faith. Israel must choose
peace, security and coexistence over the continued
occupation and domination of another people.

If Israel persists with its violations, the international
community must hold it accountable, acting responsibly
to uphold the law, avert further destabilization and
preserve the chance for peace. The Council must
fulfil its duties. Remaining on the sidelines while
peace, security and the two-State solution enshrined
in its own resolutions are endangered is unacceptable.
The Palestinian people thus continue to appeal to the
international community to take the steps necessary
to support the peace process towards fulfilment of the
decades-long promise to assist them to finally realize
their rights, justice and freedom in their independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living side by side with Israel in peace and security on
the basis of the 4 June 1967 borders - the foundation
of peace in the Middle East.

Before concluding, I must again convey to the
Council our grave concerns about the situation of
Palestinian refugees in Syria. As the conflict rages,
Palestinian refugees, like other civilians in the country,
continue to suffer loss of life and injury, destruction
of their homes and property and massive displacement.
Those developments reconfirm the need for a just
solution for the plight of the Palestinian refugees in the
context ofa final peace agreement and ofregional peace.
While recognizing the extraordinary efforts of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and other humanitarian
organizations to assist the Palestine refugees in
this time of crisis, including those who have fled to
Lebanon and Jordan, we appeal for the redoubling of
international efforts to ensure the protection of all
civilians in accordance with international law and to
find a political solution to this tragic conflict.

