Mr. Hallergard: I thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this debate. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing this
morning.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Georgia align themselves with this statement.

The European Union continues to be extremely
concerned about the deteriorating situation in Syria,
which makes it all the more urgent to put an end to
all violence and to the suffering of the Syrian people,
and find a political solution that meets their legitimate
aspirations. We condemn the unprecedented use of
force by the regime. We also condemn the continuing
widespread and systematic violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights in Syria, including
increasing attacks on religious and ethnic communities.
Only a political solution that results in a united,
inclusive and democratic Syria can end the terrible
bloodshed and grave violations of human rights.

The European Union supports a vision of Syria that
will live up to the legitimate demands of the Syrian
people for a free, open and inclusive political system
in which all Syrians are involved and enjoy equal
rights regardless of their origin, affiliation, religion or
beliefs, while recognizing an important role for women
in society.

The European Union welcomes the call by Secretary-
General Ban Ki-Moon for a peace conference to be held
in Geneva before the end of November. We urge all
sides to the conflict to respond positively to that call
and to adhere publicly to a credible political transition
based on the full implementation of the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex). The EU reiterates
that the objective of the conference must be the swift
establishment, by mutual consent, of a transitional
governing body with full executive powers and control
of all governmental and all security institutions. The
European Union also considers that, in full conformity
with the Geneva communique, the parties will have to
agree during the conference on clear and irreversible
steps and a short time frame for the political transition.
International participants in "Geneva II" should adhere
to the principles included in the communique.

The European Union calls on the opposition to
come together and participate actively at the conference
and encourages the National Coalition of Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces to take a leading
role during negotiations. We stand ready to continue
engaging with and to support the Coalition in those
endeavours and in its relations with the international
community at large.

The European Union stood united in condemning
in the strongest terms the horrific chemical attack
perpetrated on 21 August. That attack constituted a
blatant violation of international law, which amounts
to a crime against humanity and a war crime under the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Those crimes, as well as other atrocities and human
rights violations and abuses, must be investigated and
perpetrators and those ordering the crimes must be
held accountable. The European Union reaffirms that
there should be no impunity for any such violations,
including those committed with either chemical and
conventional weapons or other means, and recalls that
the Security Council can refer the situation in Syria to
the ICC , as requested in the Swiss letter to the Council
of 14 January 2013 (S/2013/l9, annex), at any time.

We are seriously concerned about the growing
involvement of extremist and non-State foreign actors
in the fighting in Syria, which is further fuelling the
conflict and posing a threat to regional stability. We call
on all the relevant parties to refrain from supporting
such groups.

The European Union welcomed the decision
of the Executive Council of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
resolution 2118 (2013), which mandated that the
Syrian Arab Republic eliminate all chemical-weapons
material and equipment by the first half of 2014. The
Syrian Arab Republic must now meet all its obligations
in the most complete, diligent and transparent manner.
The European Union calls on all sides to ensure that the
inspectors have free and unfettered access to all sites.
The European Union and its individual member States
are giving concrete support to the Joint Mission of the
United Nations-OPCW in carrying out its important
and urgent tasks and stand ready to consider further
support.

As the largest donor, the European Union
reaffirms its commitment to continuing to provide
assistance, including humanitarian aid, to the Syrian
people - assistance that now amounts to close to
€2 billion. Yesterday the Foreign Affairs Council agreed
on common EU messages on humanitarian aspects of
the Syrian crisis, to which I would like to refer.

All efforts must be made to ensure that humanitarian
aid reaches all people in need in Syria and that full
access is granted to humanitarian aid agencies. We
welcomed the Security Council presidential statement
of 2 October on the humanitarian situation in Syria
(S/PRST/2013/15). It should be fully implemented,
and we welcome the efforts being made by the
United Nations, and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs in particular, in that regard.
All parties, especially the Syrian authorities, must
take all appropriate measures to facilitate safe and
unhindered humanitarian access to populations in
need of assistance throughout the entirety of Syrian
territory, including across conflict lines and borders
with neighbouring countries. We call on all sides of
the conflict to allow for local ceasefires to facilitate
humanitarian work and to respect all obligations under
international humanitarian law.

The EU expresses deep concern for the fate of the
millions of internally displaced persons and refugees,
and commends those countries that are keeping their
borders open in order to provide safe havens for
refugees. The EU renews its commitment to respond
to humanitarian needs in Syria and its neighbours.
We recognize that the dramatic situation of refugees
affecting neighbouring countries is also of growing
concern to countries beyond the immediate vicinity of
Syria, and is having an impact on them as well.

To facilitate an effective settlement of the crisis,
the EU will continue its engagement with, and support
to, the Syrian National Coalition, including in areas
under the Coalition's control. The EU welcomes the
creation by the Group of Friends of the Syrian People
of a Syria recovery trust fund as an important step
towards ensuring that the assistance the people of Syria
need is properly delivered.

With regard to the Middle East peace process and
the ongoing direct negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians aimed at a comprehensive peace between
the two sides, the European Union remains fully
supportive of the process and is committed to helping
to ensure its success. The European Union commends
the courageous leadership shown by Prime Minister
Netanyahu and President Abbas in that context, as well
as the crucial role played by the United States and the
support expressed by the League of Arab States. We
trust that such leadership will be the basis needed for
substantial decisions to be taken on the key issues with
regard to a viable two-State solution.

The European Union recalls its commitment
to support the parties' quest for a comprehensive
agreement on all final status issues, within the agreed
nine-month timeframe. We urge all parties to refrain
from actions that could undermine the negotiation
process and the prospects for peace. We will not lose
sight of developments on the ground, and we will
continue to act in accordance with our well-known
principles and positions and with international law
and international humanitarian law. As negotiations
progress, the EU intends to give further concrete form
to its support, in line with what will be agreed on by the
parties, and keeping in mind the EU's determination to
contribute to a new era of peace and prosperity in the
Middle East. The EU is concerned with the dramatic
shortfall in fiscal revenue due to slowing economic
development in the Palestinian territory. The EU is
the largest donor to the Palestinian Authority, and we
call on other donors, especially those in the region, to
increase their financial support to it.

Before concluding my statement, I would like to turn
briefly to the situation in Lebanon. The EU welcomes
the establishment in New York on 25 September of
an international support group for Lebanon. We will
continue to uphold our commitment as the largest donor
in Lebanon, supporting the country in addressing
humanitarian, economic and security challenges. Given
the magnitude of those challenges, it is of the utmost
urgency that a Government be formed in Lebanon.

