Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Palestine): Mr. President,
allow me to congratulate you and your country, the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, on your presidency of
the Security Council this month, affirming our
confidence in your ability to wisely guide the Council's
important work.
I also express our thanks to the United States of
America for its able stewardship of the Council in
June.

We also thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Pascoe, for his briefing today.

The Middle East peace process, which was begun
17 years ago in Madrid on the basis of United Nations
resolutions and the principle of land for peace, was
launched officially between the Palestinian and Israeli
sides 15 years ago in Washington with the signing of
the Oslo accords, and renewed once again with much
hope last November in Annapolis after a bitter seven
year freeze - this process, even in the most benign
assessment, is in a state of disrepair. That is so because
the entire premise of the peace process is being
incessantly undermined by the illegal actions of Israel,
the occupying Power, in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, actions that are
totally contrary to the principle of land for peace and
the objective of achieving a just, lasting and peaceful
settlement based on a two-State solution.

Despite many resolutions, agreements and
initiatives undertaken over the years to sustain and
salvage the peace process, Israel's deliberate actions
continue to harm the peace process, preventing that
process from overcoming the serious obstacles on the
path to achievement of its goals.

The main obstruction has been Israel's illegal
settlement campaign in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, as well as in the
occupied Syrian Golan, by which Israel has, for over
41 years, been aggressively colonizing the land it
forcibly occupied in 1967 in grave breach of
international humanitarian law, particularly the Fourth
Geneva Convention, which absolutely prohibits the
transfer by the occupying Power of its civilian
population into the territory it occupies.

In the occupied Palestinian Territory, Israel's
settlement campaign has aimed at creating unilateral
facts on the ground and illegally altering the
demographic composition, status and character of the
territory, in order to facilitate the de facto annexation
of large areas of land, especially in and around
occupied East Jerusalem. As such, this colonization
represents the primary danger to the realization by the
Palestinian people of their inalienable and national
rights and the achievement of the two-State solution
with an independent Palestinian State living side by

side with Israel in peace and security on the basis of
the 1967 borders. Indeed, the settlements issue is not
only one of the final status issues in the peace process,
but is also intricately related to and at the crux of
nearly all other final status issues, including Jerusalem,
borders, water and security, and continues to
complicate efforts to justly resolve all of these issues.

Israeli settlement activities have been relentless,
in spite of the United Nations resolutions demanding
cessation of all settlement activities and the
dismantlement of the settlements, in spite of the calls
by the high contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention for Israel to respect the Convention and
abide by its legal obligations, and in spite of the fact
that the cornerstone of the Road Map is Israel's
obligation to freeze all settlement activity and to
dismantle settlement outposts.

Israel remains defiant against the will and calls of
the international community and continues its illegal
settlement activities, imposing more facts on the
ground to advance its land grab, with settlement
activities especially intense in occupied East Jerusalem
and the Jordan Valley, in the recent period. It is a
blatant situation of acquisition of territory by force,
driven by Israel's expansionist agenda, which has
prolonged the occupation and stood in the way of all
peacemaking efforts.

This massive colonization campaign has been
carried out through the vast confiscation of Palestinian
land, the construction and expansion of settlements,
transfer of hundreds of thousands of Israeli settlers and
construction of the wall, which is directly linked to the
settlements and intended to protect them and facilitate
their expansion and annexation, as well as by
numerous other illegal measures.

In this regard, we recall that this month marked
the four-year anniversary of the landmark Advisory
Opinion of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) on
the legal consequences of the construction of the wall
in the occupied Palestinian Territory. The Court
affirmed the illegality of the wall, which is being
constructed deep in the Palestinian territory in
deviation from the 1967 Green Line, as well as the
illegality of its associated regime, and called upon
Israel to cease construction of the wall, to dismantle it
and to make reparations for all damage caused by it.

The wall is part and parcel of Israel's
colonization attempts, and that was recognized by the

08-4326]
Court, which concluded, inter alia, that the Israeli
settlements in the occupied Palestinian Territory have
been established in breach of international law and that

"the route chosen for the wall gives expression in
loco to the illegal measures taken by Israel with
regard to Jerusalem and the settlements, as
deplored by the Security Council"

(A/ES-10/273, 13 July 2004, para. 122).

Taken together, the 150 Israeli settlements, the
more than 100 settlement outposts, the extensive
labyrinth of Israeli-only bypass roads connecting the
settlements to each other and to Israel itself, and the
wall, which is projected to be more than twice the
length of the 1967 Green Line, occupy huge swaths of
Palestinian land, including areas with water and other
natural resources, totalling approximately 50 per cent
of the occupied West Bank.

This vast colonial network, along with the more
than 600 Israeli checkpoints erected to completely
restrict Palestinian movement, has created a situation
on the ground whereby Palestinian communities have
been separated, with many transformed into walled
cantons and some destroyed in their entirety, causing
the displacement of thousands of Palestinian civilians.
East Jerusalem is being isolated from the rest of the
Palestinian territory, which is being dissected into
northern, central and southern parts. In other words,
economic and social devastation is being imposed on
the Palestinian people.

The overall result is the severe fragmentation of
the occupied Palestinian Territory and the undermining
of its contiguity, integrity and unity. The entrenchment
and continuation of this illegitimate situation will make
physically impossible the establishment of a sovereign,
contiguous, viable and independent Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and the ultimate
realization of the two-State solution for peace in
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003), by which the Council
endorsed the Quartet Road Map.

The situation in the rest of the occupied
Palestinian Territory, namely the Gaza Strip, also
remains critical. Israel's siege of Gaza has surpassed
one year, and the occupying Power continues to impose
a suffocating closure of border crossings, obstructing
the movement of persons and goods, in collective
punishment of the entire Palestinian civilian population
there.

Poverty and hardships continue to rise as a result
of declining socio-economic conditions. Health
conditions continue to deteriorate owing to inadequate
medical and food supplies as well as the breakdown of
sewage and sanitation systems because of lack of spare
parts and fuel. And, the continuing fuel crisis has
disrupted all sectors of life and has even disrupted
United Nations operations in Gaza. Moreover, this
deliberately imposed humanitarian crisis is only
worsening with the globally rising food and fuel prices
affecting the whole international community.

At the same time, the Israeli occupying forces
continue to carry out violent military raids and attacks
in the occupied Palestinian Territory. As a result,
Palestinian civilians, including children, continue to be
killed, injured, detained and arrested, and Palestinian
homes, property and infrastructure continue to be
destroyed. We call for an immediate end to such
illegal, deplorable actions and call on Israel instead to
abide by its legal obligations and its commitments in
order to create an environment actually conducive to
the pursuit of peace.

In this connection, I wish to refer to the truce
agreement reached as a result of the intensive,
commendable efforts undertaken by the Government of
Egypt. The truce took effect in the Gaza Strip on
19 June and continues to be upheld despite several
infractions. President Abbas continues to appeal for
respect of the truce on both sides and continues to call
as well for extension of the truce to the West Bank. The
West Bank and the Gaza Strip constitute one
geopolitical unit - the occupied Palestinian territory -
and, accordingly, Israeli military attacks in either area
affect the other negatively. As we have witnessed
repeatedly, reckless and violent Israeli actions similar
to the raids and killings in Nablus shortly after the
truce began in June have in the past undercut attempts
to bring about a cessation of violence, sabotaged
Palestinian Authority efforts to promote law and order,
harmed peace negotiations and fuelled the deadly cycle
of violence.

Nevertheless, we reaffirm our hope that the truce
will hold, that calm will prevail and that the occupying
Power will completely lift the siege of Gaza and allow
for the movement of persons and goods to ease the

isolation and humanitarian suffering of the Palestinian
civilian population.

In that regard, we reiterate the Palestinian
Authority's readiness to assume responsibility for the
Palestinian side of Gaza's border crossings and call
upon Israel to allow for the opening of the crossings in
line with the 2005 Agreement on Movement and
Access.

In 2008, despite the investment of so much hope,
energy and effort in the peace process, we are still
witness to the perpetuation of the longest military
occupation in contemporary history, the active
colonization of occupied land in violation of
international law and United Nations resolutions, and
the continued denial and Violation of the inalienable
human rights of the Palestinian people, including the
right to self-determination and the right of the
Palestine refugees to return. All attempts to rectify that
unjust situation have been impeded by Israel's
continuing illegal practices, and real progress has been
elusive. The situation continues to decline and the
opportunities for peace continue to be undermined.

That is why we have continued to appeal to the
international community to address the critical issues
before us, and why we specifically returned to the
Council, imploring it to uphold its responsibilities
under the Charter and international law, particularly
with regard to the illegal Israeli settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory. That is a matter of
international peace and security, for the continuation of
that illegal situation is not only obstructing the peace
process but is seriously harming it, endangering the
achievement of a peaceful settlement of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, the core of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, and consequently the future prospects for
peace and stability in the Middle East region and
beyond.

The United Nations has a permanent
responsibility towards the question of Palestine until it
is resolved in all its aspects, including a just resolution
for the plight of the Palestine refugees in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 194 (III). The
Council should not be exempt from its responsibilities
in that regard, and here we emphasize the importance
of the role of the caucus of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries as a voice for the 118 countries
members of the Non-Aligned Movement, including
Palestine, in the Council.

If the Council remains unable to bear its
responsibilities vis-a-vis the question of Palestine in
the face of flagrant breaches, its credibility will be
undermined. Moreover, it will continue negatively to
affect the image of the United Nations and feed the
perception of double standards held by those in the
Middle East and the developing world, a conclusion
borne out by several assessments, including the latest
investigation by an independent panel.

In our international community, alliances should
be made in favour of international law and not against
it. Unlawful actions should be confronted and not
tolerated or excused. If the latter options are chosen,
justice and peace, and their associated benefits of
security, stability, prosperity and development, can
never be truly realized, and the rule of law and the
foundations of our international system will continue to
be gravely weakened. Such an outcome must be
avoided at all costs.

Accordingly, despite our deep disappointment
and frustration, we have not lost hope and will
continue to call on the international community,
including the Council, to uphold international law
towards the promotion of a peaceful resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the Arab-Israeli conflict
as a whole. Moreover, we reaffirm in this forum the
continued commitment of the Palestinian side to the
peace process, according to its agreed terms of
reference, as the means to bring an end to the Israeli
occupation that began in 1967, to achieve ajust, lasting
and peaceful settlement, and to realize the rights of the
Palestinian people to self-determination and freedom in
their independent State of Palestine.

