Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and your team
on your effective work in the presidency of the
Security Council during the month of April. My
delegation appreciates your initiative of convening this
debate, as well as the recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2010/200) on the issue of Haiti in the
aftermath of the earthquake that took place in Port-au-
Prince on 12 January. We welcome the presence of
Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, Prime Minister of Haiti, as
well as the Action Plan presented by the Haitian
Government.

My delegation wishes to convey a message of
solidarity and hope to the Government and people of
Haiti. By joining in the emergency assistance and
reconstruction work, we pay tribute to those who
perished in the tragedy, including the staff of the
United Nations peacekeeping mission.

The timely action of the Security Council in
adopting resolution 1908 (2010) following the natural
disaster, reaffirms the relevance and contribution of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) to the stability of Haiti. I wish to
acknowledge, in particular, the work, broad experience
and knowledge of Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations Edmond Mulet, who has now
been entrusted with the difficult responsibility of
leading MINUSTAH.

Colombia supports the recommendations made in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2010/200) concerning
support for the electoral process in Haiti, the
reconfiguration of the military component of
MINUSTAH, the expansion of its police component,
and action to strengthen border controls. We agree with
the emphasis placed on the lead role that MINUSTAH
should play in coordinating international electoral
assistance to the Government of Haiti in the holding of
municipal, legislative and presidential elections, which
must be held before 7 February 2011, the scheduled
date for the transfer of power. Colombia supports the
efforts to ensure that this democratic exercise is free,
impartial and inclusive.

We also support the initiative of reconfiguring the
military component of MINUSTAH, with an emphasis
on deploying military engineers to support the
reconstruction of the country's infrastructure.
Strengthening the institutional architecture of Haiti is
as important as contributing to its physical
reconstruction. In that regard, the Haitian National
Police have a crucial role to play in establishing a
climate of security and stability that helps to strengthen
State authority and institution-building.

The Secretary-General's initiative to increase the
number of MINUSTAH police personnel is therefore
appropriate. The support that those additional troops
can provide to the Haitian National Police in its task of
providing security and organizing its work in line with
the needs of the local communities, in particular the
displaced communities, is very important.

The challenge of transnational organized crime is
particularly significant. Security Council resolution
1892 (2009) indicates that the capacity of the Haitian
National Police to address illegal activities in the
border area must be strengthened. Such work requires
particular attention in the context of the country's
increased vulnerability to illicit drug trafficking as a
result of the earthquake. In that regard, Colombia
approves of the recommendations concerning
MINUSTAH'S provision of training and specialized
technical knowledge in support of the Haitian National
Police's efforts to implement an integrated approach to
border management.

During the second half of 2009, the Haitian
authorities and the leadership of MINUSTAH received
recommendations from a high-level delegation of the
Colombian National Police, which carried out an
assessment of the institutional structure of the Haitian
National Police. That assessment proposes actions that
would have a positive impact on security conditions,
such as providing mobility resources to the Haitian
National Police, in particular air and ground transport,
that would enable it to conduct operations in a timely
way. The relevance of those conclusions is of greater
significance in the current circumstances.
Strengthening the Haitian National Police is a step in
the right direction and a response to the current
challenges, in particular the fight against crime, the
sophisticated organization of which requires a
comprehensive police response.

My country wishes to reiterate its commitment to
MINUSTAH, to which it currently contributes a total
of 34 police officers specialized in the fight against
transnational organized crime. We reiterate our support
for the work being done in response to the disaster and
the reconstruction challenges. The Government of
Colombia, aware of the magnitude of the tragedy, has
provided $4 million in assistance to be used in 2010 to
help in Haiti's recovery. Contributing to overcoming
the consequences of the tragedy also helps foster
conditions favourable to MINUSTAH's work and the
achievement of lasting stability in the brother country
of Haiti.

