At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Stephanie Williams for her briefing on the latest developments in Libya. We wish her and her team success in all their efforts to find practical solutions to the current crisis. Allow me also to thank the countries that are leaving the Council at the end of this year for their efforts, that is, Germany, the Dominican Republic, Indonesia, Belgium and South Africa, with special thanks to the last for being the foremost champion of the Libyan cause and people. We have all followed the rapid developments in Libya since the ceasefire was announced, after the attempts that have been made to bring about a ceasefire since last January, when Russia brokered the signing of an agreement in Moscow. However, we all know what happened at the time and who backed out. The developments we are following began with the meetings of the Joint Military Commission in Ghadames and later in Sirte, which were aimed at laying the groundwork for a dialogue and the other tracks. This is why we have been following the meetings very closely, hoping that they will lead to practical and realistic solutions that will guarantee success, most importantly, in verifying compliance with the ceasefire and ensuring that mercenaries and foreign fighters depart every region of Libya, along with their various weapons, under the supervision of the United Nations. Recent reports have shown that mercenaries and high-grade weapons continue to pour into Libya and that landmines continue to be planted and fortifications prepared, particularly in Sirte and Jufrah. We must therefore prevent the entry of outlaws who would imperil regional stability and the national security of neighbouring countries in particular. In that connection, we welcome the efforts that have been under way for several days now, as well as the meeting convened in Brega by the Chair of the National Oil Corporation, aimed at consolidating the Petroleum Facilities Guard, which is responsible for protecting Libya's oil facilities and maintaining their neutrality in the midst of conflict. After the unjust and nearly nine-month blockade on ports and fields was lifted, we saw production begin to recover, and it has now reached more than | million barrels per day. We want to emphasize that any tampering with the wealth and livelihood of Libyans is completely unacceptable. Here the question we will continue to ask is what international assurances of compliance with these agreements can be given, and whether the countries interfering in Libyan affairs have been persuaded that a military solution cannot work in Libya. The Skhirat agreement taught us a lesson. In spite of international promises and successive United Nations resolutions, the obstructionists found a way to sabotage negotiations that had gone on for more than a few days, lasting roughly a year, because of how divided this Council is and because it is not serious about implementing its own resolutions. The latest developments, including the launch of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in Tunisia - which we take this opportunity to congratulate and thank for hosting the Forum - have been a ray of hope for Libyans, giving cause for some optimism. While we appreciate all genuine international efforts to support peaceful solutions, amplify the voices of reason and dialogue, and silence the voice of cannons and clashes, we must keep in mind that this is the kind of forum that everyone was looking forward to in Ghadames last year, just days before the aggression began. What is happening now is what should have happened back then. Had the parties come to the table to engage in dialogue, it would have been possible to prevent the bloodshed, the deaths of children, women and our finest youth, the displacement of thousands of people and the escalation of foreign intervention in the country. We therefore underscore that the role of the Libyan parties in dialogue is crucial for every track, whether at home or abroad; that the national interest must be upheld; and that efforts must be made to find fundamental, comprehensive and uncompromised solutions. Moreover, Libyans must not be subject to external dictates of any kind, however enticing, because international intervention will continue and will not stop as long as the door remains open to it. There are those who allow it to enter, and what our country has endured for nearly 10 years has been a lesson to us all. Given how much Libyans have suffered over the years, their fear of repeating past mistakes and experience of a crisis of confidence, we must understand the fears of some and their criticism of the course that the dialogues are taking, whether with regard to the mechanism for selecting interlocutors and representatives, the process itself, the conflicting alliances or anything else. We must therefore respect the opinions of all and refrain from questioning anyone's patriotism. Despite all the difficulties and challenges of the recent dialogue, we all saw the warm domestic and international welcome given to the consensus reached by participants in the Tunis Forum on setting 24 December of next year - the seventieth anniversary of national independence - as the date of the general election. That in itself is a positive achievement that must be supported and upheld. In that context, we reiterate what has been stated in several initiatives and statements by the Chair of the Presidency Council and called for repeatedly: that presidential and parliamentary elections should be held as soon as possible, as the only way to end the conflict over legitimacy and to unify institutions, and as a real test for those who claim to be popular and eligible for leadership. Let those who are competitive compete. We therefore call urgently for an accelerated consensus on the appropriate constitutional provision for holding these elections, for respecting the popular demand that all transitional phases be ended, for the adoption of a permanent national constitution, and for an end to the succession of superannuated political bodies divided against themselves that recycle the same personages over and over again. To ensure that the political dialogues succeed and that we benefit from past experience, we would like to emphasize the following points. First, in order to ensure the credibility and success of the electoral process, we call on the Security Council to adopt a binding resolution supporting the consensus reached by Libyans in the various dialogues, including a road map anda constitutional provision on holding elections on 24 December 2021. Such a resolution should grant the United Nations Support Mission in Libya a mandate, through the Organization's specialized bodies, to provide technical and logistical support for the electoral process under the supervision of the High National Elections Commission and to monitor the process in coordination with the African Union and the European Union in order to ensure integrity and transparency. It should hold accountable anyone obstructing the process or its outcome. Secondly, the main objectives of any new transitional phase, if agreed on, should be as follows: to prepare for the election, which is only a year away; to provide prompt services to all regions; to unify State institutions, especially sovereign ones, in order to bring them into alignment with the executive branch and each other; to combat corruption; to disband all remaining militias in the country and to place the military and its branches throughout the country under civilian authority. Thirdly, the African Union has called for a national reconciliation conference to support other United Nations tracks, led by South Africa, the current Chair of the African Union, and the African Union High-Level Committee on Libya, chaired by the Republic of Congo, in order to begin a new chapter by enabling Libyans to discuss with one another confidence-building principles, the course of transitional justice, amnesty, reparations and the return of displaced persons, regardless of their affiliations or political and ideological leanings. Fourthly, it is imperative to hold accountable all who have committed war crimes or crimes against humanity against civilians, whatever their political affiliation, at any stage of the conflict since 2011, whether by carrying out the crimes or supporting their commission, as well as the countries involved. The crimes committed during the attack on Tripoli on 4 April 2019 are especially important in that regard. Efforts must be made to achieve justice and eliminate impunity because to this day, landmines planted in southern Tripoli by militias affiliated with Haftar continue to claim victims, and women continue to be abducted and killed, as was the case of the attorney Hanan Al-Barassi a few days ago in Benghazi. We continue to discover multiple mass graves in Tarhunah on a daily basis. Given this abundance of evidence and proof, we once again call on the Security Council not to limit itself to declarations of regret and condemnation, but to immediately place the names of the persons responsible for those crimes and the persons who gave orders to carry them out on the sanctions list. The work of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya and the publication of the report of its Panel of Experts should not be obstructed, as the Chair of the Committee just stated, because someone in this Council seems to want to hide the facts. To conclude, we reiterate that detrimental foreign interventions in my country constitute a major obstacle to reaching an intra-Libyan agreement. We warn the countries that are responsible of the consequences of interference, which undermines the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Libyan State and threatens regional peace and security. We call on the Security Council and the international community to seize this opportunity, consider the wrongs it has committed against Libya and demonstrate its good intentions by supporting the will of Libyans and their right of self-determination and not allowing Libya to be used as a proxy battleground for settling scores, spilling the blood of our people in the process. Let it be known that Libya, in spite of its crises, has not and will not break. Although we are suffering today, we will recover tomorrow, thanks to our people, who will not accept humiliation, because Libyans are a proud and dignified people. One day, reconciliation will come. We will turn the page on the past, and Libyans will remember those who helped to kill them and sow discord among them, and those who stood with them and came to their aid.
