Mr. Mabilangan (Philippines): The Philippines joins
previous speakers, particularly those from our brotherly
African delegations, in commending you, Mr. President,
and the Security Council for the convening of this highly
important meeting and in welcoming the comprehensive
report on peace and development in Africa issued by the
Secretary-General. I am particularly delighted to see you,
Sir, presiding over this meeting, knowing your deep
personal interest in African development and progress. It is
indeed timely that the Secretary-General and the Security
Council have devoted this occasion to a serious evaluation
of the current political, humanitarian and socio-economic
conditions faced by the continent. This is complementary
to the work of the other organs and groups within the
United Nations system, particularly the General
Assembly.

My delegation shares the concerns raised by the
Secretary-General in his report and amplified by the
statements of our African colleagues. We reaffirm that,
ultimately, the key to the resolution of conflicts in Africa
and in all regions is to address in a meaningful way the
problems of development in its social, economic, cultural
and humanitarian aspects. Prevention, in the
comprehensive sense, is far superior to cure.

The socio-economic situation in Africa is of priority
concern. International solidarity is fundamental to Africa's
development, and international cooperation and support
must necessarily complement the national resources
mobilized by the African countries themselves. It is
troubling, however, that as is noted in the United Nations
Agenda for Development, tackling the problems and
paving the way to accelerated and self-sustaining growth
and sustainable development through decisive
implementation of commitments and actions have been
lacking. Official development assistance to the continent
has consistently declined over the past five years, and the
debt problems of many African countries have yet to see
a comprehensive and durable solution. The international
community must undertake purposeful efforts to carry out
fully and speedily the United Nations New Agenda for
the Development of Africa in the 19905, as well as the
recommendation of the mid-term review of its
implementation.

We are greatly encouraged by certain developments
in the continent, particularly the increasingly active role
of African regional and subregional organizations in
mediation and crisis management, as well as in economic
cooperation. As in the recent case of Liberia, the
Organization of African Unity and the Economic
Community of West African States have played a major
and indispensable role. The Southern African
Development Community, with the new democratic
Republic of South Africa, is emerging as a key actor in
African affairs. These developments parallel the situation
in my region, South-East Asia, where the Association of
South-East Asian Nations has steadily evolved to become
a regional coordinating mechanism. In the realization of
further South-South cooperation, the importance of which
was clearly underscored by Mr. Annan's report, African
regional organizations may wish to seek to expand
cooperation with other regional economic groupings.

 

As for the various political/security dimensions
discussed by the report, I would like to bring into our
deliberations today the thinking which has emerged so far
from the various working groups of the General Assembly
on an Agenda for Peace. The results of the two concluded
subgroups, those on coordination and sanctions, are of the
same mind as the Secretary-General's report. Closer
coordination is called for between the United Nations
system and African regional organizations, a point also
underscored by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations. At the same time, Security Council sanctions
should be more discerning in that their effects on the
populace at large of the target country and on third States
should be taken into account to a greater degree.

Post-conflict peace-building is a reconstructive process
which has political, economic, humanitarian and social
dimensions. By definition, it is launched after a conflict.
Hence, it is important that post-conflict peace-building
activities be undertaken in an integrated and coordinated
manner aimed at addressing the various factors that caused
or threaten to rekindle the conflict. The Security Council
has an important role to play in this endeavour. However,
the participation of United Nations and other international
bodies would be equally essential, if not more crucial in
many cases, given the multidimensional and development-
oriented aspect of post-conflict peace-building.

The proliferation of arms, particularly small arms, and
of mines, should be curtailed. My country has supported the
Council's various sanctions on the flow of arms into the
crisis areas of the continent and calls on all Member States
to do their part in restricting such activity.

Democracy, as the guiding principle of the
international community's efforts in the political sphere,
should be underlined. The Secretary-General' 5 report echoes
the thinking of the International Conference on New or
Restored Democracies, particularly on the need to realize
good and strengthened democratic governance, to promote
transparency and accountability and to enhance
administrative capacity in individual States. The
International Conference on New or Restored Democracies
also believes that the strong participation of civil society
plays an indispensable role in assuring the realization of
truly democratic governance.

The international community's renewed commitment
to Africa - which is indeed a timely and necessary
endeavour - should ultimately take into account the work
already being done by the various organs, bodies and
groups of the United Nations system, and that such work
can proceed most efficiently if a division of labour is
maintained.

