Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
Ambassador Nestor Osorio for his work as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and for his presentation of the
90-day report of the Committee covering the period
from 13 September to 4 December.

During the reporting period, the Committee
continued its discussion of the final report of the
Panel of Experts (see S/2012/395). We take note of
the Panel's midterm report, which was submitted in
accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 2049 (2012),
as well as a number of communications related to
the implementation of the relevant Security Council
measures. We also note the Panel's visit to several
Member States and the participation of its experts
in a number of conferences and seminars during the
reporting period. It is essential that the Panel continue
its outreach activities, which play an important role
in increasing the number of national implementation
reports from Member States.

We look forward to continued discussion on the
possibility of the Committee issuing a guidance note to
aid States in their submission of national implementation
reports and the implementation assistance notice that
could assist Member States in implementing Security
Council measures.

In accordance with its international obligations,
Azerbaijan has taken all the necessary measures to
prevent the use of its territory as a transit route for
the illicit trafficking of items and materials related
to the proliferation of nuclear weapons and weapons
technology.

It is obvious that the issues concerning our immediate
neighbour Iran are of particular importance for my
country. The recent report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) of 16 November (GOV/2012/55)
has shown that outstanding issues regarding the Iranian
nuclear programme remain unresolved. We support the
right of any country to develop its nuclear industry for
peaceful purposes, in full accordance with the relevant
international obligations. It is therefore important that
all the necessary steps be taken by the Government of
Iran to build international confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.

It is encouraging that, during the reporting period,
Iran reaffirmed its commitment to dialogue with the
IAEA and invited the Agency's delegation to visit
Tehran. We hope that the visit, which commenced today,
will help move the resolution of the problem forward. It
is essential to continue dialogue and cooperation on the
issues on which progress is urgent for regional stability.
We encourage further efforts aimed at resolving the
issues of concern peacefully and in a constructive
manner.

