Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico commends you, Sir, for holding this
open debate and for Spain's bold leadership in the
comprehensive review on resolution 1540 (2004).

The comprehensive review on resolution 1540 (2004)
took place in the context of historical developments in
several areas of multilateralism, which shows us that
when there is a political will, relevant, sensitive and
efficient diplomacy is possible. The paradigm shift
represented by the adoption by the Security Council
and the General Assembly of the concept of sustainable
peace as a process and goal for all illustrates that we
are witnessing a new era for the United Nations. Since
the founding of the Organization, Mexico has pointed
out that a secure and peaceful international system
must be based on international cooperation and the full
application of international law, not on the possession of
weapons,and even less so on the existence of weapons
of mass destruction.

The 1540 regime is valuable because, within
its framework, the most important obligations
pertaining to international security, disarmament and
non-proliferation must be fulfilled, in particular those
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use
of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction, and
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction, among other relevant instruments. The
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is a task
that requires continuous and joint efforts on the part
of the international community. Current technological
advances and commercial interaction can facilitate
access to weapons of mass destruction by non-State
actors, thereby creating challenges for all of us.

What does not exist cannot proliferate. Weapons
of mass destruction should simply not exist. We must
prohibit all of them without any exception. Mexico will
continue to call for the prohibition and elimination of
all weapons of mass destruction, based on an equitable
and nondiscriminatory approach, so as to prevent the
humanitarian impact of those instruments of war.
Nuclear-weapon States must fulfil their obligations
under the NPT and take unequivocal steps towards
their elimination. The year 2017 will be crucial in
complementing and strengthening the disarmament,
non-proliferation and, above all, nuclear-arms
prohibition regimes by beginning with negotiations on
a legally binding instrument on that issue.

On 14 February 2017, we will celebrate the fiftieth
anniversary of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean, known as
the Treaty of Tlatelolco, which led to the establishment
of the first nuclear-weapon-free zone in a densely
populated region, which, in turn, led the way for the
establishment of five nuclear-weapon-free zones in the
world. That is a crucial contribution to international
peace and security of the world that fills Mexico and

all the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean
with great pride.

With regard to the Chemical Weapons Convention,
the work of the Open-Ended Working Group on
Terrorism of the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and its Sub-Working Group
on Non-State Actors is noteworthy. Mexico commends
the OPCW for its support to Libya and the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism for identifying
those responsible for using chemical weapons in Syria.
It is a priority matter to prevent a humanitarian tragedy
resulting from biological weapons, given the potential
risk owing to the availability and accessibility of the
scientific know-how.

Mexico welcomes the report on the comprehensive
review on resolution 1540 (2004) and its
recommendations and strategy on the subject for the
coming years. We support the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and welcome the outstanding work being
carried out by its Group of Experts in developing useful
tools for the full implementation of the resolution. At
the national level, we have worked in coordination
with the responsible agencies to update our national
report on the implementation of the resolution and the
matrix. Those tools contribute to transparency and
confidence-building, and they also serve as a resource
for the exchange of information and the dissemination
of good practices in the area. We have reported on
the promulgation of laws and the development of
normative frameworks and control measures pertaining
to chemical substances. We have also provided
information on the safety and security of radiological,
chemical and biological materials. Five years ago,
Mexico took the decision to close the door to the
transfer of goods and technology of dual-use that could
be used for unauthorized purposes or fall into the hands
of unauthorized end-users, including non-State actors.

We continue to strive to improve our export-
control policies so as to comply with our legally
binding commitments, as well as with the voluntary
and political obligations assumed upon becoming a
member of the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Australia
Group and of the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export
Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods
and Technologies. We have developed a national action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
on which much work remains to be done. The approach
based on international cooperation is also a strength of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), because it allows direct dialogue with States to
be carried out when making visits at their request.

The 1540 Committee has established itself as a
platform of cooperation to facilitate assistance. We must
continue working towards that end by strengthening the
mechanism for dealing with requests for specific needs
and offers of assistance in specific areas. Likewise,
the frank dialogue that the 1540 Committee has
developed with international organizations, academia
and industry in the pursuit of compliance with the
resolution is commendable.

My country will continue to work actively for
initiatives that contribute meaningfully to multilateral
disarmament and non-proliferation efforts, such as
resolution 1540 (2004).

