Mr. Fernandez de Soto (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to begin by thanking Ambassador
Brahimi for the information and proposals he presented
today. I would like to assure him that he can count on
Colombia's firm support as he undertakes a task that
we all know is so inherently complicated.

Colombia vigorously condemned the acts of
international terrorism committed on 11 September
2001 and has joined unequivocally in the unanimous
support that the Security Council has offered for the
military action that is currently under way on the
territory of Afghanistan.

We have also acted decisively in the Council by
shouldering specific responsibilities in the only current
sanctions regime against international terrorism as a
threat to international peace and security. I refer in
particular to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1333 (2000) and
1363 (2001) on the situation in Afghanistan, whose
demands the Taliban regime has systematically
violated.

We have witnessed the complexity of the
political, humanitarian and security situation in
Afghanistan and are aware of its regional and
international implications. We know that the United
Nations faces a challenge of unknown proportions. The
decisions that we will adopt regarding the future of
Afghanistan will mark the beginning of a journey along
a road whose destination, at this moment, it is the
obligation of the international community to help
construct. Our main objective must be the preservation
of international peace and security, which have been
threatened by the Taliban regime. To achieve this
objective, we must continue to take decisions that
contribute to a solution to the situation in Afghanistan.

We trust that the numerous consultations
undertaken by Mr. Brahimi and other relevant actors
will provide us with guidelines on what should be our
first step towards a transition effectively leading to a
lasting solution.

Today we have heard the specific proposals of
Mr. Brahimi, which undeniably contain important
components that open up a way of hope; we thank him
for that. There is no doubt that the Council should
examine the situation as soon as possible and adopt
decisions relating to the vision and the proposals that
Mr. Brahimi has presented to us today.

It is our hope that this transitional solution will be
constructed, first and foremost, on the basis of an
ongoing, fluid dialogue that embraces all sectors of
Afghan society. In addition, we hope that this same sort
of dialogue will be maintained with respect to regional
actors and the rest of the international community,
including all members of the Security Council. This
practice is the principal guarantee that the legitimacy,
coherence and strength of decisions taken will be
maintained.

The process of dialogue will enable the country
itself to create a broad-based, participatory, multi-
ethnic coalition Government that is built from the grass
roots rather than imposed from above and is fully
representative of the Afghan people. Such a
Government would, for a certain period, lay the
groundwork for a solution that we all hope will be
permanent.

What should the role of the United Nations be in
the search for this temporary solution? Some have
suggested that our Organization should be solely
responsible for carrying out this task. Others, pointing
to the problematic history of Afghanistan, have even
hinted that the United Nations should avoid taking any
role in this country.

From our own perspective, however, it would be
more appropriate for our Organization to play the role
of the facilitator of a process led by the various
national and regional stakeholders concerned. In this
way, the Afghans would have to ensure the fulfilment
of their own responsibilities, and the United Nations,
with the direct participation of the Security Council
and the General Assembly, under the coordination of
the Secretary-General, would provide the necessary
support for this undertaking.

Hence, it is most important to define with the
greatest political precision the role of the United
Nations, including relevant responsibilities for the
General Assembly and the Security Council.

The Council would monitor political and security
processes that have progressed unevenly. Council
members would help to ensure that the political and
security agendas are compatible and move in the same
direction. For its part, the General Assembly also has
its role, a role that must be reclaimed and preserved.
The Assembly is the principal source of international
legitimacy, and it would therefore be advisable to have
the support of all Members of the United Nations for
both the temporary and, later, the more permanent
solution.

If we succeed in establishing a transitional
Government with the characteristics mentioned, what
should we expect from it? We should expect it to have
the capacity to respect human rights, to meet the needs
of the Afghan people, to contribute to regional and
international stability and to eradicate from its territory
the links with international terrorism and related
activities such as the flow of illicit drugs and the trade
in weapons.

I would like to make a few concluding points.
First, we wish to express our particular appreciation to
the Governments of the region that have shouldered the
responsibility of providing humanitarian assistance to
the thousands of Afghan refugees who have fled their
land in order to survive. Our special appreciation also
goes to all the humanitarian workers, particularly those
of the United Nations system, for their great sacrifices
and valuable service in alleviating the humanitarian
consequences of the actions and negligence of the
Taliban regime in and outside Afghanistan. We appeal
to the donor community to continue to share the
responsibility of resolving this humanitarian crisis.

Finally, we hope that the Security Council will
continue to be part of a process of close cooperation
with the regional actors. In this connection, we have
taken careful note of the statement by the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the countries of the "six plus two"
group, in which they express their support for the
Afghans in their effort to get rid of the Taliban regime
and to bring to justice the Al Qaeda network and other
terrorist groups in Afghanistan. We support these
objectives.

We also trust - as the Foreign Secretary of the
United Kingdom indicated - that the ousting of the
Taliban regime and the reconstruction of Afghanistan
will not mean reducing the international community's
efforts in the global fight against terrorism. That would
be a great error on our part.

