Mr. Duale (Somalia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to organize this
public debate in the Security Council on the situation
in Somalia. We also thank the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative for their dedication to and
tireless efforts for peace and stability in Somalia.
Similarly, we thank the Department of Political Affairs
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. The
Assistant Secretary-General has provided the Council
with the details of a report that describes a very serious
situation. We thank the missions for their report.

As mentioned, the Security Council was first
seized of the situation in Somalia in early 1992. It
devoted much energy to the Somali crisis at that time
and adopted many resolutions. Those resolutions have
allowed for the deployment of two peacekeeping
operations and a multinational force.

However, after 16 years now, the Somali people
are asking to be given a second chance to resolve the
protracted tragedy in the country once and for all. We
believe that this moment is no to time to give up. The
people of Somalia are tired of civil war and suffering.
The leadership of the Transitional Federal Government
is committed to peace and national reconciliation, as
stated by the Special Representative, and there is now a
window of opportunity to be seized with the utmost
urgency.

The United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, could benefit from valuable lessons learned
from previous United Nations missions deployed in
zones of civil wars and conflicts. In some cases, the
United Nations has been able to send peacebuilding
and peacekeeping missions that have made positive
contributions to ending conflicts and building peace in
affected countries. We hope, therefore, that the
concerted action of the United Nations and the
international community will contribute to peace,
security and stabilization in Somalia after such a long
time.

The report of the Secretary-General and the inter-
agency fact-finding mission to Somalia (S/2008/l78)
clearly illustrates that the international community has
a clear and unambiguous responsibility towards the
people of Somalia. That responsibility obliges the
Security Council to look beyond the limitations that the
current security situation imposes and to reflect on a
possible outcome and come up with ideas as to what is
possible - within the constraints already mentioned in
the paper by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations - to help create circumstances in which
the United Nations can become more fully engaged.
We are asking for real engagement by the United
Nations and the Security Council.

The Security Council also has the responsibility
to protect and assist the legitimate Government in
Somalia as it does in other conflicts. Silence and lack
of action are not viable options at this time. The
international community in general, and the Security
Council in particular, must participate in a serious
manner in a peacebuilding process in Somalia. Such a
process would send the right message to the Somali
people, to subregional and regional organizations and
to international donors. It would help strengthen the
ongoing process of national reconciliation and thereby
help support the efforts of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia to achieve peace and
reconciliation in the country.

While the Somali Government is striving to bring
peace and stability to the country with limited
resources and assistance from the international
community, there are still a few elements - so-called
spoilers - that are doing the opposite. We have taken
note of the various ideas in the report, especially with
regard to the proposed contingency plans and scenarios
and the relocation of the United Nations agencies
inside Somalia, which we welcome.

In our View, the most viable, practical and
meaningful contingency plan and strategy is to adopt a
timely and properly integrated contingency plan
containing the four elements detailed in the report with
the utmost urgency.

We also believe it is time for United Nations
agencies to relocate inside Somalia, as was proposed,
as soon as possible. There are many major cities in the
country that can host and meet the security
requirements of the United Nations agencies currently
based in Nairobi. We wish also to emphasize the time
factor, the need for urgent action and the importance of
speeding up the whole process so that we avoid losing
momentum and opportunities.

In conclusion, we have ample reasons to be
positive and optimistic about the future as long as the
international community speaks in one voice on the
situation in Somalia under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We very much
hope that, this time, something tangible will come out
of the deliberations of the Security Council. We wish to
reiterate the firm commitment of my Government to do
everything possible to move forward an inclusive
dialogue and national reconciliation in the country in
as timely of a manner as possible, with the leadership
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

