Mr. Reinsalu (Estonia): On behalf of Estonia, I would like to thank the Government of Viet Nam for convening this important debate on the role of the Charter of the United Nations and to thank our briefers for their statements. At the outset, allow me to express my deepest condolences to the loved ones of the victims of the Ukrainian plane crash near Tehran. I hope the circumstances of that tragedy will be investigated promptly, fully and independently. Our multilateral system established after the Second World War is a network of agreements and organizations created to save future generations from grave suffering and endless wars. It is widely believed that institutionalized international cooperation provides relative stability, security and predictability. If that cooperation fails, then the probability of conflict increases and we fail to collectively stop acts of aggression, terrorism and other grave violations of international law. We are living in turbulent and uneasy times. Recent tensions in the Middle East seriously concern us. I have condemned the attacks on the United States Embassy in Baghdad and condemn the missile attacks on the two bases in Iraq, which also house Estonian troops. Despite some recent signs of de-escalation, the situation remains tense. I call for serious negotiations between the parties to ease tensions and avoid nuclear proliferation. When it comes to worldwide cooperation, there is no other organization like the United Nations. It is regarded as the primary infrastructure for global cooperation. Our support for the United Nations and its Charter is based on the assumption that many problems can be solved - or solved better - together rather than bilaterally or single-handedly. Such cooperation produces global public goods, such as better health, security and knowledge. The Charter of the United Nations represents the constitution of this cooperation, and it can serve as a source of peace and stability only when its principles are upheld. In that context, we observe with concern how violations of international law, including the United Nations Charter, are taking place in our continent, Europe. The Security Council has drawn attention to grave breaches of international law against Ukraine and Georgia. At the same time, the General Assembly has adopted resolutions expressing grave concern over the actions against the sovereignty, political independence, unity and territorial integrity within the internationally recognized borders of Ukraine and Georgia. Those are concerns we wholeheartedly share. According to the Charter, the Security Council is responsible for upholding and promoting international law. Those who drafted the Charter also stressed respect for human rights. We know that States that respect human rights and dignity are more stable, both within their own national borders and in relation to other States. Therefore, it remains crucial that, in situations of grave violations of international humanitarian law, the Security Council engage and react. That has not been the case with regard to the tragedy in Syria, where the veto has been used over and over again. For that, we know the Syrian people are paying the highest possible price. The Secretary-General has reminded us that, while the Charter's principles are as relevant as ever, we must continue to update its tools and must use those tools with greater determination. Those are very wise words. Those with special tools and privileges granted by the Charter also have a special responsibility, particularly when it comes to the veto. Estonia believes that countries should refrain from voting against initiatives aimed at preventing or halting mass atrocities. The Security Council must lead by example. Estonia started its membership in the Security Council this month. I would like to thank all who placed their trust and confidence in us. It is a great responsibility and an opportunity to exercise global responsibility. We look forward to talking to one and all and are open to hearing their concerns and ideas. The principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the international rule of law will also guide our work in the Council.
