Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank Mr. Shearer and
Ambassador Wronecka for their important briefings.

We are concerned that, even today, we are facing
an extension of 100 days to the pre-transitional period
and that the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan remains
largely unimplemented, leaving controversial issues
unresolved. Nevertheless, beyond resolving issues
such as state delimitation, cantonment and military
redeployment, it is important that those pending
issues in the process be addressed from a human-
centred approach.

The implementation of the agreement has not only
political implications, but also constitutes a moral
and ethical obligation with untold sociopolitical and
economic benefits for a people that has already suffered
enough. In that connection, we welcome the recent
meeting between President Kiir and Mr. Machar, in
which the unresolved issues that have thus far hindered
the implementation of the revitalized agreement were
once again up for discussion. Both parties announced
their decision to form the Government of national
unity, even if they fail to resolve all their differences
before the deadline. Moreover, we are pleased with the
Government's pledge of $40 million for implementation
efforts, which we hope will be fulfilled in its entirety
within the established time frame.

We regret, however, that this very backdrop
of political harmony is being overshadowed by
intercommunal tensions, as well as a dire humanitarian
situation. Approximately 40 per cent of the population
is suffering acute food insecurity, which has been
worsened by recent floods that have submerged entire
communities and led the Government to declare a state
of emergency. In that regard, it is vital that, in parallel
with the political process, programmes be promoted
for the development of resilience and the mitigation of
risks resulting from climate change, including water
and food scarcities and climate-induced vulnerability.

We are also concerned by the ongoing widespread
sexual violence in conflict, as well as the obstructions
faced by United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) and other humanitarian personnel in
accessing those in need. We condemn the attacks against
humanitarian workers in recent months, while calling
on the parties involved to put an end to the violence. We
strongly reiterate our appeal for all possible measures
to be taken to end sexual and gender-based violence and
the recruitment and use of child soldiers. We also call
for the signing of the memorandum of understanding
on the hybrid court for South Sudan. In that vein, and
as a positive note, we commend the efforts ofUNMISS
in coordinating and expanding mobile courts to areas
with limited access to justice and its continuous
rapprochement with the South Sudanese police and pro-
Machar forces for the implementation of action plans
to address conflict-related sexual violence. We would
also like to underscore the need to continue promoting
the meaningful participation of women, youth and
civil society in the formation of the Government of
national unity.

In conclusion, we understand that the process of
forming the Government of national unity must be
focused on confidence-building among all stakeholders.
Inclusivity within the process must be ensured but,
above all, it must take into account the legitimate
aspirations of the Sudanese people to achieve a just,
comprehensive and sustainable peace that addresses
the root causes of the crisis. There is a clear way
forward - if both leaders decide to take it, thereby
assuming their responsibility to build a peaceful future
for their people.

