Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to convey its appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to participate in this debate, which
is of strategic importance to my country, our region
and the international community at large. This debate
is also of strategic importance to the strengthening of
the relationship between Africa and the United
Nations.

Your personal presence in presiding over this
meeting, Mr. Minister, as well as that of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria, provides clear testimony
to the importance Africa extends to this relationship.

We thank the Secretary-General for introducing
his report on this matter (S/2010/514). We view his
presence here today as a clear expression of the
importance that he too attaches to the issue. In the
same vein, we welcome the presence and participation
of Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security
of the African Union (AU).
In her statement to the General Assembly on 25
September 2010, our Minister of International
Relations and Cooperation, Her Excellency Ms. Maite
Nkoana-Mashabane, stated that,

"The United Nations should see Africa as a
partner in the maintenance of international peace
and the management of conflicts, and accordingly
do more to strengthen the working relationship
between the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council." (A/65/PV.17)

That statement is consistent with the Charter of
the United Nations, which endows the Security Council
with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. In Chapter VIII, the
Charter also empowers regional organizations to
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security. In that regard, the AU has developed a
comprehensive African Peace and Security
Architecture, an institutional response designed to
effectively prevent, mitigate and resolve conflict within
the region.

The political will, commitment and resolve of the
AU to address issues of security have found practical
expression in the myriad of preventative and
diplomatic missions the organization has undertaken
over the years. That commitment has also been
evidenced by AU initiatives aimed at peacebuilding,
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction and
development on the continent. In cases where the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, was unwilling or unable to act, the AU,
despite its own limitations, has sent troops to maintain
peace and provide security in conflict areas in Africa.
This was the case in the recent past with the
deployment of the African Union Missions in Burundi,
Sudan and Somalia.

In the eyes of ordinary people on the African
continent, it seems that so many innocent people have
to die, so much innocent blood shed, before the
Security Council assumes its responsibility to protect
and maintain stability on the continent. Some have
even quipped that the Security Council moves with a
speed of a cheetah in responding to crises elsewhere,
and moves with a speed of an elephant to respond to
conflicts in Africa. We must continue to reaffirm
through our actions that the United Nations stands for
all of us.
These examples illustrate clearly that the AU
should and must be seen as a partner to the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security, especially in Africa. My delegation, however,
takes note of the ongoing efforts by the United Nations
in supporting the AU in carrying out peace support and
peacekeeping missions authorized by the United
Nations. However, this does not absolve the Security
Council of its primary responsibility in relation to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

It remains the AU's priority to enhance
institutionalized cooperation between the United
Nations Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council. We believe that this cooperation is
essential in establishing sustainable peace throughout
our continent. My delegation notes with satisfaction
the efforts by the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council to collaborate and articulate a
coherent and effective strategic partnership. In this
regard, we welcome the annual consultative meetings
between the two Councils since 2007 and the
commitment expressed during the fourth joint
consultative meeting to further strengthening this
cooperation. My delegation also encourages more
regular and intensified interaction between the two
Councils.

While the report provides an excellent overview
of the tremendous progress made by both organizations
in strengthening and operationalizing the AU
machinery for peacemaking and peacekeeping, it also
raises a number of challenges at the strategic level. In
this regard, we shall limit ourselves to commenting on
the following areas.

We concur with the Secretary-General's report
and encourage the Security Council to move away from
the current ad hoc, short-term arrangements to a more
strategic vision of the partnership it wishes to have
with the AU, one that would better serve its mandate to
maintain international peace and security. Such a
vision, according the Secretary-General, would
empower and enable both the United Nations
Secretariat and United Nations legislative bodies to
align their actions with this broader strategic vision.

The critical challenge of funding, which was
highlighted in the Prodi panel report (S/2008/813), is
again raised in the report of the Secretary-General,
where he states that "the current financial frameworks
for partnerships in peacekeeping operations are not
conducive to building a sustainable long-term strategy"
(S/2010/514, para. 61). This therefore warrants that the
United Nations urgently review and seek ways of
ensuring predictable, flexible and sustainable financing
for peacekeeping operations undertaken by the AU on
behalf of the international community.

South Africa also welcomes the commitment by
the Secretary-General to submit a report within six
months that will define and outline the Secretariat's
strategic vision for United Nations-AU cooperation in
peace and security and examine the increased variety
of models for peacekeeping in Africa. The annual
Security Council and AU Peace and Security Council
meetings should seize the opportunity to jointly and
closely consider that report, with a view to identifying
and adopting concrete recommendations for immediate
implementation.

Regarding the current African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), my delegation wishes to reiterate
the call by the AU for the Security Council to, among
other things, endorse the newly authorized strength of
AMISOM; authorize an enhanced support package for
AMISOM. funded through United Nations assessed
contributions; impose a naval blockade and a no-fly
zone over Somalia; approach the issue of piracy off the
coast of Somalia in a holistic manner; and commit to
recast AMISOM. as a United Nations peacekeeping
operation.

Finally, paragraph 16 of Security Council
resolution 1809 (2008) resonates in recognizing "the
need to enhance the predictability, sustainability and
flexibility of financing of regional organizations when
they undertake peacekeeping under a United Nations
mandate". We therefore call on the Security Council to
implement its own resolutions in that regard. We are
convinced the results of the implementation of that
resolution can only contribute positively to the
maintenance of international peace and security. Then
the ordinary people of the African continent could say
that "the United Nations does indeed stand for all of

US.

