We would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his briefing as well as the Foreign Ministers of Serbia and of Kosovo for their statements. The normalization of the relations between Serbia and Kosovo is the key to regional stability. We strongly support the efforts of the European Union-appointed Special Representative for the Belgrade-Pristine dialogue and other Western Balkans regional issues, Miroslav Lajeak. We welcome the resumption of the dialogue process on 12 July. The two sides have shown commitment and engagement and we are encouraged by the substantial work done since July. It is crucial that, ultimately, all open issues will be resolved. We encourage both parties to advance engagement with their civil societies, in particular with women and young people, as they can significantly contribute to solutions on the issues at the negotiation table. We welcome that both the Government of Serbia and the government of Kosovo have confirmed their strategic commitment to their European Union (EU) future. The EU-facilitated dialogue is a key condition for taking steps in their respective European path. Estonia commends Mr. Tanin for leading the work of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in helping to advance Kosovo's democratization process and promoting human rights. We particularly appreciate UNMIK's support for women's participation in decision-making processes, as well as for initiatives aimed at young people and the fight against gender-based violence. During the critical time of the coronavirus disease pandemic, we commend the supportive actions taken by UNMIK in helping Kosovo to alleviate the challenges caused by the pandemic. We welcome that the new Government of Kosovo has confirmed its strategic commitment to the EU path. Now all political actors should demonstrate that they can work together and build political consensus towards common goals. It is essential for Kosovo to reinvigorate the reform processes and ensure that citizens receive the necessary medical assistance and economic support. We also stress that respect of and cooperation with the Kosovo Specialist Chambers is an international obligation for Kosovo. As strong cooperation with the e European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo becomes increasingly more significant, we would welcome the strategic review of UNMIK in due course. Finally, we call on both parties to engage in further trust-building and refrain from negative rhetoric that could increase tensions and cause a setback in the dialogue. We expect both parties to engage in good faith and in a spirit of compromise and to work to reach a comprehensive, legally binding agreement on the normalization of relations in accordance with international law and the EU acquis.
