Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for providing me
and other outgoing Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council with an opportunity to summarize
our work and share some observations as our countries
complete their two-year terms as non-permanent
members of the Council.

For the past two years, I have had the honour and
privilege to chair the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004),
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
During my tenure, I have endeavoured to keep the
Committee centred in the overall implementation of the
sanctions regime, to offer all assistance possible to the
Group of Experts in support of their arduous work and
to establish an open, two-way dialogue with Member
States inside and outside the Committee, including the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the neighbouring
States.

Since January 2012, the Committee held a total
of six meetings, during many of which it exchanged
Views with the Group of Experts in connection with
the Group's reports and took decisions on various
recommendations contained in those reports. The
Committee also updated the sanctions list in April
2013, based on elements provided by a member of the
Committee and the Group of Experts.

In accordance with its guidelines, which allow
for non-members and others to participate in its
meetings and informal consultations, in August 2012
the Committee met with and heard the views of Major
Patrick Karuretwa, Defence and Security Adviser
to the President of the Republic of Rwanda, and His
Excellency Mr. Raymond Tshibanda N'tungamulongo,
Minister for International and Regional Cooperation
and Francophone Affairs of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

In early March 2012, the Committee held
a discussion with the Special Representative of
INTERPOL to the United Nations. That meeting led to
an agreement on the exchange of information among
INTERPOL, the Committee and the Group of Experts
in late 2012, which provided for the dissemination of
INTERPOL-Security Council special notices on the
individuals named in the Committee's sanctions list.

Over the course of the past two years, in my

capacity as a Council member and Chair of the 1533

Committee, I have witnessed the effective use of
such instruments as peacekeeping, peacemaking and

sanctions, and their positive impact on the security

situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes region, which radically deteriorated
in May 2012 with the Mouvement du 23 Mars (M-23)
rebellion. Continued efforts to end the rebellion
and address the drivers of chronic instability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo led to the signing of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region and
the subsequent adoption by the Council of resolution
2098 (2013). The international community's search for
a political solution to the crisis was accompanied by the
actions taken in the 1533 Committee, which reacted to
violations of international law and the sanctions regime
by designating five M-23 leaders - Sultani Makenga,
Baudoin Ngaruye, Innocent Kaina, Jean-Marie Runiga
Lugerero and Eric Badege - as well as the listing of the
M-23 itself and the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda (FDLR).

The robust actions of the Congolese army and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
supported by the Force Intervention Brigade, have
recently had a major military impact on the ground.
However, the military defeat of the M-23 is not an
end, which can only be achieved through a political
solution. There is still plenty of work to do in terms
of neutralizing other armed groups, such as the FDLR
and the Allied Democratic Forces, restoring State
authority throughout the country and creating space for
peacebuilding and national dialogue. But the building
blocks of change are there and the sanctions tool has
proven to be an integral part of these collective efforts.

The signing of the Framework Agreement and the
deployment of the Force Intervention Brigade clearly
demonstrate that the international community, including
the United Nations and the regional organizations, has
become increasingly involved in the active pursuit of
political and security-related solutions to the crisis
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. In my
View, similar energy should be directed towards the
exploitation of natural resources and the development of
infrastructure, for the benefit of the Congolese people,
with a View to opening up the nearly untapped potential
of the region and creating less space for spoilers like
armed groups and criminal networks.

While the number of notifications of arms deliveries
by Member States to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo Government sent to the Committee has increased
over the past two years, which are allowed under the
sanctions regime, armed groups' access to weapons in
Violation of the arms embargo continues to affect the
lives of millions of civilians and threaten the stability
of the region as a whole. Addressing the issue of arms
proliferation could also be an area where increased
regional collaboration may have a major impact,
through the establishment of confidence-building
measures and control mechanisms. The unmanned
aerial systems recently deployed by MONUSCO could
play an important role in identifying the movement of
arms and armed groups.

In conjunction with the publication of the due
diligence guidelines produced by the Group of Experts
in 2010, which are designed to mitigate the risk of
further exacerbating the conflict in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo by providing direct or indirect
support to illegal armed groups, criminal networks and
sanctioned individuals and entities, the issue of the
traceability of minerals has gained more international
Visibility in the past years. The Group of Experts has
engaged with the private sector and industry on this
issue, as well as with intergovernmental organizations
such as the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development and the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region. Increasingly, as noted in
the Group's 2013 midterm report (see S/2013/433),
continuous instability in various parts of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is exacting a heavy
toll on the fragile equilibrium ofwildlife and the unique
ecosystems, mostly for the trafficking of ivory beyond
the Great Lakes region. This is also a domain where the
cooperation between the Group of Experts and other
actors, such as INTERPOL and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, could be encouraged.

I would like to conclude by expressing my profound
appreciation to the members of the Committee for their
collegiality, spirit of cooperation and their interest
in adding value to the work of the Committee and
increasing the effectiveness of the sanctions regime
overall. I also wish to extend my sincere gratitude to the
Group of Experts, its previous and current members,
for the work done in contributing to compliance with
the sanctions regime, often in very trying and tense
situations.

I would also like to convey my sincere appreciation
to the Secretary of the Committee, Mr. David Biggs,
and his team for their professionalism, dedication and
invaluable assistance extended to me. Finally, I wish
the next Chair of the Committee every success in the
discharge of the chairmanship functions.

