Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.

The United Nations-led political process in Geneva
is the only legitimate and internationally recognized
forum to create a lasting, inclusive and peaceful
political solution to the conflict in Syria. Three
and a half years ago, in resolution 2254 (2015), the
Security Council established a blueprint for a peaceful
political transition: a new constitution, elections and a
nationwide ceasefire. The United States will not accept
any attempt by the Al-Assad regime and its allies to
use military means in Idlib, or elsewhere, to undercut,
circumvent or further delay Special Envoy Pedersen's
efforts aimed at maintaining the political process.

Nor can we, the members of the Security Council,
afford any further delays by the regime to implement
resolution 2254 (2015). The regime's escalation of
attacks on civilian areas, facilities and humanitarian
actors, including yesterday's attack on an ambulance
carrying White Helmet volunteers, shows that the
Al-Assad regime still believes force will make a
solution to the conflict attainable, as Damascus actively
seeks to avoid negotiating a political solution with
representatives of the Syrian opposition.

Time and again Syria and Russia have given
assurances to uphold ceasefires, adhere to reconciliation
agreements and advance the political process. However,
those assurances have repeatedly been broken and
disregarded. The lack of a political solution continues
to put civilian lives at risk.

The Council must acknowledge that the Astana
group's efforts to advance the political process have
failed. Seventeen months after the launch of negotiations
at Sochi on forming a constitutional committee, it is
time to admit that not only has progress stalled, it is
likely to remain out of reach for some time, because
that is where the regime wants it to be - out of reach.
The time has come for the Council to encourage Special
Envoy Pedersen to try other routes to achieving the
political solution laid out in resolution 2254 (2015),
by focusing on preparing for nationwide elections,
with the participation of an estimated 5 million Syrian
refugees and observed by the United Nations, by
securing the release of detainees and by establishing a
nationwide ceasefire.

The fate of the United Nations political process,

resolution 2254 (2015) and the lives of millions of
Syrian civilians depend on whether or not the regime
and Russia will work with Turkey to stop further
attacks in north-west Syria and immediately return to
the ceasefire lines agreed in the 2018 Sochi agreement.
Idlib must not become another Aleppo, and the United
States believes that progress on the political front and a
genuine de-escalation is still possible, but it requires the
Al-Assad regime to recognize that a healthy political
system must accommodate more than one view.

At this stage we see two paths for Idlib. The first
path is bloody and sadly familiar. The continued vain
quest for a military solution is undermining both
security and humanitarian conditions, with the United
Nations once again struggling to respond to the needs
of innocent civilians. Thousands - perhaps hundreds
of thousands - of people will flee Idlib and turn
north to Turkey, or west into the Mediterranean, jump-
starting a second migration crisis that destabilizes the
wider region.

The second path is that Idlib and its 3 million
civilian residents are protected by a permanent ceasefire
agreed between the parties on the ground and endorsed
by the unanimous support of the Security Council.
Such a cessation of violence would create momentum
and a positive political environment in which to launch
a political process.

The United States believes that the reinvigoration
of the political process in Syria can and should start
with a verifiable ceasefire in Idlib and northern
Hama. Groups on the ground, including Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham, Russia and the Al-Assad regime must
immediately cease military operations and return to the
original lines of the 2018 Sochi ceasefire agreement.
Not one more shot should be fired, no more barrel
bombs should be dropped and no more air strikes
should be launched. Turkey should be entrusted to
remove terrorist forces from the region, consistent with
the 2018 Sochi agreement, and the final status of Idlib
should be negotiated between the parties, mediated by
the United Nations, as part of the political process in
line with resolution 2254 (2015) once a ceasefire is in
place. In the meantime, as the United Nations lets Syria
political-track negotiations continue, the people of Idlib
would administer themselves and be granted access
to humanitarian aid deliveries, as enumerated under
resolution 2449 (2018).

The United States recognizes that there is no path
forward without the cooperation of Russia and the
Al-Assad regime. Therefore, the United States calls
upon Russia to de-escalate its military operations, press
the regime to do the same and engage with the United
States in a step-by-step process to implement resolution

2254 (2015) that will result in the final stabilization of
Idlib and Syria writ large. Until the Al-Assad regime
and Russia take concrete steps towards a full, immediate
and verifiable de-escalation in Idlib, the United States
will continue to apply diplomatic and economic pressure
through all available means to isolate the regime and its
allies. Our preference is to work together on a step-by-
step approach. But make no mistake: the United States
will seek any and every opportunity to ratchet up our
pressure on the regime and its supporters if political
progress on the humanitarian and political tracks
continues to stall. Our resolve is clear and unwavering.

I planned to end my remarks at this point, but I
would like to take just a moment to react to the statement
of the speaker who addressed the Council under rule
37 on 25 June (see S/PV.8561). It is a privilege to
address the Security Council - for each of us - and
it always should be treated as such. The disrespect
bordering on contempt that he showed the Council is
unacceptable and begs a response. First, procedurally,
the representative in question consistently shows a
lack of respect by abusing our time, exceeding the five
minutes recommended by presidential note S/2017/507
every time he speaks, by 10 or 20 or more minutes.
Two days ago, he tried to assert a procedural position,
demonstrating a lack of knowledge about Council
rules, when our colleague from the United Kingdom
made a point of order regarding his outrageous and
dangerous claims.

Beyond the procedural points, he tried to assert
that humanitarian workers were somehow complicit
in terrorism, that civilians in areas where terrorists
are present are not entitled to humanitarian assistance
or medical care, and that the schools and hospitals in
those areas are by extension legitimate military targets,
which they clearly are not. It is outrageous that this
representative, whose Government has repeatedly
used chemical weapons on its own civilians, prevents
humanitarian assistance from reaching its needy
and violates international norms and international
law by intentionally targeting hospitals, schools and
ambulances, would seek to lecture the Security Council
on the Geneva Conventions, applications of Security
Council resolutions or the rule of law.

Moreover, his vilification of David Lillie and the
cannot go unanswered by the United States or the
Security Council. A humanitarian who has risked his
life over and over again to help the needy on the basis
of humanitarian principle does not deserve to have a
diplomat from a region like this one, who has sat out the
trauma of his own country's civil war in the comfort of
New York, or for that matter anyone, question his bona
fides. The allegation that the Syrian American Medical
Society is a branch of the United States Government
simply because the United States is one of many
countries contributing funds to the organization is both
offensive and ludicrous. The United States funds over
20 per cent of the cost of this Organization. That does
not make the Secretary-General an employee of the
United States Government, or the Security Council a
United States Government body, any more than funding
from the United States Government makes the Syrian
American Medical Society an entity of the United
States Government, or Mr. Lillie an employee of the
United States Government. That was a shameful attack
on a humanitarian, particularly in a meeting where
the Syrian representative had no problem accepting
a humanitarian briefing from a Russian general in
military fatigues who has been helping prosecute
the war.

Finally, his contention that a non-Syrian has no
right to brief on Syria would disqualify most briefers
whom the Security Council has heard since its founding.
The United States cannot let this twisted logic going
unanswered. We reject the Syrian representative's
25 June statement during the Syria humanitarian
briefing and urge other Council members to do so as
well. It is an affront to this organ and the rules-based
international order.

