Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Sir, the Russian delegation welcomes your
presidency, in your capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, at today's important meeting of
the Security Council, which was initiated by the
delegation of Colombia. We welcome also the
Secretary-General, and we are grateful to him for his
assessment of the problem of small arms and light
weapons.

We note that recently the problem of the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons has
begun to take on greater importance in various forums,
from international organizations to regional
conferences. Quite recently, the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects took place here in
New York. At that Conference, a final document was
adopted that defined the major areas for action by the
international community in this field. The Security
Council also considered this problem in September
1999.

Russia shares the concerns of a broad range of
countries regarding the fact that the uncontrolled
spread of small arms and light weapons can pose a
threat to regional peace and security. Without a
solution to the problem of the prevention and limitation
of the dangerous spread of small arms and light
weapons in the world, it will be impossible to settle
conflicts, ensure the security of peoples and maintain
stable economic development.

Russia, which is one of the major producers and
exporters of small arms and light weapons, has adopted
a responsible policy in terms of supplying the
international market. It is undertaking measures to
tighten control over the manufacture, transfer and
circulation of these weapons, and it is carrying out, on
a planned and regular basis, the destruction of its
surplus. Thus, in the period from 1998 to 2001, at the
arsenals and bases of the Ministry of Defence of the
Russian Federation, more than 420,000 units of small
arms and close-combat weapons were disposed of,
including 44,000 units during the period 2000-2001. In
addition, in 2000-2001 the Ministry of Internal Affairs
of the Russian Federation removed from illegal
circulation 2,482 units of small arms and light
weapons. Of these, 1,142 units were destroyed; the
remaining weapons will be destroyed following the
completion of criminal investigations.

We share the approach to the problem of small
arms and light weapons of the many United Nations
members who base their positions on the provisions of
Article 51 of the United Nations Charter on the
legitimate right of States to self-defence, which also
includes the right to legally acquire necessary weapons.
Everyone should carry out a responsible policy in the
sphere of the supply of weapons to the international
market, undertake measures at the national level to
tighten control over the export, manufacture, and
supply of small arms and light weapons, and strengthen
the struggle against their illegal spread.

In recent years in our country laws and acts have
come into effect that regulate the internal trade of
weapons, including small arms. The rules regulate their
manufacture, transfer and safeguarding and also their
export to foreign States. Supplying weapons beyond
Russian borders, including small arms and light
weapons, is carried out through licensing and is under
strict State control.

In the work of the Security Council, we often
encounter armed conflicts in which the problem of
small arms and light weapons plays not only an
important role, but even a decisive role. We consider
that during the course of substantive consideration of
crisis situations, the Council should devote more
attention to the problem of illegal and destabilizing
supplies of weapons.

One of the clear examples of this is the illegal
supplying of weapons to Kosovo, Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, and the persistence of a great number of
small arms and light weapons in the hands of the
civilian population of that region. The existence of this
problem was pointed out by the representative of
Bangladesh. All of this is in direct contradiction of
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998) and 1244
(1999) and serves only to complicate the achievement
of a Kosovo settlement, as well as to threaten the lives
of peaceful civilians and the peacekeepers. Those who
are parties to such violations are taking on an
enormous responsibility for the consequences of
possibly destabilizing the entire Balkan region.
Unfortunately, in the past the dangers of this situation
did not lead to the appropriate conclusions. The result
is that we now have the development of the present
situation in Macedonia.

Also on the agenda is improving the effectiveness
of weapons embargoes imposed by the Security
Council. This problem has also been spoken of by quite
a number of speakers. A porous arms embargo can only
aggravate the confrontation of parties to a conflict and
undermine the authority of the Security Council and
the United Nations as a whole.

We consider that the recent adoption of the
Security Council resolution on the establishment of a
monitoring mechanism for the implementation of anti-
Taliban sanctions is an example of the proper way to
resolve this problem. The objective is to enhance the
effectiveness of the implementation of the embargo
imposed by the Council in accordance with resolution
1333 (2000) on the delivery of weapons to the Taliban.
We should like to take note here of the role of
Colombia, as chairman of the sanctions Committee
established in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1267 (1999), in the preparation of and
agreement on this resolution.

We support the involvement of the United
Nations, including within the framework of
peacekeeping operations and efforts to collect and
destroy small arms and light weapons with the
agreement of the relevant States and upon their request
to the Organization for assistance. We are also ready to
consider regional initiatives imposing moratoria or
limitations on the export, import, and manufacture of
small arms and light weapons, if these are voluntary
and non-discriminatory in nature.

In this context, a special report of the Secretary-
General could be useful for summarizing all of the
work done by the United Nations on the problem of
small arms and light weapons, including the
contribution of the groups of United Nations
Government experts and the results of the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. We believe that
the discussion of this problem of small arms and light
weapons within the framework of the Security Council
should devote greater emphasis to the consideration of
specific situations that create a threat to regional and
international peace and security.

