Mr. Hurd (United Kingdom): I should like to
thank Ambassadors Mayr-Harting, Lacroix and Urbina
for their briefings, and to welcome Ambassador Mayr-
Harting to his first briefing in his capacity as Chairman
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999). It was also, I believe, Ambassador
Lacroix's first such briefing. I am sure that he will not
mind my saying that I hope it is also his last, as it will
be if our best wishes for the speedy recovery for the
full-time Chair, Ambassador Jurica, are granted. We
hope that Ambassador Jurica is able to resume his
duties soon. I thank Ambassador Lacroix and his
colleagues for their additional work in providing the
necessary continuity and for keeping the Committee's
business on a forward trajectory.

The significance of the roles of all three
Committee's in countering the serious threat of
terrorism has already been well underlined. I should
like to say first a few words about the joint work
undertaken by all the Committees. The United
Kingdom welcomes this because it demonstrates the
growing reality of cooperation among the three
Committees. It is part of a broader trend towards more
joined-up and effective United Nations work on
counter-terrorism. While each Committee has a clear
and specific mandate, this collaboration between the
Committees can be particularly helpful to States
receiving joint visits rather than a succession of
delegations. It is also helpful in terms of spotting
synergies in domestic implementation.

The participation of all three Committees in the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force is also welcome. In particular, the co-location
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) of the Task Force, under its first
full-time head - who I understand will be arriving
within a couple of weeks - should also help us
progress towards the goal of one United Nations for
counter-terrorism activity.

With respect to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the United
Kingdom is pleased with progress on a number of
fronts. The new team of 1540 Committee expert staff is
now fully in place. The Committee has a new
programme of work and a new working group structure
to implement it. It has made a start on planning the
comprehensive review of the status of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) based on an open meeting of
the Committee. The United Kingdom was pleased to be
able to sponsor the regional workshop on
implementation in Doha, Qatar, in March.

While the universal implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) remains the vital goal, the United
Kingdom would like to see the emphasis shift towards
effective implementation in States where there are the
more serious deficiencies. Bilateral meetings in the
margins of regional outreach events are one way in
which these issues are beginning to be picked up. We
would like to see more of this.

As for the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
United Kingdom is pleased with the continuing
progress in capacity-building and standard-setting. The
ongoing stock-taking exercise needs to be used as an
opportunity for dialogue with States where the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) is still not
adequate. We are pleased that focused visits have given
the CTED greater flexibility and allowed it to conduct
a larger number of more targeted, shorter Visits
focusing on the main issues of concern. We thank
Mr. Smith for his leadership of the CTED. Looking
ahead, we look forward to the Security Council's
interim review of the CTED, due next month, and the
update of the global survey of resolution 1373 (2001)
implementation at the end of the year.

With respect to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), we are pleased
with the progress made since the adoption of resolution
1822 (2008) and that the comprehensive review of the
consolidated list is well under way. We are working to
ensure that our part in the process is meaningful. We
urge others to continue to do the same. With that in
mind, I would like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the Monitoring Team, which is assisting us in
this task.

However, the review of the current list should not
mark an end to our efforts. The Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions regime is a vital counter-terrorism tool that
enables the international community to disrupt terrorist
activity on a much greater scale than through domestic
measures alone. But as we know, its legitimacy is
under threat. The concerns expressed by European
courts over recent months should not be taken lightly.
These are genuine concerns which are wide-reaching
and which affect the heart of the regime. We are
determined, with our partners, to address those
concerns and to work to strengthen the AI-Qaida and
Taliban sanctions regime so that it can be used with
increasing effectiveness and efficiency while being
seen to be transparent and fair. My Government will
continue to play a constructive role in ensuring that
this regime remains credible as a tool for maintaining
and restoring international peace and security. We look
forward to working with our partners on a new
resolution for the regime at the end of the year.
Finally, I would like to associate the United
Kingdom with the statement which will be made by the
representative of the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union.

