Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to thank you, Sir, for your invitation
to participate in this debate and for the opportunity to
present the comments of the Government of Colombia
on a topic to which we ascribe the greatest importance.
I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his report
before us today (S/2013/245).

In this regard, I recall that resolution 1612 (2005)
provides for the implementation of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism and the presentation of reports in
close consultation with the concerned countries and,
therefore, with their Governments. In that regard, we
emphasize that such close consultations should be held
at all steps in the process, in particular in the phase
prior to the submission of draft reports to New York.

For these reasons - and in view of the agreement
reached between the Colombian Government and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflicts that, in implementing
the monitoring and reporting mechanism pursuant
to resolution 1612 (2005), any dialogue between
representatives of illegal armed groups and the Special
Representative, the United Nations country team or
task force on monitoring and reporting is possible only
with the express prior consent of the Government of
Colombia - it is with concern that we note that the
practice of establishing unauthorized contact with such
illegal armed groups continues.

I therefore reiterate the statement made by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs at a meeting of the Security
Council on this issue on 12 July 2011:

"It is entirely naive to think that the United
Nations or any other multilateral organization can
change the minds of terrorist organizations that for
decades have struck fear in civilian populations,
that profit from illicit activities, that utilize terror
as a modus operandi, that use children as their tools
to those ends and that have always ignored national
and international norms." (S/PV6581, p. 8)

Against this backdrop, it is important for the
Colombian Government that the monitoring mechanism
strengthen international pressure on such terrorist
groups to cease their violent acts and their activities
against children rather than creating procedures that
may legitimize those groups as political interlocutors.
Colombia reiterates that the role of the United Nations
role regarding issues related to children and armed
conflict should, given the gravity and importance of
the issue, an approach that prioritizes cooperation and
prevention. Calls for the Secretariat to enter into contact
with illegal armed groups even as it seeks to establish
punitive mechanisms are contradictory and discourage
countries that are working to implement action plans
and develop their national capacities to prevent, combat
and tackle such problems.

On the other hand, it is important, in examining
such situations, to always bear in mind that the work
of the Security Council should focus on those conflict
situations that pose a threat to international peace and
security. It is therefore imperative to distinguish them
clearly from situations that are not on the Council's
agenda. Every situation must be dealt with individually,
and appropriate responses must be sought for the
specific circumstances and context of each case.

In strengthening the Council's consideration of the
issue of children in armed conflict, denunciation and
naming can be useful tools, but they are not completely
effective. In that sense, both the Council and its Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict should evaluate
the effectiveness of existing mechanisms in terms of
their contribution to strengthening States' national
capacities. That has been a central preoccupation of the
Colombian Government, which understands that the
defence of children involves not only an indisputable
constitutional mandate, but an ethical and moral
imperative.

Finally, taking into account the context of
this debate, I would like to note the possibility of
establishing a sanctions mechanism related to children
and armed conflict. We should note that sanctions
make sense only when applied to Governments that
do not respond to the international community's calls
for action. However, the implementation of sanctions
mechanisms with respect to non-State armed actors
in situations not on the Council's agenda could lead
to various complications related to the legitimacy of
the mandates, the effectiveness of the actions and the
credibility of the Organization. It is important that
the Council bear in mind the fundamental elements
of States and their security before implementing new
mechanisms the consequences of which are not yet
clear.

Attempts to establish targeted sanctions
mechanisms raise questions of all kinds, particularly
questions related to illegal armed groups that have
carried out terrorist activities and respect neither
domestic nor international law. In that context, how
does the Council expect to implement its sanctions?
On the other hand, under which parameters would such
sanctions be enforced against illegal armed groups?
What types of issues would be addressed and what
types of Government actions would be taken into
account with regard to prevention and cooperation?

