Mr. de Soto (Spoke in Spanish): As you, Mr.
President, have just said, the Security Council has
before it the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2003/398) on his efforts between late 1999 and ll
March 2003 to assist the two sides in Cyprus to achieve
a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus problem.

This is the first written report on the Secretary-
General's mission of good offices since June 1999. It
covers a long period of negotiations. It describes
the Secretary-General's thinking underlying his
comprehensive proposals. It makes a good number of
observations on the process and on the way ahead. That
explains its length.

In a way, the report speaks for itself, and I only
wish to add a few comments, for which, with your
blessing, Mr. President, I will switch to the language of
the Cyprus problem.
(spoke in English)

The Cyprus problem is the oldest item continually
on the Secretary-General's peacemaking agenda. It is
difficult to see a set of circumstances for achieving a
settlement as propitious as that which prevailed in the
last three and a half years.

In terms of the wider political environment in the
region, all the conditions were in place. In addition, the
Secretary-General himself was deeply and heavily
involved in the effort, throwing his full backing behind
it. The Council strongly supported him every step of
the way. And, I believe, a fair and honourable package,
comprehensive in approach and only needing technical
finalization, was on the table.

The fact that a solution has not been achieved in
those circumstances is therefore deeply disappointing.
It seems attributable to failings of political will rather
than to the absence of favourable circumstances.
Obviously, towards the end of the process, when
decisions had to be made, the crisis in Iraq loomed
large and made it difficult, particularly for Turkey, to
take bold decisions and bring the necessary influence
to bear in order to achieve a settlement. Be that as it
may, a unique opportunity has been missed, and the
Greek Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots have been
denied the opportunity to vote to reunite Cyprus. This
the Secretary-General deeply regrets.

The immediate losers are the Turkish Cypriots
and Turkey, but the Greek Cypriots and Greece are also
losers; this is truly a lose-lose outcome. The Secretary-
General's views as to why this opportunity was missed
are contained in his report, so I will not dwell on them.

If the failure of this effort tells us anything, it
confirms something that all of us already knew: this is
one of the most difficult diplomatic problems in the
world. That is why the Secretary-General believes that
it would be a great step backward if the plan were
simply allowed to wither away.

Of course, like all human endeavours, the plan
presented by the Secretary-General, as revised finally
on 26 February, is not perfect. No doubt, one can have
different views about it, particularly in the details. But
the plan represents the best effort of the United Nations
to generate a balanced and truly comprehensive
proposal that resolves all issues, leaves little to be
negotiated and, above all, represents a fair and
honourable settlement that meets the core interests and
aspirations of both sides. It is based on a three-and-a-
half-year process of unprecedented intensity and stands
on the shoulders of four decades of United Nations
peacemaking efforts in Cyprus.

I urge members of the Council not to
underestimate what an extraordinarily difficult task it is
to achieve an overall balance on the range of issues that
must be settled. Every word of the plan was worked on
many times, carefully calibrated and weighed in the
overall balance.

One Turkish columnist wrote that the plan is like
an Alexander Calder mobile. All aspects are
interconnected. If any significant piece is removed and
the balance is altered, it could fall to the ground.

That is why the Secretary-General, in his report,
speaks of the need in a future negotiation not to reopen
the basic principles or key trade-offs in the plan. In the
coming period, after the signature of the European
Union accession treaty on 16 April, through the entry
into force of that treaty on 1 May 2004 and in the run-
up to the European Council of December 2004 - at
which a decision is to be taken on accession talks with
Turkey - the overwhelming need is for the parties to
hew closely to the plan. To reopen its basic principles
or key trade-offs would be to put the entire enterprise
at peril.

That is why Mr. Denktash's suggestion at The
Hague that the parties should return to a discussion of
principles did not, in the Secretary-General's view,
give any hope that an agreement could be achieved,
and equally why Mr. Papadopoulos's preparedness not
to reopen the substantive parts of the plan, if Mr.
Denktash responded in the same manner, was welcome.
The hope must be that, in time, the Turkish Cypriot
side will come around to the same position that Mr.
Papadopoulos took in The Hague.

In the Secretary-General's view, the point had
been reached where the leaders on each side should
accept that the plan could not be significantly improved
by further negotiation and, therefore, that they should
be prepared to finalize it and put it to referendum. This
is what the Secretary-General said to the leaders when
he was in Cyprus on 27 February. Without that honest
intellectual realization on the part of both sides, and
without the leaders' being prepared to explain this to
their people, it is difficult to see a settlement being
achieved.

Looking to the future, as his report outlines, the
Secretary-General does not intend to take a new
initiative unless and until such time as he has solid
reason to believe that the political will necessary for a
successful outcome exists. This would come about if
there was an unequivocally stated preparedness on the
part of the leaders of both sides, fully and determinedly
backed at the highest political level in both
motherlands, to commit to finalizing the plan, without
reopening its basic principles or key trade-offs, by a
specific date, with United Nations assistance; and to
putting it to separate simultaneous referendums, as
provided for in the plan, on a certain date soon
thereafter. The onus is on the parties and the
motherlands to demonstrate the political will to solve
the problem on the basis of his plan, in the manner
which the Secretary-General has suggested.

Since the events described in this report, Mr.
Denktash has written to Mr. Papadopoulos proposing
that they meet to discuss a range of confidence-
building measures. Mr. Denktash's letter is in the
public domain. He was motivated to do this, according
to his letter, in order to address the deep crisis of
confidence which he believes exists between the two
sides and which, in his view, was a major cause of the
stalemate at The Hague.

Mr. Papadopoulos responded that, in his view, the
stalemate was caused not by a crisis of confidence, but
by Mr. Denktash and Turkey's not accepting the
Secretary-General's plan as the basis for negotiating a
final settlement. Mr. Papadopoulos restated in the most
clear terms that he remains committed, even after 16
April, to finding a solution "within the parameters of
the Arman plan", and called on Mr. Denktash to
indicate that he accepts the Secretary-General's plan as
the basis for a further negotiating process.

Mr. Denktash responded by reiterating his
conviction that a crisis of confidence has obstructed all
efforts, including the most recent one, to resolve the
Cyprus problem and said that his confidence-building
proposals remain on the table. He reaffirmed a point
made in his earlier letter, namely, that he continues to
support the good offices mission of the Secretary-
General. On this, he and Mr. Papadopoulos appear to
be in agreement. However, Mr. Denktash, without

accepting the Secretary-Generals plan as the basis for
a further negotiating process. proposed that the leaders
should discuss the amendments they want to present to
it and, if agreed. put the plan to referendum. To our
knowledge, Mr. Papadopoulos has not responded to
that further letter at this time.

As I said, the Secl'etal'y-General's report gives his
views as to why the process was not successful and
outlines what he believes should be the best way

forward. The criteria contained therein will guide the
Secretary-General in his good offices role in the future.

