Ms. Hulan (Canada): Mr. President, thank you
for organizing today's debate. In the interests of time,
Sir, and as you requested at the outset of this meeting, I
will deliver a summary version of Canada's statement
and would note that the full text of these remarks is
being circulated in hard copy.

Canada welcomes the renewed attention which
the Council has given to the future of United Nations
peacekeeping in recent months, in particular the
initiative undertaken by your own delegation, Sir, and
that of France, as well as the efforts of the Security
Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
under the able guidance of Japan.

Canada also thanks Under-Secretaries-General
Alain Le Roy and Susana Malcorra for their briefings
earlier and for the collective efforts of their two
departments in producing the non-paper before us
today. The vision of renewed partnership that they have
given us is a vital one, and we view this non-paper as a
serious and forward-looking contribution to the
continuing dialogue on the future of peacekeeping.

The presidential statement to be adopted
following this meeting is a good preliminary response.
We particularly welcome advances that have been
made in the important area of benchmarking and with
respect to designing credible and achievable mandates,
which are the cornerstone of effective United Nations
operations. The commitment expressed in the
presidential statement to engage in deeper and more
meaningful consultations with troop- and police-
contributing countries is also heartening, and Canada
looks forward to future Council decisions on how this
commitment will be further implemented.

United Nations peacekeeping has had many
successes over the years. Peacekeeping activities have
prevented relapse into violent conflict, created
conditions for durable peace and saved lives. However,
if peacekeeping is to remain a viable and effective tool
for managing conflict, its practice must adapt to the
needs of the increasingly complex environments in
which missions are deployed. Delivering on this
aspiration will require continued effort and progress in
both peacekeeping policy and practice.

It is clear that peace operations are most effective
when supported by a solid political consensus.
However, it is equally clear that the membership as a
whole is still grappling with the implications of many
of the new and emerging challenges facing peace
operations.

Achieving the renewed global partnership called
for in the non-paper will require inclusive policy
consultations with Member States and partner
organizations. Among the issues that we believe would
profit from future discussions are the scope of mandates
and the modalities by which they are conducted, the
political dimensions of peace operations, and
resourcing. We believe that a shared understanding of
these issues within the membership as a whole lies at
the very heart of any effort to renew broad-based
support for United Nations action, and we look forward
to engaging in an inclusive discussion with other
Member States on all of these issues in the months
ahead.

The fact that there remain complex issues that
legitimately require further deliberation should not
deter us from making progress in the near term where
progress is possible. In our view, there are a number of
practical steps that can be taken in the immediate term
to improve the manner in which peace operations are
mandated, supported and conducted. Let me highlight
just three.

First is enhanced consultation with troop-
contributing countries (TCCs), The manner in which
TCCs are consulted by this body on mission mandates
is highlighted repeatedly through A New Partnership
Agenda. Canada believes that this dialogue is
fundamental in crafting the partnership that that
document envisages. We therefore urge the Secretariat
and the Security Council to take practical steps to
enhance those consultations. We welcome the proposals
in that regard. Specifically, we urge the Council to
ensure that those consultations take place during the
mandate-generation phase, not after the fact. In our
view, that need not be a cumbersome process, nor does
it imply in any way an erosion of the Council's
fundamental authority for crafting and approving
mandates. However, prior consultation and a genuine
responsiveness by this body and the Secretariat to the
views of those tasked with carrying out the mandates
would be, in our view, of benefit to all parties.

Second is enhancing the political consensus
underpinning individual peace operations. As other
speakers have noted in this debate, improving and
sustaining the political support of regional actors,
donors and troop contributors for individual operations
is critically important. We have learned in recent years
that the shared objectives and concerted collaboration
of mission-specific coalitions, such as that which exists
for the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
can provide invaluable political, diplomatic and
practical support for United Nations missions. While
we acknowledge that this model may not be
appropriate for every mission, we believe that the
practice can and should be deepened with the active
support of this Council.

Finally, allow me to say a word on the
non-military dimensions of peacekeeping operations. It
is increasingly recognized within the membership that
a basic condition for the exit of a peacekeeping
presence is the consolidation of legitimate national
security and justice institutions. Indeed, policing,
security system reform and rule of law are now

recognized as core functions of modern peacekeeping.
Our work and investment need to reflect that reality. In
the next phase of the current review, Canada would
welcome further exploration of that set of challenges
and, specifically, the elaboration of a strategic direction
for the future of United Nations policing efforts that
identifies areas of need, including the specialized skills
required for tackling organized crime and investigating
sexually-based violence; assesses the likely scale of the
policing demand and how to meet it, including a
review of formed police units; and, lastly, explores
alternative models of deployment.

In conclusion, my delegation would like once
again to thank the Secretariat and the delegations of the
United Kingdom, France and Japan for their
considerable efforts to advance this agenda. I can
assure them of Canada's fullest support through the
next phase of this important initiative, including
through the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and in the Fifth Committee.

