The President (spoke in French): 1 shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Belgium. Belgium is extremely concerned about the escalation of violence in Yemen over the past month, which led to one of the deadliest incidents to occur since the beginning of the war. A resumption of the political process is needed more than ever. The talks between Saudi Arabia and the Houthis are a good starting point, but, at some point, the Government of Yemen will have to be involved in them, and the process will have to be led by the United Nations. The next steps in the political process must begin as soon as possible under the auspices of the United Nations. Belgium welcomes the plan recently agreed between the parties in Amman for the implementation of the prisoner-exchange agreement, which could signal a first step towards the resumption of the political process. We encourage its swift implementation. The operational environment for humanitarian actors in Yemen, particularly in the north, has rapidly deteriorated, and humanitarian space has_ been shrinking significantly. Obstacles are constantly being imposed, thereby hampering humanitarian access and the delivery of aid. International and national humanitarian personnel are under threat, and we deplore the direct attacks in many areas of the country. At the conclusion of their meeting in Brussels on 13 February, donors reaffirmed their full support for the United Nations, international non-governmental organizations and other humanitarian actors who are working in extremely difficult conditions. The conference participants unanimously stated that the situation is untenable. Every form of restriction, obstruction and interference that violates humanitarian principles must be lifted once and for all. Belgium takes note of the announcement by the Houthis to lift the 2 per cent levy on humanitarian projects and urges them to put it into practice. We also call on the Houthis to refrain from setting up other obstacles that make the distribution of humanitarian aid to children and other civilians in need more difficult. Belgium welcomes the medical flights. The civilian population must be the focus of our attention. Those innocent victims continue to suffer the most serious effects of the conflict. We also encourage the Houthis once again to finally allow access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker in order to facilitate a review of the situation and avoid a possible environmental disaster. All parties must respect their obligations and commitments under international humanitarian law and, where applicable, international human rights law.As Chair of the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, we welcome the exchange of letters between Special Representative of the Secretary-General Gamba and the coalition. As a result, it was possible to adopt and formalize a time-bound programme of activities implementing last year's memorandum of understanding. We call for its implementation by the coalition as soon as possible. Lastly, the Secretary-General presented here in the Security Council last week (see S/PV.8721) the United Nations practical guidance for mediators to better protect children in situations of armed conflict. We invite the parties to the conflict and Special Envoy Martin Griffiths to make use of the guide in the political talks that, we hope will, soon begin. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
