Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me, Sir, to thank you for having convened this meeting
and to congratulate you on your skilful stewardship of
the Council's work this month. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kai Eide,
and his colleagues in the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their valuable
and tireless efforts in Afghanistan at this crucial
juncture. As we have stressed in the past, the Islamic
Republic of Iran supports the central role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan, and that commitment has been
displayed yet again in the recent fruitful visit of
Mr. Kai Eide to Tehran.

We have carefully studied the latest report of the
Secretary-General on Afghanistan (S/2009/ 135) and
share the view that the year 2009 is very important for
Afghanistan and for its partners in the international
community. In the past several years, many efforts
have been made by Afghan officials and the Afghan
people, assisted by the international community, to
foster and strengthen their newly established
democratic mechanisms, to bring about peace, stability
and development and to take their destiny into their
own hands. Undoubtedly, much has been
accomplished. Yet, a great deal more remains to be
achieved.

We are concerned that, despite all the efforts
made, insecurity has increased over the past two years
in Afghanistan, and terrorist activities, which are
perpetrated mostly by Al-Qaida and the Taliban, have
inflicted many losses and costs on the great nation of
Afghanistan.

Heightened insecurity, poppy cultivation, drug
production, drug trafficking, a spike in food and
commodity prices and the consequences of drought are
among the challenges that Afghanistan continues to
face today. As the report at hand indicates, 2008 ended
as the most violent year in Afghanistan since 2001, and
the attempts by extremists and terrorists to destabilize
previously stable areas have, unfortunately, worsened.

Nevertheless, we are confident that despite the
gravity and magnitude of the various challenges facing
them, our Afghan brothers and sisters will maintain
their commendable efforts to seriously address these
threats and will continue their journey towards peace,
stability and development. If history is any guide, as
grave as these challenges are, they will not be able to
break the determination of the Afghan people and
Government, who are resolutely striving to surmount
these problems.

As an immediate neighbour with deep historical,
religious and cultural ties with our Afghan brothers and
sisters, we share and feel their pain in their difficult
times as we share theirjoys in their successes. We have
a vital interest in an Afghanistan that is stable, secure
and prosperous - an Afghanistan at peace with itself
and with its neighbours.

In our view, incorporating terrorist elements into
the political structure of Afghanistan runs counter to
the agreement reached among the members of the
international community and will in no way help to
resolve the current situation. Categorizing extremists
as "good" or "bad" is not helpful. Any efforts to bring
about reconciliation should be purely Afghan-led and
under the full control and ownership of the Afghan
Government. In addition, only those groups that
recognize, respect and adhere to the constitution of
Afghanistan can be considered in that process.

We believe that if the insecurity in Afghanistan is
to be effectively addressed, more serious and concrete
efforts should be made to strengthen the Afghan
National Army and Police, and Afghans should be
given the chance, through the Afghanization process, to
have full ownership and control over all issues related
to their own country. Moreover, as mentioned in the
report, at this time of hardship the people of
Afghanistan need to and expect to feel the results of
the international community's assistance in their day-
to-day lives. It is a bitter fact that the results of aid
efforts continue to fall short of popular expectations.

Poppy cultivation, drug production and
trafficking in narcotic drugs in Afghanistan continue to
be among the most serious and immediate threats about
which we have been constantly and gravely concerned.
The narcotic-drugs-related menace has hugely
damaged the stability, security and development of
Afghanistan and has also had appalling consequences
for the entire region and beyond. We appreciate the
efforts made by the Afghan Government to fight this
threat, but we are of the view that their efforts and
those of the international community - particularly
those of countries with a military presence in
Afghanistan - continue to fall short of what is needed.

Iran has fought a costly and deadly war, with
utmost determination, against the drug traffickers
originating in Afghanistan, and we will continue to be
unwavering in our fight against this menace. Neither
the gravity of the task nor the enormous human and
material costs inflicted on our nation have been or will
be able to break our determination in this important
fight. We, however, expect others in the international
community to join us more seriously in this endeavour
and to pay more attention to this threat. As mentioned
in the report at hand, such initiatives as effective
eradication efforts, coupled with alternative-livelihood
programmes, increased incentives for good governance
in the relevant provinces, the destruction of drug
laboratories, the countering of corruption and more
serious prosecution of drug traffickers are among the
measures that can help counter this daunting challenge.

The coming elections for the presidency and the
provincial councils, planned for the summer of 2009,
are of paramount importance on the Afghan political
scene. We hope that the State-building process that
started with the Bonn Agreement will continue to move
forward with the help and support of the international
community.

We in the international community need to
coordinate our endeavours, to learn from our past
experiences and to redouble our efforts in order to help
complete the journey that we started by helping the
Afghan people and Government seven years ago. For
its part, the Islamic Republic of Iran has spared no
efforts to extend its full and sincere cooperation in that
regard, and we stand ready to continue on that path. We
have been an important part of the international and
regional efforts to help Afghans over the past several
years. Iran attaches great importance to regional
initiatives in that regard, and we have also contributed
to the international efforts aimed at helping to alleviate
the Afghans' suffering.

We have excellent bilateral relations with
Afghanistan. The Presidents of our two countries have
visited each other's capitals, and President Karzai just
recently visited Tehran to attend the tenth summit of
the Economic Cooperation Organization. On the
sidelines of the summit, very constructive bilateral and
trilateral meetings were arranged at the level of heads
of State, including a trilateral meeting among Iran,
Afghanistan and Pakistan and another meeting that
included the presence of Iran, Afghanistan and
Tajikistan.

Iran is actively engaged in the reconstruction
process in Afghanistan. We have spent hundreds of
millions of dollars in building basic infrastructure,
roads, railroads, bridges and telecommunication
facilities, in capacity-building and on educational
services and facilities. Iran has hosted 3 million
Afghan refugees over the past three decades and has
shouldered a heavy burden in that regard. Fifteen
thousand Afghan students are currently studying at
Iranian universities, while 250,000 students are
attending Iranian elementary and secondary schools as
well as high schools. They are enjoying the same
facilities and opportunities as those from which our
own students and children benefit.

Finally, as members may know, at this very hour
we are approaching the Iranian new year, or Nowruz, as
we call it. This traditional occasion is celebrated not
only in Iran, but also in some other parts of the world,
particularly Afghanistan. Nowruz means a new day, a
new beginning. On this occasion, let us think of a new
beginning in our serious efforts within the international
community to help the Afghan people and Government
to continue their journey towards peace, stability and
prosperity. They are a great nation. They will make it.

