The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Mexico.

My delegation thanks the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunals for Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia for the presentation of their
semi-annual reports on the status of the completion
strategies for their activities (see S/20lO/259 and S/2010/270).

Mexico takes interest in the efforts that both
Tribunals have made to speed up the execution of their
judicial activities in a responsible and efficient manner,
the progress made in implementing the completion
strategies in the past six months, and the way they have
ensured the application of justice and respect for the
procedural rights of the accused. We are aware that
judicial activity will always be subject to a series of
unforeseen conditions and circumstances and that both
Tribunals are addressing those in the best way possible.
The actions taken by both Tribunals therefore give us
the confidence to urge them to take additional
measures to conclude their work as soon as possible
and to make way for the establishment of the residual
mechanism.

The reports before us this morning confirm that
the Tribunals will not be able to conclude their work by
the dates set in resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534
(2004). Their work will therefore continue even
beyond 2010. That is due, inter alia, to such issues as
lack of cooperation, the difficulty of retaining qualified
personnel, and difficulties in referring cases to national
jurisdictions. Taken together, these pose serious
challenges to ensuring that the conclusion of the
Tribunal's work adheres to the dates set by the Council.

It is therefore important to provide both Tribunals
with the means to allow them to conclude their judicial
work as soon as possible. In that regard, it is necessary
to extend the terms of first-instance judges of both
Tribunals until at least the first half of 2011, and to
review the appeals work up to the second half of 2012,
in line with the provisions set out in resolutions 1900
(2009) and 1901 (2009).

The cooperation of States with the Tribunals is
also key. In that regard, we call on the States involved
to respond without delay to the requests of the
specialized bodies of the Tribunals, in particular when
it comes to finding and arresting fugitives - two in the
case of the former Yugoslavia and 11 in that of
Rwanda. In particular, we note the valuable judicial
cooperation provided by the Government of Croatia.
We urge it to continue that cooperation in connection
with issues pending before the Tribunal.

We cannot ignore the fact that the Tribunals face
the ongoing challenge of striking a balance between
delivering justice, administrative efficiency, ensuring
the basic rights of accused, witnesses and victims, and
completing their work as soon as possible. Mexico
therefore reiterates that the Security Council should
pursue its pragmatic and flexible approach to the
Tribunals' completion strategies. In our view, the most
desirable option would be for the Tribunals to complete
their work in the near future, but not on the basis of
arbitrary dates. The progress in implementing the
completion strategies that the Tribunals have shared
with us contributes to ensuring that the establishment
of the residual mechanism shall take place in a more
manageable and efficient manner.

In the next six months, Mexico will continue to
contribute to the effort to shape the residual
mechanism in the context of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, concerning which
our colleague from Austria has given us a very precise
briefing. Despite those very detailed considerations,
the Security Council should not fail to bear in mind the
main goal of ensuring that justice is carried out in
connection with the grave atrocities crimes against
humanity committed in the context of the conflicts in
the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Croatia.

