Mr. Christian (Ghana): We welcome the
presence in the Council today of Mr. Nikola Spiric',
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also express our appreciation to the
High Representative, Mr. Schwarz-Schilling, for his
briefing on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and for his efforts to realize the preconditions for a
united and stable State in which the various ethnic
groups coexist peacefully and harmoniously. We wish
him well in his future endeavours. We further
commend the various international partners who are
lending vital support to the process of normalization in
line with the Dayton Peace Accords and Security
Council resolutions.

We agree that the already complicated task of
nation-building has not been made any easier by the
legacy of distrust between the ethnic groups stemming
from the tragic civil war in the 1990s, following the
collapse of the former Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
The divisions became more evident during the
elections, and we are pleased that the parties
cooperated in making the conduct of the elections
peaceful.

In this connection, it is our fervent hope that the
necessary steps will be taken to ensure that the feared
destabilizing impact of Kosovo's final status on Bosnia
and Herzegovina will not materialize. We urge those
clamouring for self-determination to exercise restraint
and abandon the inflammatory rhetoric, in order not to
impede progress in the much-needed constitutional
reform and the restructuring of the police. Further
fragmentation of the region will not augur well for the
country's long-term stability. We believe that with
sustained international engagement, the required
benchmarks for achieving harmonious coexistence
among the people and effective institutions of
government will be achieved so that the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina will realize their aspirations
for a better life within the Euro-Atlantic framework.

We welcome the progress made towards forming
Governments at the State and Federation levels and
hope that the remaining structures of governance will
become fully operational as soon as possible. At the
same time, we are concerned about the lack of
agreement among the parties on the nature and scope
of the constitutional reforms, due to their conflicting
concepts of the character of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a State. Behind the two contending visions are age-old
suspicions, rivalries and, perhaps, ambitions, which
require deliberate confidence-building measures to
transcend. The membership of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in the Central European Free Trade Agreement and the
Partnership for Peace is crucial in that respect. We
encourage the relevant authorities to work assiduously
towards meeting the preconditions for signing a
stabilization and association agreement with the
European Union. In particular, we wish to stress the
need to consolidate the rule of law, not only as an
important foundation for a viable State but also for
increasing international confidence in the country.
Therefore, we support capacity-building among the law
enforcement agencies, the intelligence services and the
judiciary and correctional services.

In the meantime, the question of the return of
refugees and displaced persons equally deserves
sustained attention. We view the transfer by the Office
of the High Representative of responsibility for the
returns to the domestic authorities as positive and
welcome the progress that has been made in the area of
property repossession. We are hopeful that the
estimated 130,000 displaced persons who wish to
return to their pre-war homes will be accorded the
assistance they deserve.

To sum up, let me reiterate my delegation's
appreciation of the tremendous progress that has been
made by the international community in rebuilding
Bosnia and Herzegovina and express the hope that the
seemingly intractable outstanding problems will be
resolved eventually.
