Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Thank you, Sir, for
having convened this meeting so rapidly. I should like
to welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Turkey, Mr. Ahmet Davutoglu. I should also
like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General for her
presence here today and Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing on the Israeli
military operation against the flotilla sailing to Gaza.

Austria is deeply shocked at the loss of lives and
casualties and wishes to express her condolences to the
families of the victims. We are very disturbed about
this dramatic escalation and condemn the use of
violence that has lead to a high number of Victims.

Austrian Foreign Minister Michael Spindelegger
has called for a rapid, full and independent
investigation of this operation, which occurred in
international waters. We have also formally
communicated this position to the Ambassador of
Israel in Austria. Moreover, we call on the Israeli
authorities to urgently provide concerned States with
consular access to and information about their citizens
detained in Israel.

The lack of full compliance with Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009) is at the core of the
deplorable events of last night. The humanitarian
situation in Gaza remains a source of utmost concern.

Austria has consistently acknowledged Israel's
right to protect her citizens against indiscriminate
attacks emanating from Gaza. We repeat our call for an
immediate end to such attacks. At the same time, we do
not believe that such concerns can in any way justify
what has happened today.

We regard the ongoing blockade as totally
unacceptable and counterproductive; it only benefits
spoilers and advocates of violence. We reiterate our
call for an immediate, sustained and unconditional
opening of all crossings for the flow of humanitarian
aid, commercial goods and persons to and from Gaza.

We urge Israel to take all immediate and credible
steps to avoid any recurrence of such Violent incidents
in the future and to act in full accordance with her
obligations under international law and international
humanitarian law. We call on all sides to exercise
utmost restraint and refrain from any action that could
prolong or even worsen the plight of the civilian
population of Gaza.

