Mr. Vrailas (spoke in French): I speak on behalf
of the European Union and its member States. The
candidate countries of Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia;
Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina, countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates; as well as Ukraine and Armenia, align
themselves with this statement.

At the outset, let me first commend the
outgoing interim Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Nigel Fisher, and thank him
for his excellent cooperation with the European Union
and its member States throughout the various positions
that he has held in the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I would also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate Ms. Honore on
her appointment as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of MINUSTAH, and to
wish her every success in carrying out her mandate.

The European Union shares the analysis of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2013/493) concerning the
political situation in Haiti. While we can recognize a
relative stabilization of the political context in the past
12 months, the situation nevertheless remains fragile
and is characterized by an uncooperative attitude
among the various institutional sectors, while the
enormous challenges Haiti still faces require a broad
national consensus.

The European Union fully shares the concerns of
the Secretary-General regarding the significant delays
that have accumulated in the electoral process vis-a-vis
the possibility of holding the next elections before the
end of 2013. The consolidation of democracy and the
rule of law in Haiti, as well as progress in the process
of reconstruction and economic recovery, require
strong democratic institutions that are able to operate
according to the constitutional rules.

The European Union encourages regularly in its
high-level political contacts with all parties concerned
to adopt a cooperative and responsible approach. It is
essential that the institutions concerned accelerate the
legislative and preparatory work to allow the elections
to be held as soon as possible. For its part, the European
Union contributes €4 million to the "basket fund"
managed by United Nations Development Programme
to organize the upcoming elections, and it has released
an additional €2 million to support the capacity-
building of the future Permanent Electoral Council.

Delays in reforming the justice sector are another
source of concern. In the observations contained in the
conclusion of hit latest report, the Secretary-General
refers, inter alia, to the need to end the prevailing
climate of impunity.

The European Union welcomes the positive
results achieved by MINUSTAH in several areas of
its mandate, in particular with regard to advancing
the programme for strengthening the Haitian National
Police, significantly reducing crime as a result of
increasedjoint patrols with the Haitian National Police,
efforts to mitigate the most serious deficiencies in the
penal system, and improving the capacity of interim
municipal councils.

The European Union also notes progress in the
implementation of the four key objectives in the fields
of security, elections, the rule of law and governance,
related to the gradual reconfiguration of MINUSTAH.
It seems essential that Haiti's international partners
continue to coordinate their efforts to support the
achievement of those objectives, with a View towards
achieve the normalization of the political and security
situation, as well as strengthening governance and the
rule of law.

The European Union welcomes the progressive
reduction in the number of internally displaced
persons still living in camps. The European Union is
nevertheless particularly concerned about the fate of
thousands of vulnerable families who are facing forced
evictions and who have no solution for decent housing,
a situation that puts them at risk of abuse. In a context
where many humanitarian assistance organizations
have decided to cease operations in Haiti, despite the
persistence of significant need, the European Union
continues to provide indispensable humanitarian aid
to internally displaced persons and Victims of natural
disasters, while supporting resettlement in dignified
and decent conditions. With its humanitarian assistance,
the European Union also continues to support the fight
against cholera, which has become endemic with peak
periods during the rainy season.

With regard to development assistance, the
European Union, together with its members States,
is currently planning cooperation with Haiti for the
period 2014-2020. Haiti should benefit from a volume of
assistance at least equal to that of the previous period,
which confirms our ongoing commitment to continue
to work alongside Haiti.

Among other things, the European Union is
contemplating supporting the reform programme of
public Administration announced by the Prime Minister
in November 2012, including aspects related to reform
of the security sector. The rule of law, presented in
the report of the Secretary-General as fundamental
to the advancement of the country, and food security,
mentioned as one of the major humanitarian concerns,
should also be subject of our assistance. Negotiations
with the Government on the areas of intervention and
our future cooperation will take place this fall.

Advances in the area of democratic institutions
will not be sufficient to ensure stability and security
in Haiti while the current socioeconomic conditions
persist. Haiti is one of the most unequal countries in
the world, and extreme poverty affects most of the
population. If the data does not change, the security
situation will remain highly volatile.

In conclusion, the European Union shares the
recommendations of the Secretary-General for a
progressive reconfiguration of MINUSTAH. However,
that process must balance the momentum of the
progress that seems to be taking place in Haiti and
the continuing fragility of its institutions, in order to
avoid the significant advances in recent years being
undermined. The Haitian authorities must continue
to implement reforms to consolidate security and
democratic stabilization related to the progressive
transfer of powers from MINUSTAH. The next
test of that effort will be the holding of the electoral
process that has been delayed for nearly two years. The
European Union and its member States will continue to
be fully committed to support the Haitian authorities in
accomplishing that goal.

