Mr. Jacob (Israel): Those who are genuinely
interested in bringing peace to the Middle East must
today think carefully about which steps would enhance
this process, and which would be counterproductive.

Both Israelis and Palestinians have declared their
agreement to certain principles. At the outset of the
Oslo peace process, and repeatedly since then, the
Palestinians committed themselves to renouncing
terrorism and violence. Everyone accepts that they
have failed to do so.

Both parties have declared their acceptance of the
Tenet and Mitchell plans in all their aspects. And Israel
has accepted the Zinni bridging proposal as a means to
get there, in accordance with resolution 1402 (2002).
The Palestinians have failed to do likewise.

Israel is completing its withdrawal from
Palestinian cities in accordance with resolution 1402
(2002), and it will continue to do so in the coming
days. But let us not forget that resolution 1402 (2002)
did not call for withdrawal in a vacuum, and the
Palestinians, in defiance of the Council, have failed to
undertake even minimal steps in the implementation of
the resolution, including a meaningful ceasefire and an
end to terrorism and incitement.

What should be the Council's response to this
situation? Is it to adopt even more one-sided
resolutions and make political concessions in the face
of terror? Are our objectives served by making new
and greater demands of Israel while systematically
ignoring the Palestinian failure to do the one thing to
which they have repeatedly committed themselves -
namely, to stop violence and terror? Surely, we can
agree that our objectives are not served in that manner.

The use of the term "massacre" in the context of
the battle that took place in Jenin is of course
politically convenient for the Palestinian side. It is a
distortion that attempts to create a moral equivalence
between the suicide bomber, who deliberately targets
civilians, and the soldier, whose mission is to protect
against them.

What happened in Jenin was an intense gun battle
between Israeli soldiers and Palestinian terrorists. The
number of casualties which has been reported - as
opposed to those alleged - the 23 dead Israeli
soldiers, booby-trapped buildings and bodies, all attest
to that fact. The so-called reports of massacres have
been contradicted by the facts, as has been confirmed
by foreign journalists, and sources such as The
Washington Post, Newsday and CNN. The Security
Council will do itself no credit by accepting baseless
and distorted allegations as fact.

The real massacres here are committed by the
suicide bombers who blow themselves up in crowds of
Israeli civilians. Surely it is not an exaggeration to
describe them as such. They are not searching out
terrorists; they are not confiscating illegal weapons;
they are looking for men, women and children to
murder. For those who care about respect for
humanitarian law, the real question with respect to
Jenin and other Palestinian cities and refugee camps
relates to how these civilian areas became centres of
terrorist activities in the first place. Despite clear
provisions of international humanitarian law and
repeated Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 1296 (2000) and 1208 (1998), the civilian
character of these refugee camps has been seriously
damaged.

Does anyone inquire how it is that the large
storehouses of weapons and explosives and bomb
factories could exist in a supposedly civilian refugee
camp administered by the United Nations? For weeks
and months and years, as terrorists have armed
themselves and taken up residence within these camps,
we have heard barely a word from the international
community, from the United Nations or any
humanitarian agency. It is only now, after terrorist
massacres have forced Israel's hand, that many have
responded, pointing the finger at Israel's actions rather
than those of the terrorists.

Israel abhors the fact that it was compelled to use
violence in response to the Palestinians' abject failure
to live up to their commitments. We are obligated by
international law - and despite the allegations we
have done our utmost, in extremely difficult
conditions - to protect the civilians and international
personnel who were at risk from the situation on the
ground. I could cite many examples of other countries
that have mobilized their forces against terrorism in a
far less careful and discriminating fashion, and have
done so free from Security Council scrutiny.

No one can deny that the situation is difficult and
that civilians have suffered. Everything possible must
be done to ensure their protection. Surely, this must
begin by ending, once and for all, the use made by
terrorists of civilians and civilian installations.

The pattern of distortion and abuse of civilian
objects is nowhere clearer than with the situation at the
Church of the Nativity, from which gunmen continue to
fire at Israeli soldiers. Both customary and
conventional law make it clear that using cultural
property, such as holy sites, to support a military attack
constitutes a war crime. Indeed, international law has
made it clear - as have many States, including
members of this Council - that when such objects are
unlawfully used for military purposes they lose their
protection as cultural objects and become legitimate
military targets.

Despite this, Israel has not returned fire at the
gunmen holding hostage the Church of the Nativity.
Rather, we continue to try to negotiate with those
hiding inside in order to bring about a non-violent
resolution of the stand-off. So far, those inside have
shown no interest in ending the crisis in a peaceful
manner. Here too, the Security Council will do itself no
credit by accepting baseless and distorted allegations as
fact.

During the visit by Secretary of State Powell to
the region, progress was achieved. We are hopeful that
his continued efforts and the engagement of the
American Administration will ensure that the parties
get back on the right track. In this regard, we hope
there will be a positive response to Prime Minister
Sharon's peace conference initiative, to his positive
comments relating to the Saudi peace proposal to and
his willingness to negotiate with moderate Arab
leaders.

Mr. Powell's visit also succeeded in quieting the
situation on the northern border somewhat, despite the
inaction of the Council. That is not to say that the
situation has been resolved; far from it. Hizbullah's
belligerency continues. The Government of Lebanon
remains under international obligation to rectify this
situation at once and to prevent any resumption of
Hizbullah's illegal attacks across the Blue Line.

The Council must also bear in mind that
throughout the period of Hizbullah's attacks, an
internationally recognized armed military presence in
the area failed to bring these attacks to an end. In fact,
despite Israel's full and confirmed withdrawal, and the
presence of UNIFIL, terrorism emanating from
Lebanon has continued virtually unabated.

Is there any legitimate basis to believe that were
such a presence to exist in the Palestinian territories the
result would be any different? Would any international
force confiscate illegal weapons, intercept suicide
bombers and search for hidden explosives? Would it
stop payments by Chairman Arafat himself to suicide
bombers? Would it do anything other than deter the
actions of Israel while enabling Palestinian terrorism to
continue unhindered, in violation of signed agreements
and resolution 1373 (2002), with the protection of an
internationally sanctioned shield?

As stated in the Mitchell report, and as repeated
by virtually all members of the international
community, the international presence could serve no
useful role and cannot come about without the
agreement of the parties. Israel has made it clear that
we accept the idea of third-party, American monitors to
supervise the implementation of Tenet and Mitchell,
and we were willing to favourably consider an
international presence in the context of a
comprehensive settlement. But we cannot put our faith
in a robust international presence which could not be
effective in the face of a continuing strategy of
Palestinian terrorism.

If both parties have accepted the vision laid out in
resolution 1397 (2002) of two States living side by side
in secure and recognized boundaries, if they have
accepted Tenet and Mitchell, how did we get where we
are today?

Israel has no war with the Palestinian people. We
have no war with the Palestinian aspiration for
statehood. We have proved this at Camp David and at
Taba. We have a war with terror and with those who
are determined not to create the Palestinian State, but
to destroy the Jewish one. It is time that the
international community came face to face with the
fact that unfortunately this rejectionism exists at the
highest echelons of the Palestinian Authority.

Allow me to share but one example, a selection
from a document dated 13 September 2001 from
Chairman Arafat's office addressed to notable Israeli
Arab citizens. Chairman Arafat exhorts them to support
the intifada, to "draw up with blood the map of one
homeland" and to continue the steadfast resistance in
"the cities occupied since 1948". Chairman Arafat
wrote:

"It will continue to be the intifada of the one
people and one outburst of blood.... It will
continue to be a prolonged intifada of rage a
prolonged intifada of independence an intifada
of innumerable generations which will continue
until our supreme national dream is fulfilled."

Is this the voice of moderation and coexistence
with whom Israel is expected to make peace? Is this the
language of one who has renounced violence and
terrorism, who seeks to negotiate a compromise
solution?

The Council will not serve the cause of peace in
the Middle East by condemning Israeli actions and
ignoring the violence, terrorism and incitement that
continues to emanate from the Palestinian leadership.
Resolution 1402 (2002) implicitly recognized this by
issuing a call for a meaningful ceasefire and for
cooperation with General Zinni, together with Israeli
withdrawal. Israeli withdrawal is already under way,
and Prime Minister Sharon has made clear than it will
continue and be accelerated in the coming days. The
rest of resolution 1402 (2002) is still awaiting attention
from the Palestinian side.

The best hope for peace will come from the
international community's demand that both sides
implement what they have already agreed, not from
more concessions to terrorism. Let us build on the
progress that was achieved by Secretary Powell and
work for the implementation of the existing framework
of agreements, which will lead us to a just and lasting
peace for both peoples.

