At the outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo, Lacroix and Lowcock for their contributions and insights. Five months ago, the Security Council discussed for the first time the impacts of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on the issues on its agenda. More than two months ago, the Council unanimously adopted landmark resolution 2532 (2020) and explicitly recognized that the unprecedented extent of the COVID-19 pandemic was likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security. Since its emergence, the pandemic and its impact have been alluded to in most, if not all, contexts on the Council's agenda. It has multiplied and exacerbated the already difficult challenges of conflict-affected countries and populations. It hampers peace processes, hinders peace operations, encumbers humanitarian efforts and undermines post-conflict reconstruction, development and the sustainability of peace. In that context, we express our gratitude to the Nigerien presidency for convening this important briefing and would like to stress the following points. First, a ceasefire is a must. We take note of the encouraging number of endorsements of the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire in order to facilitate the humanitarian response to the pandemic by Governments, international organizations and parties to conflicts. Yet there has been an upsurge in conflicts and violence in several parts of the world, compounding already dire humanitarian situations. Warring parties must match their words and deeds by adhering to the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and that of resolution 2532 (2020) for a general and immediate cessation of hostilities in all situations on the Council's agenda. The United Nations and regional organizations can, and should, continue to support the effective implementation of the ceasefire, including through mediation efforts. Secondly, people must be protected. The peoples in countries in situations of armed conflict or affected by humanitarian crises look to the Council for its continued unity and solidarity in effectively addressing the challenges I mentioned. We have learned that COVID-19 attacks the weakest people in competing emergencies, such as floods and the locust outbreak in Somalia, or in pre-existing fragile conditions, such as refugee and internally displaced persons camps. COVID-19 does not wear down, it comes in waves. The Council must continue to galvanize collective efforts from all quarters and at all levels - local, regional and international - to assist conflict-affected countries in reinforcing preparedness and response to, and recovery from, COVID-19, and to fight for sustainable peace. Special attention should be paid to protecting essential health and humanitarian workers and vulnerable groups. Thirdly, peacekeeping must work. Peace operations have been greatly affected by the risk of spreading and contracting the virus and the freeze in rotations. Yet they remain an integral tool for multilateral strategies to establish stable environments for sustaining peace and triggering development, which must be part of a long- term response to pandemics. It is essential that peacekeeping and political missions continue to make peace work in the new normal, while protecting their personnel and assisting host countries in their pandemic responses. In order to do so, the mission and the country must work together as an integral part of a solution to the conflict and the pandemic, including through innovative approaches and adaptation measures. In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Viet Nam's continued support for resolution 2532 (2020). We look forward to the Secretary-General's updates on the impacts of COVID-19 on issues on the Council's agenda. We reiterate our call for international cooperation and coordination in fighting the pandemic, as no country is safe from COVID-19 and none can fight it alone.
