The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Benin.

I, too, would like to thank Mr. Nobuyasu Abe,
Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs, for
his excellent introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General on small arms.

The harmful effects of the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons are increasingly obvious.
Unquestionably, such weapons help to increase the
number of crises. They fuel and prolong armed
conflicts. They also support transborder organized
crime, mercenarism and many other negative factors
that gravely jeopardize basic human rights and hinder
the development efforts of the affected countries.

Africa in general and West Africa in particular
are affected. Two years ago, at the first Biennial
Meeting of States to review the implementation of the
Programme of Action to Combat the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms, the number of illicit small arms
circulating in West Africa was cited at 8 million.
Today, ECOWAS estimates that number to be 15
million.

However, that is not because of a lack of
awareness of the gravity of the phenomenon and its
repercussions on the stability of the subregion. The
dizzying increase in the number of illicit small arms in
circulation has taken place despite the ECOWAS
Moratorium on small arms and light weapons. Quite
rightly, ECOWAS member States have decided to
transform the Moratorium into a binding convention to
make the mechanism more effective. ECOWAS intends
to complete the process of adopting the convention by
December 2005 at the latest. Its management will be
entrusted to a particularly influential organ of
ECOWAS, the Mediation and Security Council in
particular, which will lend its full authority to the new
mechanism.

Here, I should also mention the decision of the
ECOWAS countries to replace the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development (PCASED), established by the United
Nations Development Programme in 1999 to support
the moratorium, with a new regional surveillance
programme. It is clear that the real impact of PCASED
on the development of the situation has remained
marginal owing to a lack of resources.

The new programme adopted by ECOWAS in
October 2004, named the ECOWAS Small Arms
Project (ECOSAP), and the creation of a Small Arms
Unit in the Community's Executive Secretariat, are
important elements that reflect a renewed commitment
to combating the illicit circulation of small arms in
West Africa. ECOSAP is designed to promote, by
strengthening them, capacities to monitor the illicit
circulation of small arms across the borders of member
States. In that regard, the experience of ECOWAS is
also a specific example of mobilization to contain that
phenomenon. We take this opportunity to make a
strong appeal for greater responsibility on the part of
countries that supply small arms so that they can help
stem the phenomenon of the proliferation of such
weapons.

The international community's efforts to stabilize
West Africa should devote particular attention to
controlling the arms flows that converge there. We
welcome the notable progress made in the international
community's strategy. An essential pillar of that
strategy is the integrated regional approach adopted by
the United Nations in the area of promoting
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes, taking into account military, security,
political, economic and social aspects. That approach
should be supported by sufficient resources to
maximize its impact. Likewise, we fully support the
recommended firmness to ensure compliance with the
embargoes adopted by the Security Council. In that
regard, we support the implementation of the
Secretary-General's recommendation aimed at
identifying violators and adopting sanctions against
them.

In addition to those measures, which seek to
reduce supply, particular attention should be devoted to
promoting a culture of non-violence both among
political actors and in the educational systems of the
affected countries, because that would help to
significantly reduce the demand for small arms.

We are convinced that the combined efforts of the
international community and the joint activities of the
countries of the region will make it possible to stabilize
permanently the affected countries and to prevent the
destabilization of other countries that have thus far
succeeded in preserving peace and security within their
borders.

We thank the delegation of Japan for the draft
presidential statement that it has kindly submitted.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

In order to optimize the use of our time and to
allow as many delegations as possible to take the floor,
I will not invite speakers to take a seat at the table and
then resume their seat at the side of the Chamber. Each
time a speaker takes the floor, the Conference Officer
will seat the next speaker on the list at the table.

I now give the floor to the representative of South
Africa.

