Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of the Arab Group, allow me, at the outset, to
thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
Security Council debate to discuss an issue of high
priority for the Council: the situation in the Middle
East. I should also like to thank Mr. Ibrahim Gambari,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
coming to brief the Council on behalf of the Secretary-
General.

Sad news from the Middle East continues to
make headlines. We have just learned the tragic news
of the assassination of the Lebanese Minister of
Industry, Mr. Pierre Amin Gemayel. We express our
condolences to the family of Pierre Gemayel, who was
the Victim of a treacherous criminal act, and to the
Government and the people of Lebanon. We firmly
condemn that heinous crime, and call for the speedy
arrest and trial of those who were responsible.

Everyone is fully aware of how grave the
situation in the Middle East has become. The region
has been troubled since the beginning of the year - a
year marked by several serious incidents leading to the
current escalation of the situation, especially in Gaza,
since early this month.

The Council failed to adopt a draft resolution that
would have responded to the recent escalation and
called for the cessation of violence between the
Palestinians and the Israelis. In spite of all of the
efforts that we, as sponsors of the draft resolution,
made, with a view to reaching a fair and balanced text,
the draft resolution never saw the light of day. That is
what prompted us to submit a similar draft resolution
to the tenth emergency special session of the General
Assembly, on illegal Israeli actions in occupied East
Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territory, having earlier requested the resumption of
that emergency special session. The draft resolution
(A/ES-lO/L.19) garnered the support of the
overwhelming majority of Member States, which
shows that it was fair and balanced and which confers
international legitimacy on its contents.

We all recognize, however, that, under the
Charter, primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security lies with the Security
Council. Therefore, we do not believe that the adoption
of a resolution by the General Assembly is sufficient to
deal with this issue.

All acts of violence, provocation, incitement and
destruction deserve condemnation, regardless of who
commits them. While we believe that a lasting and
comprehensive settlement is within reach, we also
believe that it can come about only through dialogue.
Violence has proved its futility, in resolving this crisis,
as it has in other cases.

The establishment of peace in the Middle East is
an issue that directly concerns the Arab States. Based
on that understanding, we have continuously urged the
parties concerned to pursue an approach that promotes
the chances of peace. In this regard, we urge all parties
to provide full support for Palestinian national efforts
aimed at achieving national reconciliation and at
forming a government of national unity.

Based on our belief that dialogue is the solution,
we were at the forefront of those who called for an
open ministerial-level meeting of the Council last
September in order to revive the peace process. It is
incumbent upon the Council to continue to provide the
impetus necessary to move the peace process ahead,
including by continuing to hold high-level discussions
to highlight the attention that the Council is devoting to
this issue.

While the Council should play its role, the
international community, and in particular the Quartet,
is called upon to take specific and concrete steps to
revive the stagnant Middle East peace process on all
tracks, within the framework of previously reached
agreements and on the basis of relevant Security
Council resolutions, the terms of reference of the peace
process and the Road Map.
The devastating war launched by Israel against
Lebanon last summer left a very bad impact on
stability in the region. In addition to the human and
material losses it inflicted on Lebanon, it has affected
to a large extent the lives of the citizens of a country
that has just emerged from decades of internal conflict.

That is why the issue of maintaining the stability,
security and sovereignty of Lebanon is of critical
importance in the quest for peace and stability in the
Middle East.

We must also support genuine rapprochement
between Lebanon and its neighbour Syria, because
close relations between the two sister countries is their
only normal and natural condition. Any different
situation will not have a beneficial effect on stability in
the region as a whole. We are confident that the
historical, demographic and geographical ties that exist
between the two countries would eventually be the
strongest factor in determining the relationship
between them.

We look forward to addressing the situation of the
Syrian Golan Heights, occupied by Israel since 1967,
because that issue is an important part of the crisis in
the Middle East. Therefore, its resolution will ease
general tensions in the region. There is no doubt that
direct negotiations between the two sides is the ideal
way to implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions and to achieve a settlement of the issue.

Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): The
establishment of peace in the Middle East is one of the
issues that directly concerns us in the State of Qatar.
From this standpoint, we have continued to urge the
parties to adopt an approach that encourages the
chances of peace.

The State of Qatar had lately undertaken
diplomatic mediation efforts to reconcile divisions
within the Palestinian leadership, because we believe
that Palestinian internal stability is a necessary
condition for an effective peace process. In this
respect, we urge all the parties to provide full support
to Palestinian national efforts that seek national
reconciliation and the establishment of a government
of national unity. Based on our firm conviction in the
State of Qatar of the Security Council's primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, we will extend, during our
presidency of the Council next month, an invitation to
convene a ministerial meeting of the Council to
consider all possible ways to help achieve sustainable
peace in the Middle East, as discussed at the
September ministerial meeting, and to put an end to the
violence and counter-violence that have been claiming
the lives of innocent people in a region where the
conflict is as old as Organization itself. We also look
forward to the active participation of Council members
in providing the momentum that will realize that
ambition.


