Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Allow me to
begin by paying a warm tribute to the work of
Ambassador Gillerman. I do not think there is anyone
here at the United Nations who has to work harder than
Ambassador Gillerman to defend the reputation of his
country, or anyone who does it with the same
brilliance, charm, incisive intellect and dedication that
he has brought to the task over the past six years. He is
going to be sorely missed, although I am sure we will
listen to his successor in this Chamber with the same
rapt attention with which we have listened to him.

08-4326]

I would also like to thank Mr. Pascoe for his
detailed briefing on the situation in the region. My
country gives its unwavering support to the peace
process and the agreements reached at Annapolis. We
welcome the most recent meeting between President
Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert in Paris this past
week. The success ofthe bilateral negotiations is going
to depend in part on a public perception in the region
that progress is being made on the ground.

My Prime Minister, Gordon Brown, earlier this
week visited the occupied Palestinian territories and
Israel and gave a moving and powerful speech to the
Knesset, the first ever by a British Prime Minister.
When he was in Israel, my Prime Minister reiterated
that settlement-building erodes trust, heightens
Palestinian suffering and makes the compromises that
Israel will need to make for peace more difficult. It is
therefore crucial, both for the daily lives of
Palestinians and for peace to be achieved, that Israel
freeze settlements and dismantle outposts, as it has
agreed to do.

While in Palestine, my Prime Minister made clear
that the Palestinians must continue to act with
perseverance and persistence against terrorists who
target Israeli civilians. We welcome the security sector
reforms that the Palestinian Authority is implementing
and we are happy to play a part in those efforts.

Egypt's tireless work has led to a ceasefire
agreement in Gaza. We commend all parties for their
continued commitment to that agreement, and it is
important that the United Nations support efforts to
deal with the outstanding issues, including the end of
arms smuggling and the return of Corporal Shalit. We
hope that Israel, in line with its own commitments, will
reopen crossings and increase supplies to Gaza. We
welcome the lead the United Nations is taking by
putting forward the immediate steps that could be
taken to improve the humanitarian situation.

However, the Palestinian Authority is at a critical
juncture. As Mr. Pascoe's briefing made clear, the
Authority will be in the red in a matter of weeks. The
European Union and the United Kingdom have
responded to Palestinian requests to front-load our
budget support. We have done so, and we have spent
what we can for this year. Others must now follow
through on the pledges they made at Paris last
December, and to which they committed again at the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee meeting in London in May.

The Security Council has its part to play. We have
consistently made clear that the Security Council
should be able to find its voice once more on the issue
of the Middle East. To that end, the Council has
worked for some weeks to seek agreement on a draft
resolution that is both balanced and engages
constructively in support of the Annapolis process and
of progress on the ground. Our assessment is that a text
that focuses on only one aspect of the conflict will not
find the necessary degree of support in this Council.
We hope that the Council can continue to work on that
issue without a fixed timeline and offer its voice and its
authority in support of the intensive efforts under way
to find peace between Israel and the Palestinians.

The United Kingdom welcomes the formation of
a national unity Government in Lebanon. That is an
important step in delivering on the Doha agreement of
May and in promoting the long-term stability of
Lebanon. Lebanon has the United Kingdom's full
support in tackling the important challenges that lie
ahead. Those include a programme of support to the
Lebanese security sector, assistance to Palestinian
refugees in Lebanon and unswerving support for the
International Independent Investigation Commission
and the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.

The United Kingdom underlines the importance
of the full implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).
We welcome the exchange of prisoners that was
brokered by the German authorities and pay tribute to
those who have worked intensively to secure that
outcome. We continue to support the vital work of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon in
maintaining peace and stability in south Lebanon. It is
important, too, that Lebanese militias be prevented
from acquiring arms via Syrian territory and we will
continue to provide support to Lebanese security forces
to increase their capacity for effective border
management.

We welcome the recent meeting between
President Sleiman and President Assad in Paris and
hope that renewed political contacts between the
leaders of Syria and Lebanon will translate into
concrete action to delineate borders and establish
diplomatic relations between the two countries, as
called for in Security Council resolutions.

We are encouraged by the continued proximity
talks between Israel and Syria under Turkey's auspices.
However, we believe that there is more that Syria could
do to support the wider peace process, including by
ending their support for Palestinian rejectionist
movements.

