Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): Like other delegations
that have spoken before us, the Netherlands welcomes
this opportunity to discuss the threat to international peace
and security posed by international terrorism.

Terrorism is one of the most pressing concerns of
the international community. It is neither new nor limited
to any particular region of the world. We have almost
come to expect the periodic shock and horror of the latest
terrorist attack after decades of Red Army Faction, Irish
Republican Army and Red Brigade terror all over Europe;
Lockerbie; the bombing of the World Trade Center here
in New York; the bombing of embassies in Tanzania and
Kenya; and, more recently, the spate of bombings which
rocked residential buildings in Moscow and elsewhere in
Russia.

What is new are the degree of sophistication of
terrorist acts and terrorism's increasingly globalized
character. The enormous financial gains from illicit
transactions, the abundant availability of small arms and
the most sophisticated weaponry alike, as well as easy
access to technology all help to create an ever more
dangerous type of terrorist. Extensive international
networks of organized criminals are creating an
infrastructure of so-called catastrophic terrorism that poses
a threat to international peace and security. Moreover, the

 

establishment of transnational criminal organizations tends
to hinder law and order, especially in those countries where
a structured governmental organization is no longer in
place. These so-called failed States are particularly
vulnerable to pressure and bribery from powerful criminal
cartels. Their citizens often end up the helpless victims of
violence.

The Netherlands Government unequivocally condemns
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, whatever its
motives and origins, wherever and by whomsoever
committed. The Netherlands continues to stand ready to
fight terrorists, apprehend them wherever and whenever
possible and bring them to justice. We extend our heartfelt
sympathy to countries and individual victims and their
families who have suffered from the arbitrary and mindless
violence of terrorist acts.

We recognize that the struggle against terrorism may
require more than political, diplomatic and legal means.
Inevitably, harsher means are sometimes needed. However,
in those cases where the official use of violence is
indispensable, it must be proportionate and limited to the
requirements of the maintenance of public order. Innocent
civilians may under no circumstances become the
indiscriminate victims of violence aimed at terrorists.

States have a special responsibility and a moral duty
to uphold the law, including international humanitarian and
human rights law. International terrorism can and must be
combatted effectively and decisively within the framework
of the law. To fight evil with evil would only work to the
advantage of terrorists and eventually lead to the erosion of
societies and of much-needed international cooperation.

As for the United Nations, international terrorism has
been on the agenda of the General Assembly since 1972. A
number of important international conventions have been
adopted and two are presently under consideration. This
sectoral approach, in our view, is the most appropriate
way - and in fact the only practical way - for our
Organization to address the issue. The Netherlands will
continue to make an active contribution to this important
work.

