Mr. Bouabid (spoke in French): I wish at the
outset, Sir, to express our appreciation for your efforts
as President of the Security Council for the month of
February to promote a resolution of the crisis in Haiti. I
wish also to thank the delegation of Jamaica, which on
behalf of the countries of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) requested this emergency meeting of the
Council. We are pleased to see the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Jamaica and of the Bahamas at this
meeting.

The International Organization of la
Francophonie is following closely and with grave
concern developments in the situation in Haiti, which
has been a member of our organization since 1970.
Ministers of our organization's member States, meeting
at Paris in December 2003 at the nineteenth session of
the Ministerial Conference of la Francophonie,
considered in depth the situation in Haiti.

Our Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Abdou
Diouf, has repeatedly condemned the acts of violence,
irrespective of their origin, and human rights abuses in
that country. He has stated his grave concern at the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and has
reaffirmed his commitment to a peaceful resolution of
the crisis.

La Francophonie was part of the high-level
international delegation that visited Port-au-Prince
several days ago in an urgent attempt to promote a
political resolution of the crisis. Because of the present
risk of chaos in Haiti, the International Organization of
la Francophonie appeals for an end to the violence and
encourages the quest for an agreed peaceful solution,
so that peace, democracy and the rule of law can return
to that country.
I should like to assure the Council of our full
support for the international community's efforts in the
quest for such a peaceful solution and to reaffirm our
readiness to participate in any action to promote the
implementation of the Bamako Declaration on the
practices of democracy, rights and freedoms in the
French-speaking community.

The Secretary-General of the International
Organization of la Francophonie will preside over a
meeting, to be held in Paris on 2 March 2004, of an ad
hoc advisory group on Haiti to determine what
contribution our organization can make in support of
the international community's action on behalf of Haiti.
We trust that the Council will swiftly take the steps
necessary to deal with the dangerous situation in Haiti
and to help re-establish order and security in the
country, thereby opening the way for coordinated
action by the international community aimed at
consolidating peace and rebuilding the country -
action to which la Francophonie will not fail to make
its contribution.

