Ms. Reinikka: The President of the World Bank,
Mr. Jim Yong Kim, is unable to be here today, but he
has asked me to convey his greetings and thanks to the
Council for organizing this event and for inviting the
World Bank. We are committed to a strong partnership
with the United Nations on the Sahel, and Mr. Kim was
particularly pleased to participate in the special event
on the Sahel organized on the margins of the General
Assembly in September.

I wish to assure the Council of our continuing
commitment to working collaboratively to address
the great needs of the Sahel, where 19 million people
were affected by reduced access to food following the
2011 drought. Good rains in the current agricultural
season have reduced the acute need and benefited the
harvest in many locations, but rains have also brought
flooding that has affected 3.2 million people in West
Africa and displaced 1.7 million people, mostly in
Nigeria. Those challenges come on top of other chronic
threats including desert locusts, rapid population
growth, pre-existing high levels of child malnutrition,
well over 400,000 migrants returning from Libya, and
conflict. Conflict and lack of security have particularly
affected the delivery of humanitarian and development
assistance in northern Mali.

Being part of the Sahel, Mali is affected by climate
volatility and rainfall variability in a very deep-seated
way. Even in years when there is record agricultural
production, many people are vulnerable to shocks
because of chronic food insecurity, persistently high
malnutrition, and loss of livelihood owing to a lack
of economic alternatives. These shocks deeply affect
human development, with shortfalls in nutrition and
stimulation among the young children of today having
a tragic long-term impact on their future lives and
productivity as the adults of tomorrow.

The institutional and security crisis arising from the
military coup in March has made an already difficult
situation much worse in Mali. It has severely hampered
the response to Mali's drought of 2011. Today, some
4.6 million people, of whom over 1.6 million live within
the conflict-affected northern regions, are at risk of
food insecurity in Mali. More than 450,000 people have
fled their homes since fighting erupted, and the number
of internally displaced people in Mali is estimated to
be 119,000. The national gross domestic product is
expected to contract by 3.1 per cent in 2012.

The World Bank is providing practical support
to help vulnerable groups cope with effects of this
compounded crisis. In July, we resumed existing
operations in Mali in the social sectors and agriculture
to help people access basic services. We are also
preparing new basic education and safety nets
programmes. We are working with partners to create
synergies and minimize fragmentation. For example,
for the Mali Safety Nets Project, we are working very
closely with UNICEF and the World Food Programme
to address the needs of specific groups, including
internally displaced people.

Across the Sahel more broadly, our three-phased
response - an approach we also adopted in the Horn of
Africa - has ranged from providing immediate relief
to planning for and investing in long-term resilience.
In the past few months, we have responded quickly
through accelerated disbursements amounting to
$64 million from existing World Bank operations across
the Niger, Mali, Chad, Burkina Faso, and Mauritania.
This has helped to support vulnerable households
through cash for work, recapitalizing livestock,
rehabilitating small-scale irrigation, and improving
access to food and health services. As a second part
to our response, we have helped people to replace lost
assets and to recover their livelihoods. Drawing on
lessons from the Horn of Africa, we are also helping
to plan for social safety nets that can be rapidly scaled
up to channel additional resources in times of need.
From experience in Ethiopia and other countries, we
know that robust social protection systems can make
a major difference, preventing shocks from escalating
into crises.

We are also helping to build resilient livelihoods in
the long-term. Investments in transformative multi-use
water infrastructure, such as the Kandadji program
in the Niger, will help people to sustain agricultural
production and remain resilient to crisis in future.
These large-scale investments need to be accompanied
by scaled-up, climate-smart agricultural practices.
They are also complemented by our ongoing support
for health and nutrition, as well as for education and
skills to help diversify livelihoods.

The Bank's engagement in the Sahel and the Horn
of Africa also provides a springboard for addressing the
broader drylands agenda, which requires the integration
of resilience as a key theme of development.

Food security in the Sahel can also be significantly
improved by measures to free up food trade, including
improving the efficiency of border crossings or even
eliminating them, reducing non-tariff barriers to
food trade, reinforcing supply chains, strengthening
risk markets, such as offering farmers crop insurance
through weather-indexed instruments, and avoiding
export bans.

Strengthening regional bodies, such as the
Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control
in the Sahel, is a key element of preparedness going
forward. This will help to further develop early warning
systems, including using new but simple technologies
such as mobile phones, and consolidate useful flows of
information in anticipation of crisis.

The Bank works closely with partners, in particular
the regional organizations the Economic Community of
West African States, the West African Economic and
Monetary Union and the African Union-New Partnership
for Africa's Development, as well as multilateral and
bilateral agencies, including in particular the European
Union, the African Development Bank and the Agence
Francaise de Developpement. Working through such
partnerships, the World Bank is bringing knowledge and
financing to the table, relying on existing instruments
and reallocation of funds for rapid action, as well as
investing in medium-term recovery and long-term
resilience.

