Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I have been assured that,
on this very special occasion of the outgoing Chairs
of the subsidiary bodies being able to reflect on their
chairmanships, I can speak for one or two minutes
longer than usual. With your agreement, Mr. President,
I intend to indulge myself in that way.

Of all the Council's functions, sanctions are
one area in which elected members of the Security
Council have a truly distinctive opportunity to make a
difference. While the permanent members may be the
architects of the sanctions regimes, the elected 10 are in
essence the engineers - it is our job, through our role
as Chairs, to ensure they work.

As you indicated, Mr. President, Australia has
chaired three Committees - the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) on the Taliban and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) on Iran.
We have also very actively engaged in the Council's
other sanctions committees and subsidiary bodies. We
have made an effort to demonstrate the positive impact
that sanctions can have, given their role in protecting
fragile States emerging from crisis or conflict, as
well as vulnerable populations in those States, and in
preventing the escalation or recurrence of violence.
As part of the high-level review of United Nations
sanctions that we co-sponsored over the last six months
with Finland, Germany, Greece and Sweden, Australia
has consulted with States with the greatest stake in
the effectiveness of sanctions, that is, the States to
which the measures apply, and their neighbours. What
emerged, among many other things, was the critical role
that sanctions committees need to play in partnership
with the Member State and its neighbours and regional
organizations. I will focus on four themes that arose
from those consultations.

My first theme is greater transparency. In
previous years, today's briefing - the briefing of
outgoing subsidiary body Chairs - was the only
public statement made in the Council about the work
of many of the bodies. There were exceptions - the
Iran Committee and the Al-Qaida Committee, jointly
with the Non-Proliferation Committee established by
resolution 1540 (2004), and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, and the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya have long
made their reports to the Council in public meetings.
But generally, the default has been that committees, to
the extent they report to the Council at all, have done so
in closed consultations.

That practice is now changing. This month, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014) concerning Yemen will again make their reports
in the open Chamber. In recent months, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Cote
d'Ivoire both reported to the Council in public for
the first time. The default should be that all sanctions
committees deliver their reports to the Council in public.
Sanctions are part of the collective security framework
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. How
they are administered is of interest to all Member
States, because these measures impose obligations on
all Member States.

My second theme, which was alsojust touched upon
by Ambassador Oh Joon, is that of closer engagement
with affected Member States. Sanctions - and therefore
the activities of the sanctions committees - are of
particular and special interest to those States to which
the sanctions apply. Our experience on the Council
has shown that the greater the engagement between
the stakeholder States and the committees, the more
effectively the sanctions can deliver the outcomes
intended for them by the Council.

In some ways, the Taliban sanctions regime is a
model for such collaborative engagement, thanks to the
crucial role played by the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, and his team in
New York, as well as the active efforts of the focal
point in the Afghan Government, Isaaq Kamkai. The
confidence generated by that relationship means that
the Government of Afghanistan allows the Monitoring
Team access to all levels ofthe Afghan National Security
Forces, not just in Kabul but across all the provinces.
That significantly enhances the quality of the Team's
analysis and the implementation of sanctions.

Over the past two years, that kind of engagement has
increasingly become the norm, due to the proactivity
of the Committee Chairs. Sanctions committees now
regularly meet with the focus country for the sanctions
regime and its regional partners. In recent weeks, the
Committees concerning the Central African Republic,
the Sudan and Yemen and Libya have held consultations
with the relevant Member States and regional countries,
and the Somalia and Eritrea Committee also recently
met with representatives of those Governments.

Such a practice applies also to the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee, as Al-Qaida affiliates and
splinter groups threaten the territorial integrity of
States. Last year we held consultations with countries
of the Sahel and Maghreb to consider how the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime could be made a more effective
instrument against the threat posed by Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb. This year we held consultations with
Yemen, jointly with the Yemen Sanctions Committee
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee, on how the three
Committees could work collaboratively with authorities
in Yemen against the twin scourges oforganized political
violence and Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula. That
practice will build understanding and trust between the
stakeholder countries and the Council's committees
and expert groups, which will in turn should make the
sanctions a more effective instrument to restore and
maintain international peace and security.

My third theme concerns the synergies across
Committees. The Al-Qaida and Taliban Committees
have long been incubators for innovations that enhance
the implementation and effectiveness of sanctions
measures. The trouble has been that much of that
innovation, despite its applicability to other sanctions
regimes, was being applied only to the Al-Qaida and
Taliban sanctions regimes. It was a surprise to me to
find that there was no capacity, either in the Council
or in the Secretariat, to consider sanctions in a
cross-cutting way. The only way to ensure a unified
Council approach was through a bureaucratic and
time-consuming process of correspondence between
all the relevant sanctions committees.

Those representatives who attended the 25 November
briefing (see S/PV.7323) in the Council on sanctions
during Australia's presidency know that Australia is
promoting the establishment of a capacity to allow
cross-cutting discussions of sanctions issues, as well
as to facilitate the provision of technical assistance
to Member States. We have been negotiating a draft
resolution to meet those widely endorsed objectives,
and we will continue to do so.

We made an effort from the beginning of our
chairing roles to consult with other committee Chairs
to see how we could exploit the obvious synergies in
the work of our committees. For so long as there is
no organized coordination mechanism on the work of
sanctions, at a time when the Council's use of sanctions
is increasing and becoming more complex, the need for
future committee Chairs to continue that consultation
among themselves will be even greater.

My fourth and last theme is the indispensable
role of the expert groups that support the work of the
committees. I have had the privilege and the great
pleasure of working closely with two such groups, the
Al-Qaida and Taliban Monitoring Team and the Panel
of Experts on the Islamic Republic of Iran.

Over the last few months, the Al-Qaida Monitoring
Team has generated its regular threat assessment, as well
as reports on the specific threat posed by the Al-Nusra
Front and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and on the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon. The
reports have been of stand-out quality and instrumental
in the Council's ability to respond to those threats. They
underpinned presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23,
adopted by the Council on 19 November. The Team's
reporting early next year will be essential to the
development of further strategies by the Council to
combat the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters in
particular.

No less impressive is the investigative and analytical
work done by the Iran Panel of Experts into possible
incidents of non-compliance. I would also like to single
out the Panel's outreach activities, which are so critical
in helping Member States understand the complexities
of the sanctions regime. Particularly at a time when the
focus seems to be on the P5+1 negotiations with Iran,
the Panel's work in reminding Member States that the
Council's measures remain fully in force is even more
important.

To conclude, I will brief the Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Iran Sanctions Committee
on 18 December, therefore I will reserve my 1737
Committee farewells for then. But I would like to
take this opportunity today to convey my unvarnished
thanks and appreciation to the members of the 1267
and 1988 Sanctions Committees; to the Monitoring
Team, whose praises I have already sung; to the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Ombudsperson, Kimberly Prost,
for her fierce independence and professional integrity;
and to our patient and hardworking colleagues in the
Secretariat, without whose support none of our work
would be possible.

