Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first to congratulate you, Sir, on your work
during your presidency of the Security Council for the
month of June. In particular, I would like to thank you
for convening this open debate, to which my country
attaches special importance. I would also like to
acknowledge the presence of Mr. John Holmes and to
thank him for the briefing he gave this morning.
09-38414

This is the tenth consecutive year that the
Security Council considers the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. In accordance with
international humanitarian law, the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts is a legal obligation of the
parties to the conflict from which they are not relieved
even if the counterparty or counterparties act in breach
of it. It is regrettable that there are still situations in
which that protection is not guaranteed, which has led
to the Council's permanent consideration of the matter.
We are therefore convinced that the Security Council
must continue to be committed to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, to promoting full respect
for international, humanitarian and human rights law
and to combating impunity.

My delegation is grateful for the report
(S/2009/277) of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We deeply
regret that, as it was 10 years ago, its conclusions are
discouraging. There are still many situations in which
civilians are the target of attacks, as evidenced by the
unacceptably high number of victims among civilians,
situations where children are recruited as soldiers and
are subject to abuse, situations where sexual violence
is a daily occurrence and other situations where
thousands and even millions of persons are displaced
and where it is impossible to deliver humanitarian
assistance. The report of the Secretary-General very
clearly identifies five challenges.

Eradicating armed conflict is one of the
objectives of the Charter of the United Nations and of
the international community as a whole. However,
where conflicts exist, the parties are obliged to respect
the basic rule - which originated even before the
establishment of the Organization - that civilians
must be protected from the effects of the conflict.

With regard to non-State armed groups in
conflicts that are not of an international nature, it is
clear that common article 3 to the four 1949 Geneva
Conventions includes specific obligations that must be
respected by the parties - that is, they apply also to
parties that are not of a State nature.

With regard to peacekeeping operations and the
protection of civilians, my country firmly believes that
including protection activities in the mandates of
United Nations missions is important to ensuring the
effectiveness of humanitarian assistance in practical
terms. However, the report of the Secretary-General

and the conclusions of the workshop on the subject
organized in January 2009 by Australia and Uruguay
have underscored the need to develop clearer mandates
that provide the necessary resources in an efficient and
timely manner. In that regard, we await the
independent study requested by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which could
serve as a starting point in continuing to address this
issue.

Another important aspect of the protection of
civilians is to guarantee humanitarian assistance. If,
owing to the inability or lack of will of the parties
involved in a conflict to fulfil their obligations under
international humanitarian law, they should at least
make every effort to guarantee the passage of
shipments and materials and the delivery of emergency
assistance. The other fundamental aspect of access is
that persons escaping from combat areas must be
allowed safe passage to places where they are protected
from the hostilities.

With regard to the role ofjustice, that is an issue
to which my country, by virtue of its not-too-distant
past, attaches the outmost importance. Individuals who
commit war crimes, genocide or crimes against
humanity are responsible for very serious violations of
the law, and must therefore be criminally accountable
before the law. The Council has established two
international tribunals, namely, for the former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda. In addition, the
International Criminal Court is now fully operational. I
would like to recall that the International Criminal
Court is not a tribunal intended to supplant national
justice; instead it operates when the latter is not
functioning. In other words, ensuring accountability for
such crimes under national systems is not only an
obligation of States. As suggested by the Secretary-
General, it could also help to alleviate some of the
perceptions about the tension between the quest for
justice, on the one hand, and the search for peace, on
the other.

Allow me to conclude by reiterating that, under
international humanitarian law and Security Council
resolutions, attacks on civilians or other protected
persons in situations of armed conflict constitute a
blatant breach of international law. I urge strict
compliance with the obligations arising from the 1899
and 1907 Hague Conventions, the four 1949 Geneva

Conventions and their 1977 Protocols, and the
decisions of the Security Council.

