Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank Ambassadors
Mayoral, Loj and Motoc for their respective briefings
on the work of the three Committees and on their work
programme for the next stage. We note with
satisfaction that, since the last meeting at which
briefings were made, the three Committees have made
progress in their work.

The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities has conducted a preliminary review of the
third report of the Monitoring Team, and the Team
made another round of visits to the countries
concerned.

The Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
(CTED) is now fully operational, with all its staff on
board, and has further improved the efficiency and
quality of its work.

The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) has further
strengthened its cooperation with international
organizations.

I should like to take this opportunity to commend
the three Chairpersons for their work. I should like also
to make the following comments on the focus of the
work of the three Committees in the next phase.

The 1267 Committee should step up its efforts to
conclude the revision of its guidelines and enhance its
sanctions measures and working procedures.

The CTC should focus on providing
comprehensive policy guidance to the CTED and step
up its efforts to carry out the new tasks set out by
resolution 1624 (2005).

The 1540 Committee should continue to urge
those Member States that have not yet submitted their
reports to do so as soon as possible. China is actively
considering hosting a regional seminar on issues
relating to resolution 1540 (2004) and would welcome
the participation and support of interested countries.

I wish to stress once again that the three
Committees and their expert groups should maintain
and enhance their synergy and coordination and further
develop a complementary relationship.

The resolute fight against terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations continues to present a major
challenge to the international community. Acts of
violence such as the bombings in Bali, Indonesia, and
the terrorist attack in Nalchik, Russia, have sounded
yet another serious warning that terrorists continue to
run rampant and to blatantly challenge us.

We express out deepest condolences to the
families of the victims of such attacks. The Security
Council, as the organ bearing primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
must intensify its efforts to take concrete measures to
assist Member States in eliminating that scourge.

We warmly welcome resolution 1624 (2005)
condemning the incitement of terrorist acts, adopted by
the Council summit meeting held on 14 September
2005. That resolution testifies once again to the
determination of the members of the Security Council
to strengthen international cooperation to combat
terrorism.

As set out in the summit outcome document and
in Security Council resolution 1624 (2005), terrorism,
in all its forms and manifestations, irrespective of its
motivation, whenever and by whomsoever committed,
poses serious threats to international and regional
peace and security and should be condemned in the
strongest terms.

The eastern Turkistan terrorists have been
rampantly carrying out activities in Xinjiang, China,
committing numerous crimes and colluding with other
international terrorist organizations such as Al-Qaida
and the Taliban. Thus, they not only pose a terrorist
threat to China but also seriously jeopardize peace and
stability in the region.

It must be pointed out in particular that the
Eastern Turkistan Liberation Organization is one of the
terrorist organizations listed by China. Recently, the
organization openly declared, through an online video
blog, that it will take up armed struggle against China
by all possible means. A hyperlink to that video blog
remains on the website of the East Turkistan
Information Centre, which is another terrorist
organization listed by the Chinese Government.

That flagrant incitement to terrorism shows once
again that the Eastern Turkistan Liberation
Organization and other East Turkistan groups are
extremely violent terrorist organizations. As the eastern
Turkistan groups are flagrantly threatening terrorist
violence, China urges all countries, especially those
countries where eastern Turkistan terrorists are found
and are active, to be more vigilant and strictly fulfil
their obligations under Security Council resolution
1624 (2005) by taking the necessary measures against
the East Turkistan Liberation Organization and its
members and other East Turkistan terrorists, firmly
suppressing their terrorist activities and bringing the
perpetrators to justice.

I wish to reiterate that, in accordance with the
purposes and the principles of the United Nations
Charter and the relevant Council resolutions, China
will continue to enhance its cooperation with the
international community and spare no effort to combat
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, in order to
make its contribution to world peace and security.

