Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank the Russian
Federation for organizing this briefing, and we reiterate
our congratulations on your assumption, Mr. President,
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of September. It is an honour to have among us Minister
Pandor and Ms. Viotti. Allow us to also extend our
thanks to the briefers for their detailed remarks.

The reasons that States find themselves immersed
in ongoing conflicts are varied, but among the most
common are economic crises, the struggle for access
to, and control of, natural resources, terrorism, ethnic
and religious differences and the effects of climate
change. That diverse set of factors makes it necessary
to approach the issue of security and development in
Africa from a broad and holistic perspective.

Mali, the Sudan, Libya and Somalia, to mention
a few places, serve to demonstrate that the threats
facing the African continent must be addressed in
a comprehensive manner, while maintaining the
understanding that the primary responsibility for the
future ofthe region is in the hands ofAfrican countries,
with cooperation from the international community.

First, we wish to underscore the importance of the
Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020. That initiative
is quite ambitious but also necessary, and we welcome
the progress made by the member States of the African
Union in implementing the Master Roadmap of
Practical Steps to achieve that overarching objective.
Despite the efforts undertaken by the international
community and the significant strides made by many
African countries in achieving peace and stability,
major challenges remain. Efforts must be redoubled
to continue supporting the region in that endeavour,
bearing in mind that the aspirations for peace, security
and stability in Africa and the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals are common priorities,
as outlined in the African Union's Agenda 2063 and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which
constitute a reinforced alliance for peace and security
in the region.

With a View to addressing the major challenges
facing the African region, it is crucial to address the
immediate and root causes of conflicts before they
reach the agenda of the Security Council. The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, with its goal of
peaceful, inclusive and sustainable societies, represents
the master plan for prevention.

Collective action can be strengthened by engaging
regional and subregional bodies, particularly in
prevention, development and post-conflict efforts.
We recognize the work being carried out by the
Peacebuilding Commission and understand that
enhanced collaboration with the Security Council
must be ensured in order to guarantee due attention
to countries emerging from conflict. It is important
to continue using the Commission's convening
power to strengthen strategic alliances with regional
and subregional organizations, since they serve as
forums for promoting coherence with initiatives
undertaken at the national level by allowing for regular
information exchange.

The Dominican Republic reiterates its commitment
to achieving and maintaining international peace and
security, which is why we extend our support to the
States of the African Union in their efforts to realize a
conflict-free continent. We urge regional organizations
to step up their activities in mediation and promoting
dialogue between the parties, including civil society,
with the aim of building the trust and political will
necessary to build sustainable peace in the region. The
active participation of organizations such as the African
Union is a vital tool for the peaceful and inclusive
resolution of conflicts. Its leadership is essential for
building trust and readiness among parties to enter into
dialogue conducive to peace.

