Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of Latvia, Lithuania and
my country, Estonia. We fully associate ourselves with
the statement made on behalf of the European Union.

We thank France for convening today's open debate,
and the Secretary-General, his Special Representative
and the civil society representative for their briefings.

The special attention given to non-State armed
groups is quite relevant in the light of the latest
Secretary-General's report (S/2017/821) given that they
have committed nearly three times more violations than
Government forces. That presents a new set of challenges
to Member States. We thank the Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba,
and UNICEF for their undisputed work in the field.
It is reassuring to read in the Secretary-General's
report that there have been positive developments with
regard to engagements with parties to conflicts. We
salute the successes achieved through Children, Not
Soldiers campaign.

(spoke in English)

Sadly, however, compared to the previous year, in
some countries, for example in Syria and Somalia, the
recruitment and use of children has more than doubled.
Also, the number of casualties has reached an all-time
high in Afghanistan and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We share the Secretary-General's concern
for the impact that the increasing disrespect for
international law has had on children. Member States
must uphold their obligations under international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
Moreover, it is important to redouble the pressure on
non-State armed groups that recruit and use children in
their ever-expanding activities across borders.

In that regard, we clearly see impunity as one
of the main enablers of the recurrence of such grave
Violations against children. It is only by consistent
prosecution that we can deter the commission of such
crimes. We therefore believe that the Security Council
should influence State and non-State actors in conflict
zones and get them to comply with international law,
including by better use of sanctions instruments, as well
as by referring matters to the International Criminal
Court in situations where States are unable or unwilling
to bring perpetrators to justice domestically.

At the same time, we must keep in mind that
children drawn into war should be primarily seen as
Victims and not as criminals. Every effort should be
made to bring about their reintegration into normal
life, especially former girl soldiers and repeated rape
victims, who are often shunned and rejected by their
families and communities. Furthermore, strengthening
child protection systems is one ofthe most cost-effective
measures for building resilience and promoting
sustainable development. Strong child-protection
systems can mitigate the impacts of conflicts and crises
on boys and girls. Allowing children to be children can
become the strongest and most cost-effective measure
for rehabilitating and reintegrating children with
traumatic experiences.

Finally, we all know that education is one of the
key elements in prevention. It is therefore important to
ensure education for children in times of crisis. During
emergencies, children in schools can be cared for,
accounted for andprotected from abduction, recruitment,
and sexual and economic exploitation. Education also
helps to avoid recruitment or re-recruitment and paves
the way to better reintegration into society.

