Mr. Batu (Turkey): It gives me great pleasure to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January. We are
confident that under your able guidance the Council will
successfully carry out its responsibilities.

I should like also to pay tribute to Ambassador
Bakuramutsa of Rwanda for his able work as President of
the Council last month.

It is also a great pleasure to welcome the Foreign
Minister of Italy, a friendly and allied country.

On numerous occasions we have expressed before this
Council our views on the ongoing tragedy in Bosnia. I do
not intend to repeat them. Today, I should like to confine
my statement to our hope that the agreement on the
complete cessation of hostilities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
will not remain simply an agreement on paper, but will
become a first step towards the achievement of a just and
viable peace. To that end, this agreement should not be
allowed to lead in any way to a freezing of the situation on
the ground. Such a freezing could seriously undermine the
chances of a just and viable peace. Therefore, we believe
it is high time for credible pressure on the Bosnian Serbs
to make them accept the peace plan unconditionally. Such
pressure should be exerted without further delay.

Unfortunately, there are reports that Serbian aggression
is continuing in and around the Bihac region. The so-called
Abdic forces and the Croatian Serbs should not be allowed
to violate this agreement and the border between Croatia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Croatian Serbs'
involvement in the aggression is a clear sign of defiance of
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Resolutions 824
(1993) and 836 (1993) clearly define the mandate of the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) vis-a-vis
the safe areas. UNPROFOR is committed to defend the
safe areas. The full implementation of this mandate is still
a very urgent and vital need. In this context, we welcome
the proposal of the Force Commander pertaining to the
strengthening of UNPROFOR with a view to enabling it
to contribute better to the implementation of the
agreement on the complete cessation of hostilities. The
reinforcement of UNPROFOR should be completed as
soon as possible.

We have serious reservations about the draft
resolution. The monitoring mechanism established under
resolution 943 (1994) is not effective. There are still only
about 200 monitors in the Mission. Because of this
shortage of manpower for the monitoring of a long
border, the effectiveness and credibility of the monitors
are widely questioned.

On the other hand, it is true that the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) could
play an important role in convincing Karadzic forces to
accept the peace plan. The adoption of resolution 943
(1994) was based on the optimistic assumption that if
Serbia and Montenegro had been encouraged it could
have played an instrumental role to this end. However, a
hundred days elapsed and the Serbs continued their
defiance of the will of international community. The
peace plan has still to be accepted by the Bosnian Serbs.

During this period we have also witnessed a new
round of aggression against the safe area of Bihac, in
which the Croatian Serbs were also involved.

Despite Serbia and Montenegro's claim that it has
closed its borders with the Serb-held areas of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and despite the certification provided by the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia
(ICFY) Mission monitoring the border, many independent
international sources acknowledge that the border
continues to be violated through the transport of strategic
material and personnel. It is extremely important that the
monitoring mechanisms be strengthened and the number
of monitors increased. In addition, serious consideration
should be given to independent third-party sources.

Furthermore, having examined the report of the
Co-Chairmen of the ICFY Steering Committee, we have
once again learned that the border monitoring Mission,
under the direction of the Co-Chairmen, has approved

 

fuel shipments to the so-called Croatian Serbs. This is a
clear violation of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic
of Croatia, as well as of resolution 820 (1993). It was these
fuel shipments that enabled Croatian Serbs to continue their
aggression against the safe area of Bihac. Therefore, we
hope that the adoption of this draft resolution will at least
contribute to the termination of these shipments. We also
look forward to the strengthening of mechanisms for
deterring and reporting violations.

In conclusion, I once again strongly urge the Serbian
side to accept the peace plan unconditionally.

