Mr. Butler (Australia): It gives me great pleasure to
be at this table to offer you, Mr. President,
congratulations on assuming the high office that you now
hold.

This meeting of the Security Council is a remarkable
one. It takes place at the beginning of the year in which
the United Nations will mark its fiftieth year of life. It is
focused on a paper by the Secretary-General which, with
impressive clarity, analyses major issues revealed by, and
needing to be addressed in, the period of transition -
transition from the old to the new - through which we
are passing.

Australia is grateful to the Secretary-General and his
staff for providing the Supplement to "An Agenda for
Peace". We also welcome the opportunity that the

 

Security Council has provided for the paper to be discussed
in an open debate.

This debate is significant because the subjects which
are addressed by the Secretary-General concern all States
Members of the Organization and are ones on which we
must all work together if the "hard decisions" - to use the
Secretary-General's words - which he rightly says need to
be taken are to be taken. This debate also reflects once
again the new directions the Council has embarked upon in
taking account, in its working methods, of the interests of
non-Member States.

The Supplement identifies clearly the challenges and
opportunities that the United Nations faces, following the
end of the cold war and in an increasingly complex global
environment. It outlines the significant action which has
been taken in many areas since the Security Council
Summit in 1992, and the subsequent publication of "An
Agenda for Peace", to strengthen the role and functioning
of the United Nations in order to enable it to respond
effectively to those challenges and opportunities.

These are important features of the Supplement, but in
our View its chief value lies in its identification of the
issues on which attention needs to be focused in the future,
and the steps needed to be taken to strengthen our common
capacity to deal with threats to peace and security.

That capacity must be developed both intrinsically and
at a fundamental level, a conceptual level. For these
purposes we need action in three main fields: in economic
and social development; in continuing development of all
regimes of disarmament; and in major progress on
reshaping, on reintegrating, the United Nations itself.

With respect to economic and social development, we
are required, because of the pledge in the Charter - I am
talking about Article 56 - but also for human and ethical
reasons to seize the opportunity of the post-cold-war period
to dramatically change our collective effort in support of
the world's people. But there is another reason, relevant to
today's debate.

As the Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator
Gareth Evans, said at the forty-ninth session of the General
Assembly, in his general debate statement,

"The distinction between peace and security on
the one hand and development on the other has too
often been a matter for sterile and unhelpful debate,
with attempts to trade off one for the other as key
goals for the United Nations. Any viable modern
concept of international peace, let alone peace within
States, must recognize that the two are indissolubly
bound up with each other: there can be no
sustainable peace without development, and no
development without peace." (Ofiicial Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session, Plenary
Meetings, 15th meeting, p. 8)

For all of these reasons, Australia welcomed the
Secretary-General' s "Agenda for Development", following
on, as it does, from "An Agenda for Peace". Among other
very important considerations, it fully recognizes the
relationship between peace and development, and it
acknowledges that equitable development eradicates many
of the socio-political conditions in which threats to peace
breed. And it is only through such an integrated approach
that we will be able to strengthen our common capacity
to deal with the threats to peace and security to which the
Secretary-General's paper refers.

The Secretary-General's paper also gives a very
welcome attention to disarmament, on all levels.

As we will review the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) just three months
from now, it is important to recognize what is at stake, 25
years after the entry into force of that unique agreement.
The Non-Proliferation Treaty addresses a question which
was not able to be addressed when the Charter was
written, but one placed squarely on the agenda of history
only months after San Francisco. That question is and
was: will we live in a world permanently characterized by
nuclear weapons? The answer given in that Treaty, by
nuclear and non-nuclear weapon States alike, was "No".

We must extend indefinitely the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. It is unthinkable that we should in any way
qualify that clear answer given in 1968. And we must use
the review and extension Conference to further strengthen
the application, the effectiveness and the implementation
of the Treaty.

In his paper the Secretary-General also mentioned
"micro-disarmament", to use his phrase. We strongly
support him in this. The new world we are building must
be freed from the destruction and waste caused by small
conventional weapons. This Organization alone can forge
international agreement on such measures, including
measures on the clandestine arms trade, a trade which is
so often associated with the major threats to peace and

 

security of people caused by the narcotics trade and by
international criminality.
In the consideration of the current situation, two and
a half years after the publication of "An Agenda for Peace",
when the United Nations is still passing through a period of
transition, it is appropriate that the Secretary-General should
mention comprehensively the range of instruments which
the United Nations has developed for controlling and
resolving conflicts between and within States, instruments
such as preventive diplomacy and peacemaking, peace-
keeping, peace-building, disarmament, sanctions and peace
enforcement.

All of these instruments have been employed in
pursuit of the objective of a stronger international security
environment. All have a role and a contribution to make.
But the particular instrument that I wish to highlight in my
statement today is that of preventive diplomacy. We
highlight it because of its extreme relevance to the roots of
conflicts we are witnessing in contemporary circumstances
and because it is the paradigm of a reintegrated United
Nations.

One of the most crucial elements in any functioning
system of cooperative security is an effective capacity for
preventive diplomacy. We note - and express our
appreciation to him for them - the efforts the Secretary-
General has made to strengthen the United Nations capacity
in this field. But Australia is convinced that more can and
should be done to prevent disputes escalating into armed
conflict by giving increased attention to preventive
diplomacy. By doing so, we will be making an invaluable
commitment and contribution to creating a more peaceful
and stable world.

As a major means to the peaceful settlement of
disputes, preventive diplomacy is both consistent with the
spirit and in accordance with the letter of the Charter of the
United Nations.

An essential and accepted principle of preventive
diplomacy is respect for the principles of sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the political independence of States.
By nature, preventive diplomacy techniques, as set out in
Article 33 of the Charter, are non-intrusive and
non-coercive, as they require the consent of the disputing
parties. This is recognized by the Secretary-General in his
position paper, where he refers to the fact that

"Clearly the United Nations cannot impose its

preventive and peacemaking services on Member

States who do not want them." (S/1991/1, para. 28)

One of the strengths of preventive diplomacy is that
it is all about non-military measures. It is quite distinct
from preventive deployment using peace-keeping forces.
In fact, the record shows that there has been limited use
of preventive deployment, whereas the use of dispute
settlement machinery has a long history, as illustrated by
the United Nations handbook on the peaceful settlement
of disputes.

It is also important to remember that strengthening
the United Nations role in preventive diplomacy would
not entail any diversion of attention or resources from the
critical task of promoting development. The figures speak
for themselves: a very small proportion of United Nations
resources has so far been used for preventive diplomacy
and peacemaking.

We also strongly believe that developing a greater
ability within the United Nations system to solve disputes
peacefully and avoid the costs of armed conflict is
necessary as a matter of balance between the vital role of
the Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security - but overloaded with crises and
often called upon to act at the eleventh hour - and the
General Assembly, which, with the benefit of all Member
States' views and with the opportunity to reflect on
questions of principle and general approach, can and
should contribute its views on the security role of the
United Nations and what can be done to act sooner to
prevent the escalation of disputes into conflict. It is also
a matter of balance between the costs - financial and in
terms of a tax on the credibility of the United Nations -
of reliance on peace-keeping and the costs of other
military options when there is enormous scope to develop
negotiation, good offices and other techniques for the
peaceful settlement of disputes. There is also the potential
to strengthen the Secretary-General's own role in
preventive diplomacy, as he mentions in his paper.

Preventive diplomacy is, in short, a field rich with
promise and opportunity. We must give greater attention
to strengthening this key element in our common search
for a more effective peace and security system.

In summary, we Australians believe that we need a
reintegrated United Nations, a United Nations which
addresses and is competent in the relevant range of
contemporary concerns in development and disarmament

 

and with respect to threats to the security of people as well
as of States. The "Supplement to An Agenda for Peace"
and indeed today's debate are strong steps along that path.

