Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
1, too, would like to thank the Italian presidency
for convening today's briefing. My thanks also go
to our briefers, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and the Police Commissioners of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

With the adoption of resolution 2185 (2014), the
Security Council adopted its first resolution related
to activities of United Nations police and underscored
that police work makes a valuable contribution to
peacekeeping. The growing relevance and importance
ofpolice work in peacekeeping operations was manifest
in the holding of the first Chiefs of Police Summit,
which took place in June 2016, where Ministers of
the Interior, Heads of Police and high-level officials
from more than 100 Member States met to analyse the
evolution of United Nations police work.

Uruguay welcomes today's unanimous adoption
of resolution 2382 (2017), which highlights the interest
generated on this issue. With this resolution, the
Security Council clearly sets out the central role played
by United Nations police in peacekeeping efforts and
the maintenance of international security. In that
regard, the resolution provides strategic guidance to
help to strengthen the ongoing efforts of the police,
as well as to ensure that police components are able
to continue to evolve hand in hand with the reform
process of peacekeeping operations. I would therefore
like to thank the Italian presidency for having taken
the initiative of drafting the resolution. I also thank
the other members of the Council for their constructive
spirit throughout the negotiations, which made it
possible to arrive at an ambitious consensual text.

Uruguay is a long-standing contributing country
and is highly committed to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. My country has been contributing police
to peacekeeping operations since 1991, when we first
deployed personnel to the United Nations Verification
Mission in Guatemala. To date we have without
interruption contributed to numerous United Nations
missions, including those in Mozambique, Timor-
Leste, Western Sahara, Angola, Liberia, C6te D'Ivoire
and Haiti. Our participation is oriented towards the
deployment of individual police officers, who mostly
act as instructors and advisers, and in some cases also
undertake executive tasks.
As a police-contributing country, Uruguay wishes
to express its gratitude for the assessment work of the
Police Division of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, in particular its visits to countries that
decide to contribute personnel. In that connection,
it is essential to continue to improve training for
formed police units and police officials, particularly
in the area of protecting civilians, taking into account
the increasingly complex environments in which
peacekeeping operations are deployed.

Also as a police-contributing country, Uruguay
meets all United Nations requirements thanks to the
training provided by our National Peace Operations
Training Institute, where both military and the police
components for service with the United Nations are
trained. Training is comprehensive, with a special
focus on zero-tolerance policies on sexual abuse and
exploitation, gender policies and human rights training.

To make this meeting a little more interactive, as
you, Mr. President, called for at its commencement, I
would like to direct a question to MINUJUSTH Police
Commissioner Monchotte. In his judgement, what
will be the major challenges facing MINUJUSTH in
successfully fulfilling its mandate?

