At the outset, allow me to thank the briefers - the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and the Director of civil society organization Save Act Mine, Mr. Jamal Usseni Jamael. I will focus my comments on three points. But before I begin, allow me to thank the Special Representative, the United Nations and members of the Security Council for the support and the kind words of sympathy they offered for the fallen Indonesian peacekeeper from the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). It is a sad time for us in Indonesia, as we had never had a casualty from an attack since we started joining United Nations peacekeeping missions in 1957. In our 63-year course of services to the United Nations, we have contributed more than 44,800 troops, and this is the first time we have experienced a fatality as the result of an attack. The most difficult and painful task that I have ever had to fulfil in my years-long service as an Indonesian Ambassador to the United Nations is to write a personal letter to the family of the fallen, expressing our condolences. I will convey all the messages of condolences I have received from Council members to my Government and to the family of the fallen peacekeeper, as well as to the other peacekeeper who, wounded in the incident, is recuperating. The fallen Indonesian peacekeeper was an engineer charged with building a bridge near Beni in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He was there to strengthen the local infrastructure and support the livelihoods of the people in the eastern part of the country. Just like us, he was doing his job under the banner of United Nations idealism with a view to saving and improving the lives of the Congolese. I pay tribute to all other fallen Blue Helmets who have served with honour in MONUSCO and in other United Nations missions all over the world and made the ultimate sacrifice for global peace and security. We shall never forget their service. This tragedy brings me to my first point, which is the need to ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers. Increasing numbers of attacks by such armed groups as the Allied Democratic Forces have claimed numerous civilian lives, and now they have claimed the life of a peacekeeper. This was the first casualty in MONUSCO from attacks in two years. To be able to carry out its mandate of protecting civilians, MONUSCO needs to first protect itself. We have heard that attacks directed against peacekeepers in United Nations peacekeeping missions have increased across the board. This is indeed worrisome, since United Nations peacekeeping missions are the face of the Organization on the ground. Attacks on its peacekeepers are an attack on the United Nations itself. It is time for us to seriously look at our peacekeeping efforts and increase professionalism and performance, as well as funding and capacity. The safety and security of peacekeepers remains high on Indonesia's list of priorities. We will continue our efforts aimed at saving lives and protecting civilians through community engagement, winning the hearts and minds of the people and building their trust. Our commitment has helped the Mission's disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process, including facilitating the surrender of more than 300 former combatants and more than 50 weapons. Secondly, we need to maintain the momentum of peace that began in the Democratic Republic of the Congo last year. The Central African and the Great Lakes regions have been positively affected by the peaceful transfer of power in the country in 2019. This is indeed an opportunity that should not be missed. We call for all partners to use this momentum to strengthen their support and assistance to the Democratic Republic. Nevertheless, having heard the Special Representative's briefing just now, we are deeply concerned at the rise of intercommunal conflicts, the proliferation of militias and armed groups, the killing of civilians and the use of hate speech. We concur with her assertions that efforts to de-soldier communities from militias is vital if we are to tackle the escalation of tensions. We condemn all attacks against innocent civilians. We need to enhance efforts to ensure that the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues on a path of peace so that its people may experience peace, stability and prosperity. To that end, we recognize the role that the country's neighbours and regional organizations have to play to help maintain this peaceful climate. Thirdly, we need to increase humanitarian assistance in the country. We join the Secretary-General in commending the Congolese Government for taking swift and decisive action to limit the spread of the coronavirus. Nevertheless, we also realize that the pandemic's socioeconomic impact on the country complicates the efforts to address the political, developmental and humanitarian challenges facing the country. The re-emergence of the Ebola virus disease has also presented the country with additional public-health challenges. I join the call of the Secretary-General for armed groups to lay down their weapons so that efforts to combat these public health challenges can continue unimpeded. We also call for all partners to increase their humanitarian support for the country. We should ensure that our brothers and sisters in the Democratic Republic of the Congo continue on the path of peace. Indonesia will continue to support efforts to this end with its own sons and daughters on the ground.
