Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism; Ms. Michele
Coninsx, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate; and Ms. Joana Cook,
Senior Research Fellow at the International Centre for
the Study of Radicalisation and Political Violence, for
their valuable briefings on the threats that Da'esh poses
to international peace and security.

I would like to focus in my statement on three
main issues: first, the threat posed by Da'esh; secondly,
technology and terrorist groups; and, thirdly, the
desired international cooperation.

First, with regard to the threat posed by Da'esh,
despite the fact that it is diminishing in Iraq and Syria,
Da'esh is still capable ofthreatening regional peace and
security. It is estimated at having 20,000 combatants
today, who are able to quickly adapt to the conditions in
which they operate. It has transformed from a regional
entity into a covert network, which is difficult to track
and whose financial resources difficult to trace. The
phenomenon of returning and relocating terrorist
fighters and their families poses a threat to their own
countries as well as to third countries, given the field
military expertise they have acquired. That requires
that we all adopt a comprehensive and collective
approach by taking precautionary measures to address
the phenomenon, including through exchanging
information on the matter. In that regard, we commend
the support that the United Nations is offering to
Member States in the area of capacity-building for
counter-terrorism.

Secondly, with respect to technology and terrorist
groups, social networking continues to constitute
an important resource for terrorist groups to spread
their radical ideologies. That requires us to enhance
international efforts to cooperate on adopting measures
to prevent and fight those groups that exploit technology
and communications. In that regard, we commend
the initiatives launched by the United Nations within
the framework of enhanced cooperation with small
technology companies and Governments with a view to
limiting the capacity of terrorists to use the Internet for
their terrorist purposes.

Thirdly, pertaining to the desired international
cooperation, the State ofKuwait would like to underscore
the importance of international cooperation to address
the threat posed by terrorist fighters, including in
the following areas: exchanging information, border
security, improving protection, dealing with the
circumstances that lead to the spread of terrorism and
preventing incitement to terrorist acts. We must also
limit the financial support that is available to terrorist
fighters, conduct and implement threat assessments of
terrorist fighters, and in addition to all that make efforts
to undertake judicial prosecutions, rehabilitation and
reintegration, in line with international law.

We also encourage bolstering international
cooperation between States and international
organizations such as INTERPOL and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, with a view
to exchanging information and expertise and
implementing joint counter-terrorism programmes.
Moreover, we encourage Member States to take
advantage of relevant programmes being offered by the
United Nations and its specialized agencies and other
relevant international organizations.

We underscore the need to hold accountable those
responsible for committing terrorist acts and violations
of human rights. In that regard, we support the
Investigative Team that was established by the Security
Council in resolution 2379 (2017) to support efforts
aimed at holding Da'esh accountable for the crimes it
perpetrated in Iraq.

In the context of the efforts made by the State of
Kuwait as a member of the coalition to fight Da'esh at
the international level, my country hosted a ministerial
meeting for the international coalition against Da'esh on
13 February, in which 70 States and four international
organizations participated to formulate strategies and
plans to combat terrorism. It was the first meeting ofits
kind since Da'esh was defeated in Iraq.

The State of Kuwait condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations regardless of the motivations
behind it. Terrorism constitutes a criminal act that is
unjustifiable and must not be linked to any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnicity. Combating
terrorism requires mobilizing all international efforts
to confront that criminal scourge by adopting measures
that guarantee respect for human rights, the rule
of law and good governance, as well as the peaceful
coexistence of religions and respect for their symbols
and sanctity, while dealing with the conditions that lead
to the spread of terrorism, stopping incitement to hatred
and rejecting all forms of extremism and violence.

