Mr. Trujillo Garcia (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I must begin my remarks by thanking everyone for the
unanimous expression of condolences and solidarity
following the recent heinous terrorist attack in Bogota,
which resulted in more than 20 deaths and left close to
70 injured.

I thank Foreign Minister Miguel Vargas Maldonado
for presiding over this informative meeting. I
congratulate the Dominican Republic, Belgium,
Germany, Indonesia, whose Minister for Foreign
Affairs is with here with us, and South Africa on their
election to serve as non-permanent members of the
Security Council.

I also convey my Government's appreciation of
Mr. Jean Arnault for his work at the helm of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, and I once
again welcome Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, with
whom I had an opportunity to meet in Bogota, along
with President Ivan Duque and Mr. Emilio Archila
Pefialosa, High Counsellor for Post-Conflict, who is
with me today.

We welcome the fact that the report (S/2018/1159)
recognizes that the first 100 days of President Duque's
Administration witnessed his explicit commitment to
the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
within the framework of his Government's agenda.

With regard to the initiatives that have been
submitted to the Congress of Colombia, we must
specify that, as set out in the "Peace with legality"
policy, which was put in place last December, all
adjustments to the regulatory framework adopted
under the agreement - namely, that henceforth neither
drug trafficking nor kidnapping will be recognized as
crimes related to political crimes and that the treatment
of sexual crimes committed against minors will be
reviewed - have been openly proposed as legislative
acts so that they will have an effect on the future.

On the path to implementation, the Government
of President Duque has reiterated its commitment to
overcoming obstacles and correcting the problems it
has encountered. We are doing so with a long-term
perspective to eliminate the conditions that have
protected many forms of violence throughout our
history, based on the coordination of different State
agencies and prioritizing victims' rights and the
legitimate expectations of those who remain within
the legal framework, while honouring in good faith the
commitments undertaken. Allow me to highlight some
concrete examples of this commitment.

With the active participation of senators and
representatives belonging to the political party that
emerged from the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of the former illegal armed group, the
Congress of Colombia is discussing various initiatives
related to the agenda of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
including the reforms that I already mentioned. We
proposedthoseinitiativessothattheywillbeinforceinthe
future with a View to broadening the national consensus
necessary to ensure that the implementation of the
Final Agreement is politically and socially sustainable.
At the same time, the Government obtained credit to
finance the first stage of the Multipurpose Cadaster
Project. The first phase will be focused on approximately
70 of the country's municipalities, of which 50 per
cent belong to those marked as priorities within the
development programmes with aterritorial focus. Within
the framework of the "Peace with legality" policy, we
will take advantage of all available tools, such as the
development programmes with a territorial focus, the
implementation of which involves 11,000 villages of 170
municipalities and will benefit nearly 7 million people.
In that, too, we can see tangible progress in the social
and economic reintegration of former combatants of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP).

Since September 2018, the Government of
President Duque Marquez has been working closely
with representatives of the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Coman (FARC) to focus the
efforts of the body responsible for the follow-up to
the reintegration process on its role as a high-level
executive and strategic body with the aim of adopting a
road map in line with its responsibilities. As indicated
in the Secretary-General's report, 20 collective projects
and 29 individual income-generating projects, valued
at $3.7 million, have been approved, which will benefit
1,340 ex-combatants, including 366 women.

In line with this new momentum, the departments
have established departmental reintegration boards,
with very positive effects. The Government believes
that one of its functions is to create the right conditions
and provide leadership, so that the international
community and the private sector are actively involved
in reintegration. When that is achieved, one cannot,
obviously, believe that the projects developed with that
support are a failure on the part of the State, but rather
an achievement of the Government. Although we agree
that land may not have been released as quickly as
possible by the previous Administration, it is relevant
and worth mentioning that a number of productive
projects have been sustainably realized with access
to land in the form of leases, thanks to the technical,
commercial and financial support of many entities that
we have asked to strengthen the development of those
projects, such as iNNpulsa, which is the Government
entity that provides expertise in economic projects
and that falls under the umbrella of the Ministry of
Commerce, Industry and Tourism.

Along the same lines - and undoubtedly because
of the dates on which the information was collected,
it was not possible to indicate this in the report - the
Government, through a great effort, headed by the
Ministry of Health and Social Protection, carried out
ajudicious study of needs and ensured health coverage
in the transitional areas for training and reintegration
under better conditions than those that had been
carried out up until August of 2018. In addition, and in
developing a project that had been going on for some
time and that the Verification Mission was aware of,
the Government managed to extend food distribution
until August 2019.

Lastly, the full activation of the Comprehensive
System of Truth, Justice, Reparation andNon-Repetition,
with the beginning of Truth Commission's work last
November, is of great importance. On 16 January, in
commemoration ofits first year ofoperation, the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace reported a positive balance: 11,675
people had signed agreements subjecting themselves
to the authority of the Jurisdiction, of which 9,687
were former members of the FARC-EP and 1,938 were
members of the public security forces. The Government
shares the expectations of all Colombians with regard
to transitional justice - it hopes that its credibility will
be strengthened and, in doing so, its functioning will be
enhanced, in accordance with the mandate of each of its
components and with Colombia's commitments under
international law.

The Government of President Duque Marquez
attaches the utmost importance to ensuring the safety
of ex-combatants, their leaders and the leaders of
voluntary crop substitution programmes. In that regard,
we agree with the value that the report places on the
effort that the Government has made, the plausible
results and the expectation that we are already working
on a protection plan for the local elections to be held
in October.

The Government of Colombia condemns without
hesitation unacceptable acts that affect social leaders
and defenders, which are linked to factors such as the
intensification of competition for the domination and
control of different criminal economies, the stabilization
of the areas in which the FARC-EP guerrillas formerly
exerted its influence, the unprecedented increase in
illicit crops and the ongoing activity of various kinds
of illegal armed groups. The Office of the Attorney
General has been working to strengthen investigative
processes and has shed light on 53.36 per cent of cases
to date. By adopting, in November 2018, the Action
Plan for the Protection of Social and Community
Leaders, Human Rights Defenders and Journalists, we
further strengthened the State's capacity to implement
effective measures for the prevention, protection and
punishment of these crimes.

With regard to legal guarantees for former FARC-
EP combatants, I would also mention that, during this
period, the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace
has been resolving incidents related to the transition
to legality.

The report also highlights the very difficult
situation that we inherited with regard to the increase
in illicit crops in Colombia. In that context, we share
the report's assessment that reducing violence and
insecurity is inextricably linked to success in combating
illegal economic activity, especially drug trafficking,
which is of particular importance.

We will spare no effort to continue to tackle the
world drug problem firmly, in a comprehensive and
balanced manner, in all its dimensions and in all the
links in the chain. Accordingly, we are intensifying our
efforts and adopting a new policy to effectively address
all the relevant issues. Beyond that, we claim the
importance of the principle of shared responsibility as
the basis for the international collective action needed
to confront the world drug problem. This has been
demonstrated by the eradication of 30,262 hectares of
illicit crops between 7 August and 26 December 2018.
In this context, we hope that, with the adjustments
made to the "Peace with legality" stabilization policy
and the National Comprehensive Programme for the
Substitution ofIllicit Crops, with the various initiatives
that will be implemented, will have a sustainable effect
over time.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the
main challenge today is to achieve the effective
implementation of plans and programmes designed
to provide the most vulnerable communities, victims
and former FARC-EP members with greater security,
better access to public goods and services, and viable
alternatives to criminal economies. In accordance
with the relevance that the Government gives to the
issue, the Vice-President of the Republic and the High
Counsellor for Post-Conflict received a first report from
the international verification component for gender
in November, in which the Government's high-level
forum on gender had already been cited. The session
of the forum was held on 16 January 2019, at which
the guidelines that its president, the High Counsellor
for Post-Conflict, presented, were approved, with the
decisive participation of the Presidential Counsellor
for Equity for Women. At the same time, the gender
technical group of the National Reintegration
Council has continued to be relevant in promoting
comprehensive reintegration.

The monitoring, support and facilitation role of the
United Nations is of great importance in verifying the
effective implementation of the Final Agreement and
the fulfilment of the commitments made. We believe
that these activities should take place within the
mandate received and with the understanding that it is
the National Government of Colombia that must lead
all fronts of implementation and that the most valuable
way to contribute is to coordinate the work with the
"Peace with legality" plan and the developments that
will come from it, many of which will have to engage
at local levels.

We highly value the contribution of the Verification
Mission to the realization of this shared purpose,
and we hope to maintain a constructive and trusting
relationship with it, within the terms of its mandate and
of our Constitution and our laws.

