Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): In view of the announcements made
by the President of the United States concerning his
unilateral recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of
Israel and his decision to start taking steps to move
the United States Embassy to that city, eight Security
Council delegations requested the Council's presidency
to convene this emergency meeting. The Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries has taken the same stance in
that regard, as have the African Union and the League of
Arab States. A series of statements by several Member
States also attest to the importance of the issue that we
are addressing today.

Bolivia wishes to clearly and unequivocally state
that it opposes that unilateral decision, as it is not only
contrary to international law, but it is also harmful
and undermines the possibility of achieving a just and
lasting peace between Israel and Palestine. The decision
is extremely damaging and irresponsible, because it
further exacerbates the already unstable situation in the
Middle East, in addition to being in contravention of
the Charter of the United Nations and Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions. That decision will
affect not only Palestinians and Israelis, but the entire
region. It will be exploited by extremists and fule
violence by radicals.

Likewise, that unilateral decision affects the
multicultural and multi-religious identity of Jerusalem,
which Pope Francis put in the following words:

"I cannot silence my deep concern for the situation
that has been created in recent days. At the same
time, I urgently call on all parties to strive to
respect the status quo, in accordance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions. Jerusalem is
a unique city; it is sacred to Jews, Christians and
Muslims, who therein venerate the holy places of
their respective religions. It has a special vocation
for peace."

We express our resolute commitment to all
international efforts that lead to apeaceful solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In that regard, we of course
support initiatives such as the Quartet road map, the
Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and others
that constitute guarantees for ajust and lasting peace, so
that both peoples can live within recognized and secure
borders. Bolivia is convinced that the only alternative
to resolving this conflict is the two-State solution - a
free, sovereign and independent Palestinian State within

the pre-l967 international borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions.

It is necessary to remember that, while there are two
parties to this conflict, they are not on an equal footing.
One of the parties, Israel, is the occupying Power; the
other, Palestine, is an occupied people. There is historic
and undeniable inequality between them. One of the
parties has used, and uses, force to occupy the territory
of the other. One of the parties has built a wall that,
according to an advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice, constitutes a violation of international
law. One of the parties builds illegal settlements in
the territory of the other. One of the parties forcibly
displaces civilians, confiscates land, demolishes homes
and transfers settlers to illegally built settlements. One
of the parties imposes a blockade on Gaza, with terrible
humanitarian consequences, restricting access to basic
services. One of the parties has caused 5 million
Palestinians to become refugees. One of the parties
appropriates the water resources and agricultural lands
of the other. One of the parties has unleashed a brutal
military campaign against the Palestinian people. One
of the parties commits serious human rights violations
and has allegedly committed war crimes. One of the
parties is responsible for the forced displacement of
Palestinian civilians. One of the parties violates its
international obligations and systematically violates
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.

That is the result of the longest military occupation
in the modern world. In recent years and months,
settlements have increased exponentially, and a
discriminatory economic, political, juridical and social
system has been emplaced. This situation removes us
further from the two-State solution.

We must ask ourselves - how is such a situation
occurring in the twenty-first century? How is it
admissible that the series of resolutions of the Council
are not being implemented, not just with regard to
Jerusalem but concerning the conflict in general? We
must recognize that calls for dialogue and negotiations
are insufficient. The Security Council bears a
responsibility to take action and decisions; otherwise,
the Security Council will also become an occupied
territory, and this Chamber will have to join the long
list of settlements ofthe occupying Power. We Will have
demonstrated our irrelevance in this matter. Bolivia
demands the end of the occupation, the end of its
policies that violate international law and its colonizing
practices in Jerusalem and all Palestinian territory.

