Ms. Keita (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the
members of the Security Council on the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/ 1174) on the situation
in Mali.

Before doing so, allow me to share with the Council
some brief observations following my visit to Mali one
month ago, accompanied by the Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacebuilding Support, Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco. We were there to assess the progress
made in the implementation of the 2015 Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. During our stay,
we had the privilege of meeting President Keita, his
Prime Minister, the members of the Government, the
signatory movements to the agreement, the opposition,
civil society, the diplomatic community and the United
Nations country team, among others.

During our visit, we were particularly encouraged
by the constructive momentum that seems to be present
in relations among the parties. The general opinion is

that, since the holding of the presidential elections in
July and August, more emphasis has been placed on the
implementation of the agreement. The determination of
the signatory parties has been illustrated, among other
things, by the establishment in September ofa ministry
tasked with monitoring the implementation of the
agreement and by the signing of the Pact for Peace in
October. The more frequent meetings of the Agreement
Monitoring Committee is another concrete example.

It is no doubt too early to fully evaluate the
impact of the sanctions adopted by the Council in
December against three people who have hindered
the implementation of the peace agreement. However,
it is fair to say that the parties are fully aware of the
Council's frustration and its impatience with regard
to the ongoing delays in the implementation of the
agreement. That undoubtedly explains the efforts
under way to accelerate the implementation of its
key provisions.

Finally, we were pleased to note through our
conversations with the parties that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) continues to be seen as playing an
essential political role in working with all parties to
accelerate the implementation of the agreement. The
conclusions of our joint visit will be reflected in the
Secretary-General's next report, to be submitted to
members of the Security Council for their review in
early March, six months after the swearing in of the
President of the Republic.

The progress highlighted in the Secretary-General's
report under consideration touches upon issues
that are central to the peace process, including the
institutional reforms envisaged in the agreement. The
reconstitution and reform of the defence and security
forces remains key to establishing lasting peace in
Mali. The launching, in November, of an accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
is a first concrete step to that end. The holding ofa high-
level workshop on security sector reform in December
enabled progress on important issues.

With regard to institutional reforms to strengthen
decentralization, we welcome the holding in November
of consultations on administrative restructuring as a
first step in carrying out territorial reform. Dialogue
must continue in order to reach a consensus on these
reforms. I therefore not only invite the Government but
also members of the political class, whether they be the
opposition or the majority, to pursue their efforts in
order to ensure greater inclusivity in these discussions.
With regard to national reconciliation, the National
Assembly has postponed discussions on the national
accord act in order to allow for more consultations.
I urge the parties to continue their efforts to support
the reconciliation process, which is indispensable to
fulfilling the Vision of a Mali that is united and fully
anchored on the path of peace. In that context, the fight
against impunity must remain a top priority. There can
be no compromise that would jeopardize the progress
that has been made towards reconciliation. It must
be noted that the political landscape has remained
polarized since the presidential election. A constructive
and inclusive dialogue among political stakeholders,
including civil society, women and young people, is
essential in order to carry out the ambitious reform
agenda set out in the 2015 agreement.

Recent signs of a more open dialogue - which
made it possible, for example, to reach a consensus
on postponing the elections - are encouraging. I
strongly urge the political class to continue along that
path, working together to build the foundations of a
united and reconciled nation with an inclusive system
of representation.

(Spoke in English)

As I witnessed during my visit to Gao and Mopti,
the security situation remains of grave concern and
a major challenge to the implementation of the peace
agreement. Asymmetrical attacks continue to target
peacekeepers, national and international forces and,
increasingly, civilians. In Me'naka, MINUSMA was
targeted on 21 December by a complex attack on its
camp, which once again indicated the determination of
extremist groups and spoilers to prevent the Mission
from implementing its mandate. Our peacekeepers
and the Malian defence and security forces continue
to serve under very difficult conditions. Far too often,
they pay the ultimate price in supporting peace and
stability in Mali.

Last year, Mali experienced a significant increase
in improvised explosive device (IED) incidents,
particularly in the centre of the country. MINUSMA
and the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS)
continue to support the Malian authorities through the
provision of advice, training and specialized equipment
to mitigate the risks posed by the IED threat. From
September through December, Malian instructors,
previously trained by MINUSMA/UNMAS, delivered
their first explosive-ordnance disposal courses to their
own troops in Bamako. The training was supported by
MINUSMA but entirely delivered by Malian trainers,
marking a milestone in the development of national
capacities and contributing to the restoration of
State authority.

We remain concerned about the further
deterioration of the security situation in the centre,
where intercommunal violence, instrumentalized
by extremist armed groups, has intensified over the
past months. On 1 January, 37 members of the Fulani
community were killed in an attack in the Bankass
district. The authorities swiftly responded by deploying
a Malian armed forces unit to the site of the incident
and opening an investigation. On 4 January, President
Keita visited the village where the attack took place.
MINUSMA is engaging the Government to define
the political parameters framing the approach in the
centre and is stepping up its support to the Government
in responding to the rapidly evolving situation and
protecting civilians, in coordination with the United
Nations country team.

With regard to security in central Mali, MINUSMA
is enhancing its assistance to the Government in the
protection of civilians by increasing its mobility and
its presence. This approach should also enable the
United Nations country team and humanitarian and
development partners to intensify their contributions
to peace and development. The deteriorating situation
resulted in a dramatic 75 per cent increase in displaced
persons in December 2018, compared with June 2018.
Overall, the humanitarian situation in Mali remains
dire, with 2.3 million vulnerable people targeted by
the 2019 humanitarian response plan. Over 800 schools
remain closed due to insecurity.

Addressing the challenges facing Mali must take
into account the complex cross-border dynamics
and drivers of conflict occurring within the broader
regional context. I therefore reiterate the Secretary-
General's call on national, regional and international
actors to redouble their efforts to tackle the multiple
threats facing Mali and the Sahel region.

The Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) Joint
Force remains an instrumental part of the response
needed to address the threat of violent extremism in
the region. I wish to call on G-5 Sahel member States
to take all steps necessary to resume the operations of
the Joint Force as soon as possible, and on international
partners to provide it with the support it requires. In
parallel, we also must redouble our efforts to address
resilience, governance and development deficits in the
region. In this regard, the United Nations will continue
to move forward in the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.

In conclusion, it is important to continue impressing
on all parties to the peace agreement the importance of
maintaining positive momentum in order to continue
accelerating the implementation of priority measures of
the peace agreement and register meaningful progress
without further delay. MINUSMA, through the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, remains
committed to supporting the parties in their efforts to
advance the implementation of the peace agreement.

