Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): My delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution extending the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL) for a further three months. The recent
reports of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy
confirm that the Agreement reached by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Committee of Nine at Abuja on 17 August is a significant
development that may at last offer real hope for the
suffering people of Liberia. But it remains the case, as the
draft resolution before us makes quite clear, that the key
lies in the response, or otherwise, of the faction leaders

 

who have publicly committed themselves to this
Agreement. They must now disengage, disarm and
demonstrate their willingness to reach a peaceful, lasting
and democratic solution to the conflict.

For far too long this Council has been given clear
demonstrations of the disdain of the faction leaders for the
help of the international community and for the interests of
the people of their own country. Agreement after agreement
has been torn up by the so-called warlords; cease-fires
violated; innocent civilians killed; children forced into
combat; and the country's infrastructure laid to waste - all
to satisfy the egos and thirst for power of those leaders.
Time and again this Council has heard renewed
commitments to peace from such people, and it would be
easy to take a cynical approach and call it a day. But it is
greatly to the credit of the leaders of the ECOWAS
countries that they have not given up. Indeed they have
become more determined to bring peace to this part of their
region, and we owe it to them to give them our support.
We commend and endorse the Agreement reached in Abuja
last month. It gives the faction leaders another chance, and
we note that severe penalties will be imposed on any
faction leader who fails to abide by his commitments.

The faction leaders must take heed of this draft
resolution. They must be under no illusion. This is the last
chance for Liberia to resolve its problems with United
Nations assistance. It is vital that the factions cease their
intimidation and attacks against United Nations, ECOWAS
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) and non-governmental
organization personnel, end the looting and return all stolen
property, including especially that of the United Nations.
Without this small sign of good will, the international
community cannot be expected to contribute to the
rehabilitation of the country and to provide humanitarian
relief.
The United Kingdom welcomes the readiness of
ECOWAS to provide additional peace-keepers to the
ECOMOG forces. ECOMOG in its reinforced composition
is doing a difficult job well. Its presence is vital. We also
warmly welcome the decision of the United States to
provide additional logistical and financial support to
ECOMOG. The United Kingdom is considering a further
contribution to the Trust Fund for Liberia, which would be
provided for assistance to ECOMOG. We also intend to
help with police training once stability has been established,
and we urge other States to provide additional logistical
support.

The revised timetable for the implementation of the
Abuja Agreement gives the faction leaders clear signposts
towards a peaceful settlement of the conflict leading to
elections next year. Early disarmament is a vital part of
the plan. The faction leaders themselves have accepted
the timetable. The three-month extension of UNOMIL's
mandate will test the will of the faction leaders to take
these necessary steps. We hope, and urge, that they
finally bow to the will of their own people, of their
neighbours and of the international community to see this
terrible civil war come to an end.

