The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the report
on the judicial status of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and
the prospects for referring certain cases to
national courts (S/2002/678) submitted by the
President of the Tribunal on 10 June 2002.

"The Council recognizes, as it has done on
other occasions, for example, in its resolution
1329 (2000) of 30 November 2000, that the ICTY
should concentrate its work on the prosecution
and trial of the civilian, military and paramilitary
leaders suspected of being responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law
committed in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia since 1991, rather than on minor
actors.

"The Security Council therefore endorses
the report's broad strategy for the transfer of
cases involving intermediary and lower-level
accused to competent national jurisdictions as
likely to be to be in practice the best way of
allowing the ICTY to achieve its current
objective of completing all trial activities at first
instance by 2008. The Council invites States and
relevant international and regional organizations
to contribute as appropriate to the strengthening
of national judicial systems of the States of the
former Yugoslavia in order to facilitate the
implementation of this policy.

"The Security Council takes note of the
recommendations of the ICTY with regard to the
creation, as proposed by the High Representative
to Bosnia and Herzegovina, of a specific
Chamber, within the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to deal with serious violations of
international humanitarian law. The Security
Council is ready to look constructively and
positively at this matter when more details of the
proposed arrangements are available. The Council
also takes note of the intention of the ICTY to
amend its Rules of Procedure and Evidence in
order to facilitate the referral of cases to
competent national jurisdictions.

"The Security Council will remain seized of
this matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2002/21.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.
