Mr. Manalo (Philippines): At the outset, my
delegation expresses its great pleasure at seeing you,
Sir, in the Chair. We share the confidence expressed by
previous speakers in your able leadership. At the same
time, we commend the Guinea presidency for its able
leadership last month.

My delegation associates itself fully with the
statement just made by the Permanent Representative
of Cambodia on behalf of the Association of South-
East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and joins others in
thanking Ambassador Greenstock for his briefing on
the seventh work programme of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC).
It has been 18 months since the Security Council
initiated a global coalition against terrorism. Member
States have been actively engaged in strengthening
their efforts to fight terrorism at the national, regional
and international levels. Resolution 1373 (2001) served
to guide this undertaking, and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) which it established, under the
chairmanship of Ambassador Greenstock, provided the
linchpin for the Member States' evaluation of their
existing capacities in countering terrorism.

Today's meeting is a fitting occasion to take stock
of where we are and where we wish to proceed. While
the very positive response in the signing and
ratification of legal instruments to suppress terrorism is
notable, much remains to be done. Despite the
increased priority given by the international
community to combating terrorism, many initiatives
have to manifest themselves more fully. Terrorist
attacks continue in a number of countries, including in
the Philippines just this week. Hence, echoing the view
put forth by the Secretary-General in January, during
the ministerial meeting on Counter-Terrorism,
sustained long-term action is imperative. In that
connection, the CTC's regular briefings on the progress
of the implementation of resolution 1456 (2003) have
been valuable, and we encourage the Committee to
maintain that practice. We hope that transparency will
be preserved in the future work of the CTC.

The special CTC meeting on international,
regional and subregional organizations, held last
month, was useful in that regard. We look forward to
follow-up actions to pursue the recommendations of
that meeting. At this juncture, I should like to express
my delegation's appreciation for the swift issuance of
the list of contacts called for by the special regional
meeting.

The progress of the focus of the CTC's
programme of work from individual States to regional
and international cooperation marks the beginning of a
new phase in its work. My delegation hopes that this
will set the stage for more concrete and doable
cooperative activities in the future.

The CTC's programme of matching donors and
recipients of technical assistance, under the guidance of
Mr. Curtis Ward, deserves our appreciation. Needless
to say, that programme should be vigorously pursued
by Member States, as well as by regional and
international groups.

There have been some notable recent
developments in my country in the combat against
terrorism, particularly with respect to the suppression
of the financing of terrorism. Recently, the Philippine
Government enacted financial controls that bring the
Philippines into compliance with international anti-
money-laundering and terrorist-financing standards.
The programmes of assistance to evaluate financial
systems and to develop counter-terrorism finance
training programmes, extended by donor countries such
as the United States and the European Union, are
appreciated. Also, the Philippines has now ratified ll
of the 12 international conventions on combating
terrorism.

Turning to our region's response to resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1456 (2003), my delegation wishes to
underline that it has been engaged in various initiatives
and political declarations of the Association of South-
East Asian Nations in support of those two landmark
resolutions.

Finally, as Chairman Greenstock hands the
chairmanship of the CTC over to Ambassador Arias of
Spain, my delegation wishes to express our
appreciation to Ambassador Greenstock for his
outstanding work in translating resolution 1373 (2001)
into action, and we wish to express our full confidence
in Ambassador Arias with respect to undertaking the
challenging task of building upon resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1456 (2003). My delegation assures
Ambassador Arias of our continuing cooperation and
support. Last but certainly not least, we pay tribute to
the CTC team of experts and the Secretariat for their
fine work and cooperation.

