At the outset, I would like to thank Indonesia for convening this timely debate. I also thank the Secretary-General for being with us today and for his tireless efforts in mobilizing the United Nations system and international efforts to address the impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. And I also thank former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center on International Cooperation at New York University, for their briefings. The pandemic caused by the coronavirus disease is a massive global crisis and an unprecedented challenge that poses a significant threat to international peace and security and entails a health catastrophe, a profound economic downturn and serious risks of instability. It is affecting food security, employment, incomes and livelihoods. It also contributes to the erosion of social cohesion and potentially exacerbates underlying tensions. Despite the global nature of the pandemic, which is affecting all countries without exception, it is mostly hurting those already suffering from conflicts, violence and unrest. It poses grave risks to traumatized and vulnerable populations of refugees and displaced people and, as the Secretary-General has observed, it threatens to highlight the typical root causes and underlying fragilities that can lead to, or exacerbate, conflict, which are the focus of peacebuilding interventions. All those aspects of the crisis contribute directly or indirectly to amplifying the challenges of sustaining peace. In that connection, the pandemic has posed serious threats to the peace processes and transitions to peace and stability now under way. Moreover, there have been disruptions to and difficulties for United Nations peacekeeping operations and an upsurge in armed conflict in some hotbeds of tension during the pandemic, which further drives displacement and compounds already dire humanitarian situations. On 23 March, the Secretary-General called for an immediate global ceasefire to "silence the guns" and "focus together on the true fight of our lives". Since the very beginning of the pandemic, Tunisia has warned of the unprecedented and multidimensional impacts of the pandemic and the challenges that it poses to sustaining peace and security, especially in war-ravaged countries and those in post-conflict situations or facing humanitarian crises. Tunisia therefore expressed its full support for the Secretary-General's appeal and believed its immediate implementation to be a crucial priority. In that connection, Tunisia focused on the pivotal role of the Security Council in such critical circumstances in preserving peace and security, silencing the guns in all corners of the world, ensuring the continuation of peacekeeping and special political missions and creating conditions for the delivery of life-saving medical aid to people in places of high vulnerability. Accordingly, together with France, Tunisia initiated resolution 2532 (2020), which was unanimously adopted on 1 July. The resolution states that the unprecedented extent of the COVID-19 pandemic is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security and recognizes that the peacebuilding and development gains made by countries in transition and post-conflict countries could be reversed as a result of the pandemic. It also requests the Secretary-General to provide updates to the Security Council on the impact of COVID-19 on the ability of peacekeeping operations and special political missions to deliver their mandated priority tasks. We believe that mitigating the impacts of the pandemic and addressing the challenges it poses to sustaining peace should be within a comprehensive multidimensional approach and guided by our firm collective political will and our interest in enhancing solidarity and cooperation at the international, regional and national levels. In that context, we stress the importance of the implementation of resolution 2532 (2020) and the exploration of more effective support for war-devastated and post-conflict countries in order to contain the impacts of the pandemic and make positive progress on stabilization efforts and the peaceful resolution of conflicts. Considering that peace is more sustainable when it is locally owned, led and implemented, it is crucial to focus on strengthening local conflict-resolution mechanisms, political peace processes and engagement of women and youth in peacebuilding initiatives, COVID-19 responses and inclusive dialogues. In the same vein, we stress the importance of promoting cooperation and partnership between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations given their knowledge of the factors and specificities of conflicts and their ability to deal with the parties concerned, in addition to their role in achieving and monitoring peace agreements. In conclusion, we reiterate Tunisia's firm commitment to continuing its active engagement in supporting all initiatives and efforts aimed at addressing the impacts of the pandemic and maintaining peace and security throughout the world.
