Ms. Ferrari (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is pleased,
Mr. President, that you have organized this open
meeting, which gives countries like my own a rare
opportunity to address the Council on an issue of vital
importance to global accountability and governance.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on the rule of law and transitional justice in conflict
and post-conflict societies (S/2004/616). The report is
balanced and thought-provoking; it highlights the
crucial role of the United Nations in this troubling
sector; and it is forthright in highlighting the
Organization's successes as well as its failures.

There is no doubt that the ad hoc criminal
tribunals established by the United Nations in post-
conflict situations have helped in some measure to
convey to the victims of criminal behaviour a sense
that their persecutors will be made accountable for
their crimes. The tribunals have gone a long way
towards destroying the notion that perpetrators of
serious crimes against humanity in any part of the
world would enjoy impunity. The tribunals have also
served up a rich diet of new jurisprudence which can
only enhance and enrich the practice of international
law.

It is troubling, however, that there is a public
perception that the tribunals take a disproportionate
amount of time to prosecute and bring finality and
closure to criminal proceedings.

It is not for my delegation to speculate on the
myriad causes of the apparently infinite agenda of the
tribunals, but merely to say that the information given
in the Secretary-General's report - that the two ad hoc
tribunals now have a combined annual budget
exceeding $250 million, which is equivalent to more
than 15 per cent of the United Nations total regular
budget - must give us pause for thought. For even as
we recognize the valuable contribution of the tribunals,
we cannot help but ponder what $250 million could do
for post-conflict development in the very same
countries.

For the above and other reasons, we remain
strong and determined supporters of the International
Criminal Court. Our support has come with a heavy
price attached, but we have never wavered in our
commitment. As the Secretary-General notes,

"domestic justice systems should be the first
resort in pursuit of accountability. But where
domestic authorities are unwilling or unable to
prosecute violators at home, the role of the
international community becomes crucial".
(S/2004/616, para. 40)

We are pleased with the Secretary-General's
endorsement of the Court and in particular his
statement in the report that "the Court is already
having an important impact by putting would-be
violators on notice that impunity is not assured" (ibid., para. 49).

We recognize that the Court is not a panacea for
all the ills of the world, nor will it be free of some of
the same problems that have afflicted the ad hoc
tribunals. But by our collective efforts we have
managed to establish a permanent forum for
prosecuting the most serious crimes of which mankind
is capable.

According to the President of the Court, the Court
is now ready to begin proceedings in its first cases,
which could start at any time. This is indeed welcome
news and we hope that the Court will translate words
into actions in the very near future. Its credibility
depends, in large measure, on whether it can prove its
worth as a functioning institution. Let us hope that the
lessons learned from the ad hoc tribunals will be
heeded.

We conclude by echoing the call of the Secretary-
General for all Member States of the United Nations
that have not yet done so, to move towards the
ratification of the Rome Statute at the earliest possible
opportunity. We believe wholeheartedly, that if the
Member States of the United Nations act as one in a
multilateral capacity to tackle the heartbreaking
aftermath of post-conflict situations with resolution
and justice, mankind will be the ultimate beneficiary.
