Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate. I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zarif for
his briefing on the recent developments in Kosovo. I
acknowledge the presence of His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dacic', First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs ofthe Republic of Serbia, and Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj, and I thank them for their statements.

The successful conduct of elections for the Kosovo
Assembly on 8 June is a significant development. We
take positive note of the negotiations on electoral reform,
political dialogue with Belgrade and participation by
Kosovo Serbs in their internal politics. We see merit
in the early conclusion of those negotiations in order to
enable the authorities of Pristina to focus on procedural
challenges, including political dialogue with Belgrade.

We note that, while no high-level meetings were
held during the reporting period, talks facilitated by
the European Union (EU) were held at the technical
level, with a focus on the implementation of the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations, of 19 April 2013. We welcome the
commitment of the new Government in Serbia to
the EU-facilitated dialogue with Kosovo and the
full implementation of the Agreement of 19 April
2013. That will no doubt reassure the international
community of Serbia's desire to continue its quest for
peaceful coexistence with Kosovo. We look forward to
the resumption of high-level talks between both sides,
once a new Government is formed in Pristina.

It is essential, in the interest ofpeace, that unilateral
action and inflammatory rhetoric be avoided in order
to ease the security challenges faced by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo police. We condemn
the violent incidents in Mitrovica that resulted in both
police and civilian casualties and damage to vehicles
belonging to the Kosovo police, UNMIK and EULEX.
We applaud the intervention for peace by the EU
High Representative Catherine Ashton on 11 July and
welcome the establishment of a working group that will
see to the peaceful resolution of the ethnic tensions in
Mitrovica.

In our statement in the previous debate on UNMIK
(see S/PV.7183), we encouraged the unimpeded
resettlement of minority returnees and internally
displaced persons in Kosovo. In that regard, we take
positive note of the voluntary return of 49 IDPs during
the reporting period. We welcome the completion of
UNMIK's confidence-building measures programme
aimed at promoting reconciliation among the various
communities. We call for the institution of similar
projects to promote reintegration, education and access
to services and economic opportunities for all.

Finally, we commend Special Representative Zarif
and his team for their unrelenting efforts to promote
peace and stability in Kosovo.

