Mr. Tanin: This quarter was dominated by
the holding of an early general election in Kosovo,
and ensuing lengthy negotiations, deal-making and
bargaining to form a new Government. As we meet
today, these discussions are still in progress. At the
outset, allow me to make a few observations about
this process.

First, the decision to call an early election was
a deliberate one. A broken unity of understanding
brought an end to the ruling coalition; however, those
parties that sought a more decisive majority may have
fallen short of their expectations.

Secondly, the transition phase has proved to be very
challenging. The main coalition was unable to achieve
an outright majority. Some parties improved their
share marginally, while the long-standing opposition
gained significantly. As a result, we see a shift in the
configuration of the political landscape of Kosovo, one
of the most significant in many years. One factor that
may have contributed to this shift is a tidal wave of
change in the mind of many voters, particularly the
younger generation, for whom jobs, access to education
and economic opportunities, reducing corruption and
strengthening the rule of law were prominent concerns.
Ethno-nationalist rhetoric appeared less effective to
galvanize the majority of the electorate into action than
in the past. The new political environment after the
election is obviously affecting all parties positioning
themselves for municipal elections, due to take place
in October.

Thirdly, there is no doubt that the election was
generally free, fair and competitive, despite the very
short preparation time and campaign. The official
European Union (EU) observer mission noted this,
while at the same time also mentioning the longstanding
issues of updating the voting lists and ensuring the
enfranchisement of voters outside of Kosovo. We
recognize the important contribution of the EU
observer team and other observers during the election,
and also wish to highlight the role of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in
facilitating the vote in northern municipalities and
providing technical assistance to the Central Election
Commission. Importantly, there was no significant
dispute of the results.

The overall turnout was 41 per cent. While this is
not dramatically different from the 2014 elections, it
was notable that many new voters participated, with
variations across Kosovo, ranging from below 30 per
cent in some districts to above 60 per cent in others.
In Serb areas, the turnout was the highest recorded in
recent times. We should remember that Kosovo Serbs
have evolved from a position of boycotting Kosovo
elections to partial participation to active participation.

The election did not generate a momentum for
change in the participation of women. While political
entities observed the gender quota under the electoral
law, women's representation in leadership remained
limited. There are no female candidates for Prime
Minister and few mentioned as likely in a future
cabinet. Women's representation in electoral bodies
also remained low, constitutinhg only 9 per cent of
Kosovo's Central Election Commission members.

Fourthly, perhaps the greatest concern is that
the election process itself consumed the energy of
institutions during these past three months. In fact, a
functional institutional vacuum has hampered progress
on a full panoply of governance priorities. Important
economic and social opportunities were missed
during the period, for example, from the resources
that continue to be available through the European
Stabilisation and Association mechanism. In late July,
the International Monetary Fund cancelled the final
instalment of its two-year funding arrangement in the
absence of a fully-authorized Government to complete
its review. According to Kosovo's Central Bank, foreign
investments during this past year fell by nearly two-
thirds. The climate of political uncertainty during the
last quarter is tied inextricably to these facts.

Iwould like to draw the Council's attention to another
important development in the region - the initiative
of President Vueie of Serbia to launch an internal
dialogue on Kosovo, a matter I had the opportunity to
discuss with him and with First Deputy Prime Minister
and Foreign Minister Dacic last week in Belgrade. On
24 July, President Vueic' expressed publicly that for
Serbia's progress to be constant and sustainable, the
Serbs should endeavour to resolve the Kosovo issue
and avoid leaving "this greatest of burdens" to the next
generation. He also warned that ifthe historical conflict
between Serbs and Albanians were not resolved, it
would represent a joint failure of both, and that the
effort required a "long, complicated and often painful
process". Kosovo Foreign Minister Hoxhaj welcomed
the statement, while Albanian Prime Minister Rama
also expressed his respect for this initiative, reiterating
that a lasting solution for Kosovo would be "in
everyone's interest".

As history teaches, pursuing fair, difficult and
often painful compromise demands strong leadership.
It should be clear that such leadership is required on the
part of all if we are to reach lasting peace, in the interest
of all who live in the Western Balkans region. I stress
"the region" because peace and stability in Kosovo are
interwoven with peace and stability in the region and
the normalization of relations between Pristina and
Belgrade. As we all know, the problems are regional in
nature and so, therefore, must be the solutions.

As outlined in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/640), progress in the EU-facilitated dialogue
has been slowed not only by political processes, whether
in Belgrade or in Pristina, but also by the partial
implementation of agreements that were achieved
more than four years ago. On 3 July, European Union
High Representative Mogherini hosted a meeting
between the Presidents of Serbia and Kosovo with a
view towards moving this process forward. If serious
negotiations over long-term interests remain the order
of the day, it should be expected that, with political
clarity in Pristina, the dialogue can resume as soon as
possible, not simply to implement the main agreements
reached so far but also to advance negotiations for the
benefit of both sides.

During the reporting period, the 2017 Western
Balkans Summit also took place in Trieste, Italy. It was
the fourth annual summit within the Berlin process,
itself designed to further European integration for all
the Western Balkans States. The process reinforces
the inherently regional nature of the issues most
directly affecting the future of Kosovo. Possibilities for
developing a common market, expanding infrastructure
and dealing better with region-wide problems and
challenges were all on the agenda.

Political reconciliation by itself cannot overcome
all divisions. It must be accompanied by societal
reconciliation and by rebuilding trust and cooperation
at all levels. Working to help foster greater trust
among communities is one of the main priorities of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). We are continuously exploring
how the Mission can better contribute, within our
existing mandate, towards improving intercommunity
relations. We do this together with governmental,
non-governmental and international partners.

Obviously, rebuilding trust is not an event but a long-
term process of transforming mistrust into coexistence
and, ultimately, genuine cooperation. Wherever we are
able, we are focused on promoting new cooperative
activities among municipal and community leaders
and institutions, supporting the work of energetic local
actors. I would like to highlight some of our most recent
initiatives to enhance intercommunity trust-building.

At the end of June, I co-hosted, with High
Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid Ra'ad Al
Hussein, an international roundtable in Geneva to bring
attention back to the many unresolved cases of persons
missing from the Kosovo conflict. This continues to
be a significant obstacle to societal reconciliation.
Within this framework, we have managed to strengthen
the involvement and participation of the missing
persons' family representatives and to advocate for
far-strengthened commitment from the Pristina and
Belgrade delegations, as well as the reinforced support
of the international community, particularly the United
Nations, to determine the fate of the 1,658 persons still
unaccounted for.

Also in June, our mission hosted the first United
Nations Kosovo Youth Assembly, attended by over 140
youngleaders-60percentofthemwomen-representing
all of Kosovo's ethnic communities. The event was the
result of close cooperation with UNICEF, the United
Nations Development Programme, the OSCE, the
EU and the Kosovo Ministry of Culture, Youth and
Sport. It demonstrated the vibrancy of Kosovo's civil
society and presented a prominent public picture of the
progress that can be made. Based on resolution 2250
(2015), participants developed a road map on youth,
peace and security for Kosovo, which also addressed
young women's empowerment, to help serve the wider
strategy being developed by the Kosovo authorities.

UNMIK remains active in its engagement with
municipal Governments, among which I can say that
strong efforts are being made to tackle the matters
of importance to their constituencies. At the end of
July, we facilitated a meeting among 10 municipal
leaders in the south-eastern part of Kosovo, led by
the Mayor of that region's largest municipality. Many
practical issues were debated, including economic
cooperation and the particular exposure of that region
to radicalization and the dangers of extremist ideology.
We will be developing similar initiatives in other areas
of Kosovo during the coming months. Our efforts to
strengthen intercommunity trust-building are aimed
at very practical levels, not only building on existing
frameworks but also working to innovate new ones
based on the particular concerns of local communities.

Kosovo has continued to make steps towards
demonstrating its commitment to justice and the rule
of law in the international sphere. After a series of
final legal steps, including the approval of its rules
of procedure, on 5 July the Specialist Chambers,
a mechanism to tackle some of the most difficult
and painful post-war chapters, became operational
in The Hague. It is now ready to receive filings and
indictments, with full cooperation from all the relevant
Kosovo institutions.

After three months of an election campaign and
post-election uncertainty, it is important for Kosovo
to move forward seriously and responsibly, and for the
international community to work together to continue
to provide essential support. In that spirit, we will
continue to engage with all of our partners towards our
common goal of promoting peace and stability.

