Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank Mr. Feltman, Mr. Simonovie and
Mr. Ging for their briefings and express my gratitude
to the delegation of Lithuania for having called for this
meeting. I would like to particularly thank Lithuania
because Spain is very supportive of the Security
Council's role in closely monitoring the implementation
of the Minsk agreement on the basis of resolution 2202
(2015). All ofus here agree that the conflict in Ukraine
can be resolved only by political means. The Minsk
accord, facilitated by Germany and France, to which the
parties agreed and which was endorsed by the Security
Council, can serve as a tool for us to achieve a solution.
We need to support it in a decisive, and unanimous way.

A new high-level meeting of the participants in the
Normandy format is convening today in Berlin, with
Ambassadors Tagliavini and Apakan in attendance
on behalf of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in order to continue
providing assistance aimed at advancing the process.
The Security Council should also support that process.
Spain welcomes the progress achieved in the first
few weeks after the entry into force of the ceasefire
agreement, including the first steps in the withdrawal
of heavy weapons and the exchange of prisoners.

However, progress remains weak and inadequate,
as clearly described by Under-Secretary-General
Feltman. I believe, as he does, that we really need to
take advantage of this window of opportunity. We urge
respect for the ceasefire, without exception and pursuant
to the agreed conditions, and the implementation of the
other provisions of the Minsk agreement in a uniform
and condition-free manner. We also appeal to Russia
to use all its influence to demand that the rebel groups
immediately and strictly implement the agreements and
thereby comply with its obligations as a signatory of the
Minsk agreement. We also call on Ukraine to continue
moving forward in fulfilling the obligations undertaken
in Minsk, including the non-military aspects of the
agreement.

We are concerned about the difficulties that
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
continues to face in fulfilling the tasks entrusted to
it under the agreement. We therefore urge the parties
to work together with the Mission and to provide it
forthwith with the full information it requires. In recent
days, the Council has repeatedly expressed its support
for the important role that the OSCE plays. I think that
we must stress the importance of the agreement. Spain
has proposed extending the mandate of the Special
Monitoring Mission and providing it with the necessary
human and material resources.
We have heard with great concern the
description of the humanitarian situation reported by
Mr. Ging. Assistance to the population in need should
be a top priority for everyone. We need to reject the
politicization and exploitation of the situation. The
effective distribution of humanitarian assistance
should be a common goal that should be implemented
in a coordinated way and not unilaterally. I appeal
specifically to Russia to ensure the effective distribution
of aid and the due observance of international law and
the necessary restoration of trust between the parties
and to coordinate its humanitarian assistance with the
Ukrainian authorities and the competent international
authorities. Spain suggests that we consider the
possibility of setting up a specific mechanism that
would make it possible, perhaps with the support of
independent humanitarian actors, to facilitate and
accelerate the delivery of aid to those in need with full
respect for humanitarian principles.

We have also listened intently and with great concern
to Mr. Simonovie's briefing. We again see the dramatic
impact of the conflict in terms of its undermining
human rights and international humanitarian law. That
has been particularly severe since January in the areas
under the control of rebel groups. On that point, I would
like to express, as have other delegations, a special
thought for Nadiya Savchenko, whose hunger strike is
of great concern to us. We request that she be released
immediately.

Also of particular concern is the description of
the situation in the autonomous republic of Crimea.
Its population, according to the report, is subject to
systematic violations of its rights, especially those
people who belong to the Tatar community. Spain would
like to recall the content of General Assembly resolution
68/262. The report submitted by Mr. Simonovic recalls
that the implementation of the laws of the Russian
Federation in respect of the population of Crimea not
only contravenes that resolution but also has certain
implications that negatively impact human rights.
Any lasting and sustainable solution must be based on
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine.

