The President (spoke in Chinese): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
November, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr.
Martin Belinga-Eboutou, Permanent Representative of
Cameroon to the United Nations, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of
October 2002. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Belinga-Eboutou for the great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted at the Council's business last
month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo

Letter dated 15 October 2002 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2002/ 1146)

The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Belgium, Denmark, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Oman, Rwanda,
South Africa, Uganda and Zimbabwe, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representative to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the Third
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Uganda, His Excellency The
Honourable James W. Wapakhabulo.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Wapakhabulo
(Uganda) took a seat at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat at
the Council table; Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium), Ms. Loj
(Denmark), Mr. Al-Hinai (Oman), Mr. Gasana
(Rwanda), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa) and
Mr. Muchetwa (Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved
for them at the side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Kassem,
Chairman of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Kassem to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now continue its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to call the attention of members to
the following documents: S/2002/ 1187, letter dated 23
October 2002 from Rwanda, transmitting a statement
and the reply by its Government on the final report of
the Panel of Experts; S/2002/ 1199, letter dated 25
October 2002 from South Africa; S/2002/1202, letter
dated 25 October from Uganda, transmitting a
statement by its Government on the final report of the
Panel of Experts; S/2002/ 1207, letter dated 28 October
2002 from Rwanda; and photocopies of a letter dated 4
November 2002 from Rwanda, which will be issued as
a document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/2002/1221.

I give the floor to the Honourable James
Wapakhabulo, Third Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Uganda.


