Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): At the outset, I would like to
welcome Ambassador Abukar Dahir Osman, Permanent
Representative of Somalia, Ambassador Mohamed Siad
Doualeh, Permanent Representative of Djibouti, and
Mr. Amanuel Giorgio, Charge d'affaires of Eritrea.

I welcome unreservedly the adoption of resolution
2444 (2018). We greatly appreciate the United
Kingdom for its efforts as penholder in facilitating
the negotiations on resolution 2444 (2018) and all
Security Council members for voting in favour of the
resolution. We fully support the resolution drafted by
the United Kingdom, which we believe is balanced and
the result of a consensus made in the negotiations over
the last couple of days. We commend the role played
by the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea and
the Committee established pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea, which has done great work in supporting peace
and security in the Horn of Africa.

The whole trajectory of future development in our
subregion has changed fundamentally in recent months.
Countries of the region have opened a new chapter of
normalizing relations, resulting in relations that truly
reflect the long-standing historical ties among our
peoples. This has already had enormous implications
for the work of the Committee and the sanctions regime
as a whole. It also has great significance for regional
and international peace and stability.

We have adopted this resolution today at a time
when a major historic development is unfolding in
the Horn of Africa. The breakthrough arising from
the rapprochement between Ethiopia and Eritrea is
already producing unprecedented and far-reaching
positive consequences and is significantly changing the
political landscape of the Horn of Africa and beyond.
It is highly appropriate for the Security Council to take
this decisive decision at the time when countries of the
region are turning a new page in their relations.

The Horn of Africa has tremendous potential for
shared development and prosperity, provided that there
is durable peace and stability. The Council decision
today will help to capitalize on the opportunities we
are now creating to transform the region into a zone
of peace and prosperity and usher in a new era of
friendship among all the countries of the region. It is
with this conviction that, last July, my Prime Minister
formally submitted a request to the United Nations
to lift the sanctions imposed on Eritrea. Therefore,
today, we are very pleased that the Council responded
positively by lifting the sanctions on Eritrea.

For our part, we are fully committed to forging
ever closer political, economic, social and security
cooperation with all the peoples and Governments of
the Horn of Africa. This will serve and advance the
interests of our peoples and ensure regional peace,
development and cooperation.

A lifting of the sanctions regime on Eritrea
does not, of course, mean that the region is free of
challenges. We still face problems that require effort
and determination to resolve. We still need the help and
serious support of the international community. But, for
our part, we are determined to accelerate efforts being
taken to create a region where peace, development and
democracy prevail in harmony. We are confident that
the international community will stand in solidarity
to support us as we continue to move forward towards
greater peace, stability and economic integration in the
Horn of Africa.

It is also encouraging to note how far Somalia has
come in recent years. At the same time, the rebuilding
and reconstruction of the country still requires sustained
engagement and support. Somalia has indeed reached an
important phase in consolidating its State institutions,
but Al-Shabaab remains the greatest challenge, as it is
capable of creating destruction in Somalia and beyond.

The security situation remains volatile, and
Al-Shabaab continues to present a serious danger to the
peace and security of Somalia and the region as a whole.
The string of deadly bomb attacks last Friday claimed
the lives of over 50 innocent civilians and injured many
more. It was a reflection of the continuous threat being
posed by the group. It underlined the importance of
doing everything possible to minimize Al-Shabaab's

acquisition of arms and funds, as well as the necessity
to control its activities.

It is particularly important at this critical juncture
not to divert attention from the current process as the
Government prepares for the very important transition
towards elections in 2020. The Council must continue
to provide the fullest possible assistance to sustaining
the Government and the transition. We must avoid the
risk of seeing the gains achieved so far reversed; these
are gains that were made with enormous sacrifices by
the Somalis and others in the region.

Finally, Ethiopia will continue to be involved
closely, constructively and in a principled manner,
in all efforts aimed at settling outstanding issues in
good faith.

