Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First, I would like to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Malloch
Brown, Mr. Morris, Mr. Nabarro, Mr. Kastberg and
Mr. Kellenberger for their briefings. I would like to
make a few comments and pose a few questions.

I think that the presentations we heard this
morning make it clear that we are faced with a serious
situation. Although the Deputy Secretary-General has
assured us that at present there is no humanitarian
catastrophe, we feel that the situation indeed gives rise
to major concern. As we heard from the representatives
of the specialized agencies and programmes, in many
important areas - such as food supply, potable water,
sanitation, electricity and the health system - effective
assistance programmes will have to be developed or
implemented in order to prevent a dramatic
deterioration of the humanitarian and social and, in the
end, the political situation on the ground.

We believe that these tasks have to be tackled
without further delay and that the prerequisites for
immediate action have to be created. First of all, a
minimum level of security is needed. There is no
security so far. We are facing serious looting and other
criminal activity. Arms are freely available on virtually
every street corner. This situation not only prevents any
normal economic activity from developing; it is also a
serious impediment to humanitarian assistance,
whether through the United Nations or through non-
governmental organizations (NGOs).

These acts have to be stopped immediately. If
sewage plants have to be protected, we have to protect
them. If hospitals are in danger of being looted, we
have to make them safe. This is a very important part
of the responsibilities of the occupying Powers.

We hear news that some hospitals experienced
less looting than others because they were protected by
Shiah or Sunni militia. This may create a wrong
perception in the Iraqi population that the only way to
get security is to rely on and to follow Islamic religious
groups. In this context, I would be interested in hearing
from the United Nations specialized agencies as to
whether they share this concern.

On the issue of security, we cannot expect a great
deal of patience from the Iraqi population to let things
gradually settle. They have not experienced democracy
or the rule of law. They do not know how strong a
country governed by the people's will can be. What
they see is that the new Power in the country is so far
not able to establish public order and security. The
initial frustration is already tangible, and if we let
radical elements in Iraqi society gain social or political
influence, there is a real danger that the Iraqis will turn
their backs on the very values that we are trying to
promote.

Taking these aspects into account, I would like to
ask the representatives of the specialized agencies what
they believe to be the motives of the ongoing criminal
activity. Is it motivated just by greed, or are we facing
acts with a political, or even terrorist, background? In
our view, it is obvious that it is necessary to better
address the security issue and to curb criminal
activities in Iraq. I wonder if the specialized agencies
or the International Committee for the Red Cross
(ICRC), being on the ground, have any practical advice
in this area?

I would also like to reiterate a question that I
asked at the last briefing on humanitarian matters in
Iraq which pertains to the problems of access to Iraq
for certain NGOs. Is the access problem no longer an
issue?

I also have a question on cooperation with Iraqi
institutions. Could the ICRC and any of the agencies
present inform us of their cooperation with Iraqi
administrative offices or with the private sector?
According to the Security Council resolution
adopted today, a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General will be sent to Iraq. One of his major
tasks will be the coordination of all humanitarian and
reconstruction efforts. What would the humanitarian
organizations and agencies expect from this new
Special Representative? I think this would also be
important for the Deputy Secretary-General to know.

And, finally, I have a question on funding. It is
directed to all agencies and NGOs that work on the
basis of donations raised by the United Nations flash
appeals. We just heard from the Deputy Secretary-
General that the flash appeal has brought together, I
think, $700 million, and many countries have made
donations for humanitarian assistance in Iraq. My
country, for instance, has participated with 50 million
euros, which equals about $58 million. But, as we
heard this morning, the flash appeal is still far from
succeeding completely. Now the question is: if no flash
money is coming in, can the agencies cope with
substantially less funds if they want to reach the goals
they outlined this morning?

