I welcome Mr. Josep Borrell to the Security Council. To see him in the Council triggers a bit of emotion for me because I had the pleasure of working for his first predecessor, his countryman Javier Solana, between 1999 and 2005, as the head of the policy unit. It was wonderful to work for the European Union (EU). Let me say that I subscribe to everything that Mr. Borrell said in his briefing. In his statement, Jose Singer Weisinger, Special Envoy to the Security Council of the Dominican Republic, mentioned the Schuman Declaration, which was one of the key moments of European unification after the Second World War. To see where we stand today in Europe, 75 years after the Second World War, we have to go back to 1870. In the 75 years between 1870 and 1945, there were three major wars in Europe, two of which were world wars. The time since 1945 has been the most peaceful period in European history. The European Union is therefore a truly historic achievement. The European Union was made strong by the rule of law and the strength of the rule of law, not by the law of the strongest. Conflicts in Europe are resolved peacefully at the European Court of Justice. This is how we want the United Nations also to succeed. We are deeply convinced that the United Nations can achieve the same results. What that means is that we actually do our job in the Security Council to resolve conflicts through peaceful means and through respect for the rule of law, the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and resolutions by the Security Council, which, according to the Charter, are legally binding. It also means that we must respect the International Court of Justice, the International Criminal Court, the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, and that we respect human rights. Unfortunately, we have not yet fully achieved those goals, and we are in fact in a very critical phase. Speakers before me mentioned that point. Russia's invasion of Ukraine in violation of the sovereignty of an independent country violates the United Nations Charter and shows that the law of the strongest is still sometimes operative. Unfortunately, over the last few years, we have seen a great deal of disrespect for Security Council resolutions, particularly with regard to the Middle East and Libya. As we discussed yesterday, countries flagrantly supply weapons and mercenaries to Libya in violation of binding international law buttressed by Security Council resolutions. Let me now turn to one of the masterpieces of European diplomacy: the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) on nuclear proliferation. We greatly regret that the United States has left the JCPOA. Furthermore, I would echo what Mr. Borrell said with respect to regretting the non-renewal of the waivers for JCPOA-related nuclear projects. Since the United States left the JCPOA, the region has not become safer and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is not being more closely observed. Violations of human rights and the rights of minorities persist. The freedom of assembly and expression are being violated. Similarly, when we look at Hong Kong, we see that the freedom of assembly, the freedom of expression and the right to a democratic debate as guaranteed in the Basic Law are now being put under pressure. We regret this. Let me echo those who have discussed the participation of women: resolution 1325 (2000) still is not implemented. The EU is very interested in the United Nations and wants to strengthen multilateralism and work together with other regional organizations. The European Union and its member States are the strongest, largest and biggest supporters of the United Nations when it comes to financial contributions. In the wake of coronavirus disease, the biggest part of the socioeconomic package has been provided by the European Union and its member States. The close cooperation between the EU and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations was also mentioned, and I would like to refer to what our colleague from the Niger, speaking for the three African members and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, said about the cooperation between the EU and the African Union. The EU continues to be a very strong supporter, with three missions to support the Group of Five for the Sahel. Let me end by recalling what was said with regard to how we achieve peace and security in the Sahel region. It is a matter of good governance, respect for human rights and democracy. That is essential for peace and development. So, dear colleagues, let us not use the Security Council for propaganda. Let us use the Security Council to implement what is in the Charter and to work for the common good.
