Mr. Akasaka (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my Government's shock and deep regret at
the deaths of six workers of the International
Committee of the Red Cross in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on 27 April, and to extend our
sincere condolences to their bereaved families. Such
heinous attacks on humanitarian workers must be
condemned.

Before commenting on the report of the Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, I would like to
emphasize that the resolution of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - in which nearly
half of the countries on the African continent are
involved and more than 3 million lives have been
lost- is critical not only to the countries directly
concerned, but to the peace and prosperity of Africa as
a whole. Japan urges all the parties concerned to
implement the Lusaka Peace Agreement without
further delay, and calls upon the Security Council to
make every effort to fully implement phase II of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The illicit exploitation of diamonds and other
natural resources must be stopped, as it poses one of
the main obstacles to the settlement of the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and is a cause of
recurring open hostilities. Indeed, as mentioned in the
report of the Panel of Experts, the exploitation of
non-diamond resources, including such mineral
resources as gold and coltan, as well as timber, is also
fuelling the conflict in the eastern part of the country.
Although the report before us contains a number of
recommendations for curtailing the illicit activities,
today I would like to focus my comments on the
following two points.

First, the relationship between the illicit
exploitation of natural resources and the protraction of
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
must be considered in the wider context of
consolidating peace throughout the region. This will
require a comprehensive and integrated approach. In
particular, as part of its efforts to achieve a peaceful
settlement of the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Security Council should at the same
time address the economic and security problems in
neighbouring Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda. It will be
necessary to pursue peace-building, post-conflict
reconstruction, development and democratization from
a regional perspective.

Secondly, in order to ensure the effectiveness of
such a region-wide integrated approach, the Council
must ensure the smooth transition from one stage of the
peace process to the next, from conflict resolution to
peace-building to post-conflict development. This will
require a coherent strategy throughout the entire period
of United Nations involvement. Any gap in the
extension of international assistance required at
different stages, particularly at a point of transition
from one stage to the next, must be avoided.

As pointed out in the Secretary-General's recent
report on the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2001/373),
the Council must now begin to contemplate entering
phase III, which involves the withdrawal of foreign
forces as well as the implementation of the process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration or
resettlement of ex-soldiers. In this reconstruction and
development phase, social and economic assistance
will be especially critical. To ensure that it is extended
as smoothly and efficiently as possible, it is incumbent
upon the Security Council to cooperate more closely
with major donor countries, as well as with
international financial institutions such as the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank and
with the United Nations Development Programme.

Before concluding, I would like to offer my
comments on the reference made in the report to the
companies located in various countries, including
Japan, which the report claims are importing
uncertified timber from a Ugandan-Thai forest
company called the DARA-Forest, located in the Ituri
area of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
Japanese authorities are investigating the matter and
would appreciate any concrete evidence that the Panel
of Experts might have to substantiate the statement
made in the report and that would assist our
Government in its investigation. I wish to assure
members that Japan is doing its utmost to halt such
illegal practices.

In this connection, I would like to call the
attention of the members of the Council to the
communique that was issued at the conclusion of the
G-8 Okinawa Summit last July, which contained a
paragraph calling for the suspension of illegal logging
and trade practices in the interest of sustainable forest
management. Japan is committed to implementing the
provisions of that communique in cooperation with the
international community.

