Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We welcome Ms. Karin
Landgren and thank her for her briefing on the latest
developments in Nepal, especially regarding the peace
process. The latest events in Nepal, leading to the
resignation of the Prime Minister, events which other
members have mentioned, have caused a great deal of
concern to my delegation, especially as they could
potentially derail the peace process, which has, until
now, made significant progress. We call on all parties
to remain calm and seek to address the contentious
issues through dialogue.

While it is very important to resolve the
misunderstandings at the earliest opportunity, a lasting
solution will have to be reached in the framework of
the ongoing constitutional process. In this regard, we
welcome the progress made thus far in the constitution-
making process and trust that the Constituent Assembly
will be able to reconcile the views presented by the
various parties, especially on the form of government.
The National Security Council, mandated with the
responsibility of making recommendations on the
mobilization, operation and use of the Nepal Army as
part of the process of strengthening civilian control
over that Army, will also have to expedite its work.

We are convinced that, as the peace process
moves forward, it is imperative to adequately focus on
the proper integration of the Maoist army into the
Nepal Army as a way of ensuring lasting peace. We
urge the relevant authorities to address this matter as
soon as possible. We welcome the formation of the
Technical Committee, which has already taken up its
function of supporting the Special Committee in
drawing up a work plan for completing the integration
and rehabilitation of verified Maoist army personnel.

Finally, we express our appreciation to the United
Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) for its contribution
to the stability of Nepal, especially in its support for
the peace process. Given the current political situation,
UNMIN's role and its support for the Nepalese
authorities in dealing with the immediate aftermath of
the Prime Minister's resignation will be very
important. We trust that, with the dedicated leadership
of Ms. Landgren, the situation will be stabilized and
the parties will move the process forward to its logical
conclusion, which is the attainment of lasting peace
and sustainable development in Nepal.

