Mrs. Boniface (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me also to thank Vladimir Voronkov and Michele
Coninsx for their briefings.

As the report indicates (S/2019/6l2), despite the
loss of its territory, Da'esh continues to pose a serious
threat to international peace and security, particularly
through its regional subsidiaries and the attacks it
continues to inspire. In that context, the efforts of both
the military and civilian components of the international
coalition against Da'esh must continue in order to
support pluralistic and inclusive political solutions in
Syria and Iraq. That is the only lasting response for
preventing the re-emergence of Da'esh in a different
form. The fight against impunity for crimes committed
by Da'esh is also an essential element for peace and
reconciliation. Those messages were reaffirmed at the
coalition's meeting in Paris on 25 June and enshrined
in the Paris road map, which is intended to guide the
coalition's action in the coming months. In addition,
France believes that our efforts must continue to focus
on three priority action areas for action, which are
included in the report.

First, we must focus on combating terrorist
financing. As the financial resources of Da'esh
are still estimated at nearly $300 million, we must
intensify our efforts to isolate terrorists by drying
up their sources of funding. France encourages all
States to fully implement resolution 2462 (2019)
and cooperate closely with the United Nations in the
implementation of their obligations. We must build the
broadest possible partnership, involving all the actors
concerned - States, the private sector, multilateral
institutions and civil society.

France commends the outstanding work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the Office of Counter-Terrorism in assessing
needs and providing technical assistance. The second
iteration of the "No money for terror" conference, to be
held in Australia in November, will be an opportunity
to take stock of the implementation of the commitments
made in Paris in April 2018 and the obligations set out
in resolution 2462 (2019).

The second priority concerns the treatment of
foreign terrorist fighters and persons associated with
them through the full implementation of resolution
2396 (2017). We must continue to strengthen measures
to detect, assist and monitor people at risk, through
constant information sharing. At the international
level, close coordination among civilian, military
and financial intelligence services, as well as among
judicial authorities, is essential to responding to the
threat and delivering justice. France has a consistent
position in that regard - foreign terrorist fighters are
expected to be tried as close as possible to the location
where they committed their crimes. It is a matter ofboth
justice and security. France recalls that it is opposed,
in all places and under all circumstances, to the
death penalty. In addition, France attaches particular
importance to providing assistance to children,
especially psychosocial and educational, to promote
their reintegration.

Finally, the third priority is preventing the use ofthe
Internet for terrorist purposes. Progress has been made,
with Internet companies mobilizing their resources. But
as the Christchurch attack demonstrated, much remains
to be done to more effectively prevent the spread of
terrorist propaganda and support the development of
positive counterarguments. That is why France and
New Zealand have mobilized alongside several partners
and Internet companies to launch the Christchurch Call,
which includes collective and voluntary commitments
by Governments and online service providers to address
the problem of terrorist content online and prevent the
misuse of the Internet, while respecting human rights
and fundamental freedoms and the principles of a free,
open and secure Internet. That complements important
measures already taken in other frameworks, such as
the European Union, the Group of 20, the Group of
Seven, the Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism,
the Tech Against Terrorism initiative and the Aqaba
Process. We will remain fully mobilized to ensure the
follow-up of these commitments.

Allow me, in conclusion, to stress the central and
unifying role that the United Nations must continue
to play in the fight against terrorism. France will
continue to support United Nations entities in their
efforts to identify needs and responses and to promote
coordination among all relevant actors.
