Mrs. Albright (United States of America): The
United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP) in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia has been a success. Its purpose is to prevent
the conflict in the region from spreading into and possibly
beyond the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. For
three and a half years, it has met and passed that test.

My Government is pleased with the role that United
States forces have played in the accomplishments of this
mission, which is the first purely preventive peace-
keeping Force in United Nations history. I was delighted
to have the opportunity this past winter to visit the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to meet the officers and
troops stationed there. I found a Force that was uniformly
proud of its mission and convinced of the value of its
contribution to regional stability and peace. The Force
Commander, Bo Wranker of Sweden, his troops and each
of the troop-contributing nations have ample grounds for
pride in the work that has been done and continues to be
done.

 

The question before the Council today is whether
UNPREDEP should continue. Clearly, the situation in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is far different
from what it was and far more stable than when
UNPREDEP was deployed. The fighting in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has stopped. We welcome the signing of the
Agreement of 8 April between the Governments of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and hope that these Governments
will continue working to resolve the outstanding issues
between them. We hope soon to see mutual recognition
between all the successor States of the former Yugoslavia,
and we commend the Governments of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Greece for the continuing
improvement in their bilateral relations.

However, as the Secretary-General points out in his
report, it will always be a matter of judgement as to when
a preventive operation is no longer required. Certainly, the
imminent risk of war has been reduced, but the peace
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina and elsewhere in the
former Yugoslavia remains fragile. Underlying tensions
remain. The presence of UNPREDEP clearly continues to
have a reassuring, stabilizing and confidence-building effect
not only within the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, but within the region. Accordingly, my
Government believes that the continuation of UNPREDEP,
at least for the period contemplated by this resolution,
provides a measure of insurance that is well worth the
costs.

The next six months will be critical in consolidating
the gains made in achieving peace in the region. Any
change to the mandate or structure of UNPREDEP now
would have a potentially destabilizing effect on the peace
process in the Balkans. The elections to be held in Bosnia
and Herzegovina in mid-September are a critical step
forward in the peace process, and it is vital that we avoid
as much as possible adding any elements of uncertainty to
that process.

It is for these reasons that we concur with our fellow
UNPREDEP troop-contributors that the Force should stay
at its current strength and continue to perform its mission.

In the last year and a half, the United Nations has
reduced its deployed peace-keeping forces by more than
50 per cent. The United States believes strongly that peace-
keeping mandates should be examined periodically to
determine whether they are still necessary or can be
implemented with fewer resources.

UNPREDEP is no exception. UNPREDEP should
not continue indefinitely. My Government will certainly
consider a reduction or reconfiguration of the Force in the
future, if the situation so warrants. We share the hope of
the people of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and of all the people of the Balkans that the peace will
broaden and deepen in the coming months. We look
forward to the day when that peace is so strong that there
will no longer be a need for UNPREDEP. That day has
not yet arrived, but by continuing UNPREDEP, we
contribute to the likelihood that peace will endure and
that that day will come. That is a worthy goal for this
Council, and for the contributors to this successful and
well-run mission.

