Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the
briefing made by Mr. Tanin, whom we welcome, and
congratulate him on his new appointment. We wish him
every success in his new functions.

We would also like to thank Mr. Ivica Daeic', First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, and Ms. Flora Citaku for their briefings.

For the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
resolution 1244 (1999) is of increasing relevance as the
international legal basis for achieving a comprehensive
settlement within the framework of a politically
negotiated solution to the question of Kosovo, taking
into account the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Serbia.

We have seen with great concern the actions taken
by opposition activists to impede the ongoing discussion
of important aspects in the process of applying the First
Agreement on Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013. Venezuela believes that
dialogue between the various Kosovar political sectors
must be encouraged in order to prevent a recurrence of
these violent events and to support efforts to complete
the 2013 Brussels Agreement.

My country supports the dialogue in Brussels
between Serbia and the local authorities of the province
of Kosovo, aimed at achieving a mutually acceptable
solution between the parties. In that context, we note
with satisfaction that progress has been achieved in
areas such as energy, telecommunications and freedom
of movement across the bridge that connects the city
of Mitrovica. The parties must continue their work
towards establishing the association/community of
Serb municipalities in northern Kosovo.

We recognize the key role being play in Kosovo
by the United Nations, especially through the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), by promoting security, stability and respect
for human rights. That work has been supplemented
by the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). Given the
importance of direct dialogue between the parties,
UNMIK, KFOR and EULEX must continue, on the basis
of their respective mandates, to play a proactive and
complementary role with a view to promoting a lasting,
sustainable, fair and mutually acceptable solution to
the Kosovo question. Moreover, my country believes
that the parties should reaffirm their commitment to
achieving genuine national reconciliation based on
the promotion and respect of human rights and the
full application of relevant international standards to
prevent discrimination against displaced persons and
minorities.

We are struck by the fact that the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/833) again cites a very
low number of Serb voluntary returnees who were
displaced from their homes in Kosovo. Based on strict
observance ofthe 2013 Brussels Agreements, continued
efforts must be made at the State and local levels to
guarantee security, ethnic and religious tolerance,
and the property and economic rights and freedom of
movement of Kosovar Serbs. That is the only way to
reverse this negative trend.

Turning to the issue of cultural and religious
heritage, the parties need to work together to protect this
heritage by establishing and effectively implementating
laws to safeguard that important legacy of the various
communities living in Kosovo. However, we are
concerned by incidents that have occurred against
non-majority communities and their cultural and
religious heritage. Those events must be investigated in
order to bring the perpetrators to justice.

We also value the fact that the Working Group
on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances has
presented its report (A/HRC/30/3 8/Add.1) to the Human
Rights Council with a view to shedding light on the
fate of thousands of persons who disappeared during
the conflict. We hope that regular working meetings
between the parties can be resumed as soon as possible
so that the affected families can find closure and peace.

In the framework of fighting impunity, we reiterate
our satisfaction at the approval of the measures
necessary for the establishment of a specialist court
to investigate allegations of war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed during the armed conflict
in Kosovo. We urge all interested parties to continue
working to ensure that the court can begin its work
promptly. We are convinced that the application of
judicial due process in those cases will help promote
reconciliation and peace among all parties.

Moreover, we recognize the efforts of the
authorities of the province of Kosovo to strengthen
actions to combat the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters and put an end to the recruitment of citizens
of that province by terrorist organizations. The scourge
of terrorism, which my country strongly condemns,
is a threat to international peace and security that
requires the resolute cooperation of the international
community in the effective implementation of the
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly that ban financing funding, training and the
transfer of weapons to those groups. We are convinced
that, in grappling with the terrorist threat, we must also
address the conditions that provide fertile ground for
their propagation, including poverty, social exclusion,
foreign occupation and interventionism.

To conclude, once again we encourage the parties
to redouble their efforts in the quest of a peaceful,
fair and lasting political solution, in the framework of
international law, and in full compliance with resolution

1244 (1999) and the 2013 Brussels Agreement.

