Mr. Perovic' (Montenegro): We warmly thank you,
Sir, for convening today's debate on countering the
narratives and ideologies of terrorism, and commend
Egypt's strong commitment to this relevant issue.
We also thank today's briefers for their remarkable
briefings.

Montenegro welcomes today's adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6, and aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union. I would like, however, to add some
remarks in my national capacity.

We are too often faced with terrorist attacks and
tragic events across the globe that are stark reminders
of limited results in fighting terrorism, and thus call for
more resolve, unity, coordination and active engagement
from every single State Member of the United Nations.
The ability of the United Nations and the international
community to fight terrorism has been constrained
by the inability of States to agree on a comprehensive
counter-terrorism convention, including the definition
of terrorism. Achieving a convention, including a clear
definition, is a political imperative and necessity.

In the wake of the rising numbers of terrorist
attacks, the evolving nature and growing complexity
of terrorism, and the ever-present threat of terrorist
groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
Al-Qaida, Boko Haram and others, Montenegro
considers it urgent to redouble our efforts in the fight
against terrorism, particularly in the implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

The United Nations should strive to do more to
provide political leadership to guide and encourage
international cooperation against terrorism. None of
us is immune to terrorist threats, and we need to work
together effectively. In order to increase efficiency,
Montenegro affirms that due attention has to be
given to ensuring counter-terrorism coordination and
cohesion within the United Nations system, including
by establishing a new position of United Nations
counter-terrorism coordinator for all United Nations
activities in this area. It would also help to improve
United Nations interaction with external bodies, such
as Global Counter-Terrorism Forum.

Today's violent conflicts and violent extremism
are rooted in weak institutions and governance; the
absence of respect for fundamental rights, rule of law
and justice; unemployment, marginalization, exclusion,
corruption and organized crime. It is important to keep
in mind that societies with effective, inclusive and
accountable institutions are more likely to withstand
crisis and peacefully manage disputes. The 2030
Sustainable Development Agenda (General Assembly resolution 701/), particularly in Goal 16, offers an
invaluable opportunity to make substantial progress
and a difference in this area.

Measures to counter terrorism must be in line with
human rights standards and the rule oflaw. The peaceful
expression of views that are considered extreme should
never be criminalized unless they are associated with
Violence. States should not misuse a poorly defined
concept of terrorism to suppress political opposition or
ideological dissent from mainstream values. Moreover,
in counter-terrorism operations, States have to comply
with international law and ensure the protection of
civilians.

Montenegro is of the view that the fight against
terror is a struggle to uphold the values of democracy
and human rights, and not to undermine them.
Counter-terrorist operations that are non-specific,
disproportionate, brutal and insufficiently supervized
violate the very norms that we seek to defend. They
also risk giving the terrorists a propaganda tool, thereby
making our societies neither free nor safe.

We have to do more to better understand the
underlying drivers of terrorism to be in a position to
confront this challenge more decisively. Engaging
citizens - including not only families, women, and
youth, but also religious community leaders - in public
conversations on the drivers of radicalism and violent
extremism would go a long way towards addressing
them.

We must be aware that individuals attracted to
terrorism are coming from vulnerable groups, and
only if we find a way to address the root causes that
led them to violent extremism and terrorism will we
succeed in our intention. Promoting economic, political
and social cohesion and inclusiveness and access to
justice for all must remain a priority. For Montenegro,
the focus should be placed on young people and their
empowerment, particularly through employment and
education, so that they can gain ownership of the
policies that affect them and all of us.

