Ms. Coomaraswamy: Thank you, Sir, for
convening this open debate on children and armed
conflict. Your presence signals a commitment at the
highest level to the protection of children during war. I
would also like to commend the dedication of
Ambassador Peter Wittig and his staff for their
effective engagement as Chair of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict. Their dedication must
be truly commended and we look forward to continuing
to work closely with them.

I also want to thank the Secretary-General for
honouring us with his presence and his unwavering
support for the cause of women and children. I also
want to thank all the ministers who have come from
afar to be with us today.

The Security Council has before it the tenth
annual report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2011/250). In 15 of the 22 situations
covered in the report, we found evidence of attacks on
schools and hospitals. During my visits to conflict
areas, I have personally seen the devastation - schools
completely destroyed, bombed or burnt to the ground. I
have also seen schools with broken window panes and
empty classrooms where children have been recruited
as child soldiers. I have met girls whose colleagues
stay away from school because, as female students,
they may be the Victims of acid attacks.

These images stay in my mind and remind me of
how important it is to ensure that schools are zones of
peace for children. Half of all the children who do not
go to primary school in the world live in conflict areas.
They do not go to school because their schools have
become part of the tragedy of conflict. Schools are
increasingly under physical attack, resulting in either
full or partial destruction, oftentimes in violation of
international humanitarian law. Schools are also closed
as a result of threats and intimidation. Teachers and
students are also killed and maimed in targeted attacks.
Military use of schools is also a concern, as such use
can put children in clear danger. To deprive children of
an education is to destroy their future. A future
destroyed - a future without hope - will only sow
the seeds of further conflict.

Hospitals are also vital to children, especially in
war. Attacks on hospitals are two-fold atrocities; not
only do they kill and wound girls and boys, but they
also leave them without access to treatment. Attacks on
hospitals and hospital personnel deprive the
community of a much-needed lifeline. In fact,
protecting hospitals and its personnel was the founding
element of modern humanitarian law.

The Secretary-General has repeatedly called for
strengthened attention to and focus on the need to
protect schools and hospitals from attack. Germany's
initiative to bring today's resolution 1998 (2011)
forward demonstrates the Council's resolve to expand
the protection of girls and boys. The resolution
provides for the listing of parties who attack schools
and hospitals and those who use intimidation to force
their closure. It also reaffirms the need for the
enhanced monitoring and reporting of incidents where
there are violations that deprive children of their right
to go to school or be treated in hospitals. The
resolution gives concrete impetus for action on the
ground to protect these facilities.

The promise of the resolution is very real. I know
this because we have achieved so much since the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005). What I would like
to highlight today are a few successes we have had,
and thereby to thank the Council for being steadfast
and committed to children.
11-41067

First, in February this year, the Afghan
Government signed an action plan for the prevention of
underage recruitment into the Afghan security forces,
including the police. The United Nations country task
force on children and armed conflict, with access to
military and police installations, has sent to my Office
progress reports about the effective implementation of
the plan. Further, the Ulema Shura, the highest
religious body, has proclaimed a fatwa on violations
committed against children in conflict.

Secondly, last year in Nepal, 2,973 minors were
discharged. Despite a few concerns about reintegration,
the United Nations country team has risen to the
challenge, offering programmes and following up on
the children once they returned to the community.

Thirdly, in the Philippines in January 2010, the
Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) signed an action
plan with the United Nations with the full support of
the Government. Further, MILF issued a supplemental
general order warning its commanders of sanctions for
recruiting and using children and created child
protection units. Children are now being registered and
released, and UNICEF and the International Labour
Organization (ILO) have stepped up their presence to
provide these children with education and vocational
skills.

Fourthly, in the Central African Republic during
the course of 2010, 525 children were separated from
the ranks of the Armee populaire pour la restauration
de la democratie following the commitment made by
their commander during my visit to the Central African
Republic a few years ago.

Fifthly, in Sri Lanka, 562 children, including 201
identified at the end of the conflict as formerly
associated with armed groups, were released after one
year of rehabilitation. They were reunited with their
families by a magistrate's order. This was done in close
cooperation with UNICEF and my Special Envoy.

Lastly, I also visited Chad in June to witness the
action plan signed between the Government of Chad
and the United Nations for the release of children.
Again, they have given the United Nations access to
military installations and have requested our assistance
in the reintegration of the children into the community.
Moving forward, I am hopeful that I will be able to
witness the signing of an action plan with the
Government of Myanmar, which acknowledges the key
role of the country task force, including UNICEF and
IL0, in the coming months.

Yet, great challenges remain. Persistent violators
of children are on the list of the Secretary-General with
little action taken against them. Their impunity remains
a blot on justice systems, both national and
international. In time, the Council must deal with this
issue in a comprehensive manner and find ways and
means of dealing with perpetrators. As a testimony to
that, a list of persistent violators is attached to my
statement. The reintegration of children often left at the
doorstep of UNICEF and its partners also requires the
commitment of resources and personnel.

While we work with these issues of
accountability, we must also attempt to understand the
root causes of violations against children. Without
prevention and understanding, long-term solutions will
not be sustainable.

In 1999, the Council began a journey of great
promise. There have been important landmarks along
the way, including the Council's demand for clear
monitoring of violations, the proper implementation of
action plans and accountability. Governments and
non-State actors have begun to respond to the
Council's call for action. When I meet them in the field
they display great respect for the power and authority
of the Security Council. In addition, the Council's
commitment has real and positive effects on the lives
of thousands of children. As Council members have
just heard from the Secretary-General, only last year
10,000 children were released from armed forces and
groups and reintegrated into their communities. Today,
at this open debate, I bring the Council their message
of thanks.

When I was in Chad recently, I met with many
children in a refugee camp. One girl grabbed my hand,
curled her fingers around my wrist and whispered,
"Madame, I want to go to school." Today, with the
Council's adoption of resolution 1998 (2011), we have
acknowledged the importance of schools and education
to children all over the world, especially in conflict
areas. We hope it will usher in an era where children
can study, play and learn in an atmosphere of safety
and dignity.

