Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, we thank you for having convened this
emergency meeting, which gives the Security Council
an opportunity to consider the tragic events that are
currently taking place in Gaza. The presence of the
Secretary-General, which we welcome, clearly attests
to the importance and urgency of the situation.

We condemn the use of force by anyone on either
side. We regret the great loss of life in the current
crisis, including among civilians, that has resulted from
Israel's disproportionate military operations in Gaza.
We call upon Israel to comply with international
conventions, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War. We also cannot condone the
repeated firing of rockets by Hamas, which endangers
the lives of both Israeli and Palestinian civilians. My
delegation calls for an immediate ceasefire in order to
avert an escalation that could engulf the entire region,
as well as to facilitate the provision of humanitarian
assistance, especially in order to evacuate the
wounded.

By adopting resolution 1850 (2008), on
16 December, the Security Council called on the
parties to honour their commitments under the Road
Map, the Arab Peace Initiative and the relative
resolutions of the Council. In line with those very
commitments, we call on the parties to abandon the
military option and to choose the path of dialogue, for
violence will in fact only delay the prospects for peace
in the Middle East.

Despite Israel's withdrawal from the territory,
Gaza is among the key issues recently focusing
attention on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In that
regard, 2008 will go down as a year of great suffering
for the people of Gaza; but it will also be one of great
tragedy for the people of southern Israel, who have
lived with the anxiety caused by indiscriminate firing
of rockets. The current crisis therefore entails a number
of security concerns, which above all fall within the
responsibility of the Security Council. How can the
security of Israel, which is under threat from rocket
launches from Gaza, be ensured? How can the
Palestinian population be protected from Israel's
military incursions and repeated embargos? How can
emergency humanitarian assistance for the people of
Gaza be ensured today? Those are the great current
challenges that the Security Council must address.

At the same time, pending a comprehensive
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, it is
important that the Security Council agree on the
answers to those questions. That is especially so given
that reality on the ground calls for immediate action.
That includes the urgent need for Israel to open border
crossings to humanitarian assistance, and in particular
to allow access for humanitarian workers and the
delivery of assistance by a number of States. The
international community, including the League of Arab
States, has a duty to continue to help the parties to find
a solution to the current crisis and, in general, to work
to bring about a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

We have just received the draft resolution that has
been introduced by Libya. We shall consider it in due
course.

