Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Permanent Representatives
of the Republic of Korea, Australia and Morocco for
their detailed reports on the Committees they chair. We
take note of their fruitful work in the context of their
chairmanships.

Terrorism, despite all of the efforts of the
international community, remains one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security. That
is evidenced by the ongoing terrorist attacks in various
areas of the world, to which innocent people, including
children, daily fall victim. It is clear that terrorism adapts
itself to new realities at breakneck speed, becoming
ever more serious and acquiring new dimensions. More
often than not, terrorist attacks are occurring in regions
of the world where this phenomenon had never before
been seen.

Of most serious concern today are the developments
in Syria and the region. Almost daily, the region
is witnessing terrorist attacks, the uncontrolled
proliferation of weapons and infiltration by combatants.
We condemn in the strongest terms terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, by whomsoever committed.
We expect other countries to take the same unwavering
stance in combating this global scourge.

Double standards, the categorization of terrorists
as good or bad, and any attempts to justify barbaric
activities are absolutely inadmissible. Against that
backdrop, the activities of the three counter-terrorism
Committees and the strengthening of their cooperation
play a key role in increasing the effectiveness of the
Security Council in the fight against terrorism.

We believe that the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) is the cornerstone and the foundation of the United
Nations counter-terrorism architecture. Recently the
Chair ofthe CTC, Mr. Loulichki, briefed Member States
on the updated format of the basic documents for the
review of the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
and improvements to the rules for its work with respect
to the outcome of country visits. We are convinced that
those reforms and the continuation of the practice of
country visits will allow the CTC to more effectively
carry out its mandate, complementing the process of the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and the work being done in this area
by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.

Given the growing instability in various
regions of the world, we must prevent any further
radicalization of populations and the triggering of
sectarian or inter-religious clashes. In that regard, we
deem of fundamental importance the implementation
of resolution 1624 (2005), focusing on preventing
terrorism, limiting the range of terrorist activities,
combating the spread of terrorist ideology and violent
extremism and the use of media and the Internet for
terrorist purposes.

Of particular importance here is the strengthening
of the CTC's contacts with organizations in the
international arena in order to expand the network
of counter-terrorism cooperation under the auspices
of the United Nations. In that regard, we note the
contacts of the CTC, as well as the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), with the Meeting of Heads of Special Services,
Security Agencies and Law-Enforcement Organizations
on terrorism-related issues, which was conducted by
the Federal Security Service of the Russian Federation.
In our view, the briefing to the CTC by representatives
of the Meeting have proved to be valuable.

We continue to value the role of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
in providing assistance to the CTC. We should like
to express our gratitude to the outgoing Executive
Director, Mr. Smith, for his contribution to resolving
the daunting challenges before the CTED under its
mandate, as set out in resolution 1963 (2010).

The 1267 and 1989 Committee remains one of the
most effective mechanisms in the Security Council's
counter-terrorism efforts. Its sanctions list should
adequately reflect the Al-Qaida threat, which, as recent
events in the Arab world and in Africa show, remains
significant. We support the proposal to include new
entries on the list. We believe also that the Committee
must swiftly respond to existing threats without
excessive bureaucratic red tape and consider States'
listing requests, guided by its mandate to combat
terrorism.

However, the practice of the adoption of sanctions
against individuals and entities involved in terrorist
activities must continue to be based on a case-by-case
approach, in line with the relevant procedures.

The mandate of the Ombudsman on delisting and
the procedure for considering requests for exclusion
from the list set forth in resolution 2083 (2012) ensures
optimal transparency in the work of the Committee.
However, a more important task is enhancing the
effectiveness of sanctions mechanisms, which is
dependent on the implementation by Member States of
their international obligations in that area.

Unfortunately, as practice has shown, unresolved
issues remain. These include, running counter to
paragraph 4 of resolution 2083 (2012), the Kavkaz
Center website, an information portal for the terrorist
organization Emarat Kavkaz, which in July 2011 was
included on the sanctions list. That site continues to
promote terrorism and religious intolerance.

Preventing weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery from falling into the hands of
terrorists remains one of the most important challenges
for the international community. A key instrument for
doing so is resolution 1540 (2004), which provides, inter
alia, for the implementation by Member States of the
measures necessary to strengthen national systems for
monitoring and control in the field of non-proliferation.
Russia continues to support the implementation of that
resolution by all countries, fully taking into account the
complex and long-term nature of its requirements.

We support the efforts of Ambassador Kim Sook to
ensure the effective functioning of the 1540 Committee
on a regular and predictable basis. The work of the
Group of Experts has made a significant contribution
to the Committee.

In the context of the Committee's activities during
the past six months, we would highlight the report
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In
addition to being a review, it takes note of the progress
made and charts a course for the future work of the
Committee.

With respect to future work, we suggest that the
Committee attach greater importance to the issue
of the provision of assistance to States in carrying
out the tasks set out in resolution 1540 (2004). The
Committee's coordinating role in the relevant efforts
of the international community is crucial. For its part,
Russia will continue to actively participate in those
activities, including in the context of our cooperation
with the States members of the Commonwealth of
Independent States on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).

