Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Special
Representative Jan Kubis for his briefing this morning
and for his leadership of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his statement and his close
engagement in the Council's work on Afghanistan.

I also want to recognize the dedication and efforts
of all United Nations personnel in Afghanistan. The
death of four United Nations staff, as well as Afghan
and international civilians, in the attack of 17 January
on the Taverna restaurant in Kabul was a reminder of
the risks faced by civilians in Afghanistan, including
United Nations and other international staff. The
Council condemned that attack in the strongest terms,
and I reiterate our condolences to the families, friends
and colleagues of those involved.

Resolution 2145 (2014), which we havejust adopted,
is a firm statement of the international community's
continuing commitment to Afghanistan and its people.
The resolution provides the right mandate to ensure that
the United Nations can continue to support Afghanistan
during the completion of security transition. This
12-month renewal preserves UNAMA's core mandate,
ensuring continuity in UNAMA's support for Afghan-
1ed efforts to strengthen governance and build capacity.

As we know, 2014 is a pivotal year for Afghanistan,
with the Government assuming full responsibility
for security as well as the management of political
transition, which is as critical to Afghanistan's
transformation as the continuing security, stabilization
and reconstruction efforts.

The international community will be closely
watching the presidential and provincial council
elections early next month. They constitute a historic
moment for Afghanistan's transition. An inclusive,
transparent and credible presidential election process
is necessary.

Australia welcomes the United Nations role in
supporting the elections and encourages the Afghan
Government to continue to work with the United
Nations in order to strengthen the sustainability,
integrity and inclusiveness of the electoral process.
We encourage continued efforts to ensure that women
are able to safely exercise their right to vote and to
participate in the process. Their participation will be a
decisive measure of the representativeness and success
of the elections. It is also essential that the Independent
Election Commission and the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission be enabled to fulfil their
critical roles.
Beyond the elections, we look to a new Afghan
Government to address key political, governance and
security challenges, with the support of the United
Nations. The leadership and considered decisions of
the new Government will be the key determinant of
the international community's support for Afghanistan
post-2014.

The 2012 Tokyo Conference saw an unprecedented
level of resources pledged to Afghanistan. Progress
against Afghanistan's commitments by a new Afghan
Government, as well as by the international community,
is necessary to support sustainable economic and social
development in Afghanistan. Of particular importance
will be progress by the Afghan Government to improve
governance and the rule of law, including transitional
justice, budget execution, combating corruption and
improving accountability.

On human rights, Afghanistan needs to be vigilant
in building on the gains of the past decade, particularly
in relation to the rights of women and girls. Today's
resolution reaffirms that message. We continue to urge
the full implementation of the law on elimination of
Violence against women and to encourage the Afghan
Government to finalize and implement a national
action plan on women and peace and security so as to
support the active participation of women in the peace
and reconciliation process.

We remain concerned about the increasing number
of civilians killed and wounded in conflict, as outlined
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2014/163). That
includes development and humanitarian workers. We
support further sustained efforts by Afghanistan to
track civilian casualties.

We also encourage the Afghan authorities to provide
full support to the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission so that it can fulfil its necessary
role as an effective and independent institution.

The Afghan Government must send a strong
message to the international community about its
commitment to security over the long term. Security
challenges limit the international community's ability
to provide effective support. The Afghan National
Security Forces (ANSF) has demonstrated its capability
in fighting the insurgency and providing security for the
Afghan people, but it must continue to expand security
across Afghanistan. Australia will continue to support
the ANSF, through our sustainment commitment,
agreed in Chicago in 2012, and through the continued
presence of Australian military personnel in training
and advisory roles.

We continue to encourage Afghanistan to sign the
bilateral security agreement with the United States
and to conclude NATO status-of-forces agreement
negotiations as soon as possible to provide the legal
basis for the post-2014 mission and to enable planning
for a post-2014 military presence to proceed.

In conclusion, Australia, along with the United
Nations and international community, will continue to
support Afghanistan at the national level. But reform
and progress are naturally the responsibility of the
Afghan Government and people. Leadership by the
Afghan Government will be critical in meeting the
security, political and economic challenges in 2014 and
beyond transition.

