Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Thank
you, Mr. President, for your presence here today and
for convening this important debate. I also thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his informative
briefing.

My Government is pleased tojoin in commemorating
the tenth anniversary of resolution 1540 (2004) and
in adopting a presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/7)
regarding our continued commitment to the goals of
that landmark measure.

Over the past year, we have been reminded of
the horror that can result when weapons of mass
destruction are used. Resolution 1540 (2004) was
designed to minimize that possibility through concerted
international action to prevent the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological arms and their means
of delivery, especially to non-State actors, including
terrorists.

In 2004, working with many of those present, my
Government crafted a draft resolution specifying some
200 technical and legal obligations every State should
undertake to make proliferation riskier for those who
attempt it, and easier to detect and stop when they do.

Since the resolution was adopted, the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) has identified hundreds of additional
measures that States on every continent have taken
to prohibit weapons of mass destruction proliferation
activities, secure sensitive related materials and combat
illicit trafficking of such items in response to the
obligations the resolution created.

Fifteen international organizations and almost four
dozen countries, including my own, have registered as
assistance providers. When a country requests help in
order to meet its obligations, we are prepared to provide
it. Regional groups, such as the African Union, the
European Union, the Organization of American States
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, have incorporated elements of the resolution
into their mandates and daily work.

Non-proliferation has also become a major goal
of civil society. As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
remarked last week, the resolution has become a key
component of the global security architecture.

Accordingly, I commend the efforts of the
Council's 1540 Committee, including its current and
highly effective Chair, the Republic of Korea. Since
its establishment, the 1540 Committee has done an
excellent job of coordinating the global effort to
implement that vital resolution.

Looking ahead, we know that there remains much
more that we can and must do. Stopping the spread of
nuclear, biological and chemical weapons is not one of
those fields where a pretty good record is enough. The
potential consequences of failure anywhere, and at any
time, could be catastrophic.

Recognizing that challenge, President Obama
established the Nuclear Security Summit process.
During the third Summit, held in March in The Hague,
over 30 countries produced ajoint statement calling for
the full, global implementation of the nuclear security
elements ofresolution 1540 (2004) prior to the Council's
next comprehensive review in 2016 - a welcome sign
that global vigilance is high and that we are determined
to work cooperatively to protect our citizens.

The imperative now is to continue moving
forward with the tasks outlined a decade ago. Each
State must identify its own vulnerabilities and gaps
in implementation. Each must develop a plan for next
steps, based on a clear sense of priorities for action.
Any State that lacks the capacity to take needed
measures should request help. States and organizations
that are in the position to assist should do so. Everyone
involved should be open to sharing useful information
on a timely basis.

The United States is committed to doing its part. As
shown in its most recent report to the 1540 Committee,
my Government meets or exceeds international
standards in implementing all of its obligations. The

report documents dozens of measures taken since 2004
that are designed to implement the resolution's goals.

On the financial side, the United States has
contributed $4.5 million to the United Nations trust
fund to support resolution 1540 (2004). That is in
addition to numerous bilateral aid projects. We have
also emphasized the importance of helping States draft
effective laws to criminalize and prosecute activities
that allow proliferation to take place. We are pleased
that the 1540 Committee has begun working with
parliamentarians, including the Inter-Parliamentary
Union, to organize that assistance.

The widespread availability of information is
a defining characteristic of our age. There are many
benefits to this, but one of the dangers is that people
who wish to inflict great harm on others have access
to the knowledge that would allow them to do so. That
is especially the case with respect to biological agents,
which are often able to reproduce themselves, meaning
that a proliferator need only acquire a small amount
of a pathogen to pose a large risk. For that reason,
my Government proposes that special emphasis be
placed on improving the design of national and global
approaches to the problem of biosecurity, and one way
to do so is to promote the global health security agenda.

We recognize that terrorists and other proliferators
will employ new technologies and methods to gain
access to prohibited materials and to avoid detection in
transporting and possibly using them. In response, we
cannot afford to be complacent. The security system
that was adequate five years ago may not be sufficient
now, and today's good system may be obsolete within
a few years.

In closing, I emphasize the global nature of the
threat addressed by resolution 1540 (2004). That
includes chemical weapons of the type so ruthlessly
deployed against civilians in Syria, toxins sent
through the mail in the United States, the complicity
of some Governments in proliferation, including that
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and the
knowledge that terrorist and militant groups in many
parts of the world have actively sought to acquire the
means to produce weapons of mass destruction. With
that threat always before us, we must proceed with
renewed vigour to implement resolution 1540 (2004)
fully, cooperatively and urgently.

