Mr. Kolby (Norway): Norway welcomes this
opportunity to exchange information and views with
concerned Member States regarding the situation in
Somalia and the efforts to bring lasting peace to the
country. We are pleased to welcome, once again, Prime
Minister Galaydh of the Transitional National
Government (TNG) to the Council.

Norway commends the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia and the Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. David Stephen, for their tireless
support towards peace in Somalia. We emphasize the
importance of sustained and comprehensive United
Nations efforts for Somalia on the political,
humanitarian and development levels.

Norway views efforts to further peace-building
and stability in Somalia in a long-term perspective.
Completion of the Arta peace process remains a key
priority and the only available option for lasting peace
in Somalia. We encourage the Transitional National
Government, political parties and leaders, traditional
leaders and factions in Somalia to continuously make
every effort to complete the Arta process through
dialogue and the involvement of all parties in a spirit of
mutual accommodation and tolerance. We call on all
parties to refrain from actions that serve to undermine
the outcome of the Arta peace process. While the
search for a national solution continues, it is also
important that unwavering attention be paid to
achieving local political settlements in Somalia.

Concerted involvement on the part of the
international community could help facilitate this
process and we welcome the intent of the Organization
of African Unity to field a mission to Somalia in this
regard. We also value the efforts of the United Nations,
the Red Cross and Red Crescent movement and other
humanitarian and development agencies in assisting the
Somali people in all regions of the country.

Continuous and unimpeded humanitarian and
development assistance is now more than ever essential
to meet humanitarian needs, to secure and strengthen
the fragile stability already obtained in some regions
and to build the basis for stability in other regions. We
strongly encourage the Members of the United Nations
to contribute generously to the Consolidated Inter-
Agency Appeals for Somalia.

We further support the process initiated by the
United Nations to review the functions of the Somalia
Aid Coordination Body in order to facilitate a
concerted approach towards Somalia by the
international community.

A central task in the peace-building process is
disarmament, not least with respect to small arms,
within Somali society. We acknowledge the
Transitional National Government's efforts in this
regard. The international community needs to discuss
how the TNG's efforts for broad disarmament,
demobilization and rehabilitation in Somalia can best
be supported.

Norway strongly condemns the attack this past
weekend on a police station in Mogadishu, resulting in
the deaths of a number of officers and civilians. We
note, however, that there nonetheless seems to have
been some improvement in the security situation in
Somalia recently and stress that peace-building in
Somalia should not be held hostage to deliberate
actions by a small subset of Somalis to prevent the
country from returning to normalcy and rehabilitation
of its governing structures. Against this background,
we encourage the United Nations to carry out a
comprehensive security assessment in Somalia, which
we understand would be the first of its kind since 1995.

We must seek to introduce appropriate support
structures in Somalia, inter alia, to avoid the country's
becoming a safe haven for terrorists. The 11 September
events have changed the world and we cannot pretend
otherwise.

We call on the concerned States in the Horn of
Africa to contribute constructively to the peace efforts
in Somalia. The situation in Somalia and the objective
of long-term regional stability can most effectively be
addressed if neighbouring States reinforce the process
of national reconciliation and the process of rebuilding
national institutions in Somalia. We call on all States
and other actors to comply scrupulously with the arms
embargo established by resolution 733 (1992).

We recognize Ethiopia's genuine right to patrol
its border with Somalia, but also encourage Ethiopia to
use its influence with the Somalia Reconciliation and
Restoration Council and its members to promote
reconciliation with the Transitional National
Government.

We acknowledge Djibouti's major contribution to
the Arta process and welcome its continued role in
furthering peace and reconciliation in Somalia.

We encourage the Secretary-General to consult all
concerned on the feasibility of setting up a committee
of friends of Somalia to facilitate exchange of
information and coordination of efforts among regional
actors and to focus on ways and means to draw
attention to Somalia's needs in the area of national
reconciliation. Such a committee should be based in the
region. It should facilitate concerted approaches and
should contribute to the regional capacity to explore
and advance national reconciliation in Somalia. It
should consolidate support for completion of the Arta
process and should interact closely with the Security
Council in that regard. We also strongly support the
role of the OAU and of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development in this context.

