Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate you most sincerely, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I also thank you for your
ongoing coordination efforts during Colombia's
membership of the Council.

We are all aware of the significance of today's
deliberations, especially for the Sudan. In particular,
the report of the Secretary-General before the Security
Council (S/2011/239) is the penultimate report on the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) and the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS). The interim
period will end in just over two months. This is the
most decisive, crucial and sensitive period for the two
parties to the CPA. During that time, they will have to
redouble their efforts in order to reach political
settlements on outstanding issues, so as to achieve the
primary goal of the CPA, namely, the establishment of
lasting peace and security in both the North and the
South.
11-30506
The report of the Secretary-General sheds light
on numerous political developments during the
reporting period. Chief among those is the completion
of the referendum in a safe, fair and transparent
manner, as has been communicated to the Council by
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, head of the United Nations panel
tasked with monitoring the referendum. However, the
referendum is not an end in itself. We have reached the
point where we must conclude the implementation of
the CPA, not just by resolving outstanding issues but
also by initiating arrangements to enhance integration
between the North and South following separation.

Our desire in the North to promote fraternal
relations, in particular with the nascent State in the
South, was illustrated by the historic statement
delivered by our President during his visit to Juba prior
to the referendum, as well as by his statement to the
Cabinet at the time of the referendum's endorsement.
Once again, I wish to stress here that the principles and
guidelines declared by Sudan's President constitute
both our platform and our approach to addressing post-
referendum arrangements, including on the issues of
citizenship, debt, assets, water, international
instruments, security, economic arrangements, the
demarcation of the border and the situation in Abyei -
in spite of the thorny nature of those issues and the
time they require. We have reiterated many times here
in the Council that we would like - and are in fact
eager - to provide assistance to the nascent State in
the South, for we understand that security there also
means security for the North.

In its section on Abyei, the report of the
Secretary-General sheds light on many developments
experienced in the region during the reporting period.
Paragraph 17 refers to the 13 January Kadugli
agreement between the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka
tribes, as well as to the 17 January agreement between
the Ministers of the Interior of the two parties to the
CPA. Those agreements provide for arrangements to
find solutions to disputes. If the two parties adhere to
them, those arrangements will bring about an end
conflict. The agreements also provide for the
deployment of two additional Joint Integrated Unit
battalions, while withdrawing all Southern-affiliated
police units. However, clashes flared up once again
when Misseriya tribe members were prevented from
taking their herds to water sources.
No one can argue that addressing security issues
and concerns will ever substitute for a comprehensive

political settlement on Abyei. As the Council is aware,
the Government of the Sudan has continued to
positively address the proposals on the situation and
status of Abyei provided by the facilitators and
mediators, as they represent members of the Council.
Those include the framework proposals submitted by
Mr. Thabo Mbeki, head of the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel. However, those proposals
fell on deaf ears on the other side, which failed to
respond positively and rejected them. In the light of the
flexibility we in the North have shown, we call upon
the Council today to resolve the question of Abyei. We
propose that the other party should also take steps to
demonstrate flexibility, in order to help the facilitators
and mediators to address the problem. We would like to
emphasize that we are prepared to show the necessary
flexibility, taking into consideration the circumstances
in the region, so as to reach a final solution to the
Abyei issue.

We have followed up on the preparations for the
legislative elections to be held in South Kordofan state.
Those elections were among the requirements of the
popular consultations provided for in the CPA.
Preparations began with voter registration and the
publication of candidate lists to carry out elections for
the legislative council. I would like to emphasize that
we in the North are committed to making progress and
to continuing the preparations. I wish to reassure the
Council that the elections will take place from 2 to
4 May, as scheduled. That will constitute a great stride
towards completing the popular consultations. We will
provide the Council with updates on developments in
due course. I also wish to reassure the Council that
both parties are participating in the popular
consultations.

In his briefing, our friend Atul Khare referred to
clashes in certain areas of Southern Kordofan. I wish to
stress that those were the same kind of actions as take
place in the context of competition between any two
parties in preparations for elections anywhere in the
world; they are not policies aimed at reigniting
hostilities. They flared up, but were contained
immediately.

Following elections for the Legislative Council in
Southern Kordofan, we will initiate public
consultations aimed at assessing public opinion in
connection with the services provided by the State.
This is an aspect that has already been achieved in
Blue Nile State, which is a step ahead of Southern
Kordofan. Generally speaking, the popular
consultations in both States are taking place in an
objective manner; there are no major problems in this
regard.

As noted in paragraph 42 of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/239), the SPLA presence in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States is an issue that
should be discussed, investigated and addressed on the
basis of the CPA - that is, those forces should be
withdrawn. I wanted to provide the Council with
details so that it would be aware of where the problem
lies - that the SPLA has not yet withdrawn its
elements from Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
States, which could have a negative impact on the
popular consultations. We therefore call on the Council
to send a strong message. We are not asking for
condemnation, but for the Council to encourage the
SPLA to implement the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, specifically on this aspect.

I would recall that the Sudanese military made a
commitment to all of the aspects of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement by withdrawing all of its units and
the Joint Integrated Units from Southern Sudan. SPLA
redeployment from the North remains at 37 per cent.
According to the report of the Secretary-General, that
aspect should be addressed by the Council, as these
issues are intertwined.

Regarding security developments in Southern
Sudan, the report before the Council and the briefing
provided by Mr. Atul Khare paint a grim picture of the
situation in Southern Sudan. It can be summed up as
follows: there are too many insurgent units. I could
describe them as an amoeba - a kind of creature that
keeps growing and growing. Every day we hear of a
new instance of an insurgent battalion defecting and
taking up arms against the State. I personally drew
attention to this issue one month ago, when Mr. Pagan
Amun participated in the meeting of the Council.
However, Mr. Amun did not like my statements. I
believe that this is not the right approach to tackling
these issues.

We welcome the role of the United Nations and
of UNMIS. We pay tribute to them for the credible
information they have presented in depicting the issues
and shedding light on the problems beleaguering
Southern Sudan. The goal is for that nascent State to be
stable, secure and deserving of international support,
especially in the area of development. It should prepare

and transform itself from an elitist military
organization into a State that is inclusive of all the
political parties in Southern Sudan. The units in
question should be integrated and reached out to, not
excluded, for their exclusion would mean that the
nascent State had failed before even seeing the light.

I am sharing this with the Council not as an
opponent of the South but as a Sudanese citizen who is
truly looking forward to the stability and security of
both the North and the South. I therefore wish to paint
a true picture of the situation and thereby help the
Council to take the right decision.

Another aspect that shows that recently there
have been tremendous problems related to the SPLA is
the fact that they have prevented many elements from
reaching the region. They have prevented UNMIS from
carrying out its humanitarian work, let alone fulfilling
its military mandate.

In closing, I wish to recall what I said earlier: that
this is a mushrooming phenomenon. George Athor, the
insurgent SPLA General, and many others have
defected and separated from the SPLA.

Regarding the recommendations on the future of
UNMIS, the Mission's mandate will expire before
9July, the date that marks the end of the interim
period. Therefore, we endorse the technical and
temporary extension of the UNMIS mandate until
9 July, as proposed in paragraph 111 of the report.

We are determined to intensify our consultations
with our brethren in the SPLA so as to resolve all
outstanding issues, including the status of Abyei. What
is needed at this stage is for the international
community, in particular the Security Council, to build
confidence between the two parties and to support their
efforts to resolve those issues. We are filled with hope
that our brethren in the SPLA will understand the
requirements of the forthcoming period and the
daunting challenges that we will face. In that way,
together we will be able to present a civilized example
of two neighbouring countries sharing many common
denominators in terms of history and brotherhood.

