Ms. Rice (United States of America): On behalf
of my co-leader, Ambassador Loulichki, I would like
to begin this report on the Council's trip to Liberia by
thanking the Officer-in-Charge of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), Moustapha Soumare, and
his team for welcoming us and for greatly facilitating
our successful visit.

The Council undertook the trip, which was our first
to Liberia since 2009, to examine the country's efforts to
improve its security and rule of law institutions, to foster
national reconciliation and to position itself for UNMIL's
eventual drawdown. We also assessed inter-mission
cooperation between UNMIL and the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI), as well as the
security challenges along the Ivorian-Liberian border.

Although our visit was short, we covered a great
deal of ground. We arrived in Monrovia on the afternoon
of 19 May and met with President Johnson-Sirleaf and
members of her Cabinet. President J ohnson-Sirleaf told
us that her Government's priorities included improving
youth education and employment opportunities, access
to equitable justice, infrastructure development and
reconciliation efforts. She stressed that improving rule
of law capabilities, economic growth, governance and
human development were key to Liberia's future, and
commended the strong partnership between the United
Nations and Liberia.

When asked about UNMIL's transition, the
President called for greater international support for
Liberia's police, because Liberia's domestic capacity
to provide security needed to increase in line with the
expected decrease in United Nations troops. She also
stressed that corruption remained a significant problem.
Our discussion covered regional concerns, including
the Ivorian border region and the crises in Mali and
Guinea-Bissau, as well as the challenges of resolving
domestic land ownership disputes.

The following day, the Council visited Liberia's
National Police Training Academy, where we discussed
rule of law challenges with the Minister of Justice,
the Inspector-General of the police, and the heads
of the Drug Enforcement Agency and the Bureau
of Immigration and Naturalization. The Minister of
Justice stressed the need to decentralize the delivery of
justice to the people, and cited the five planned United
Nations peacebuilding-supported justice hubs, the first
of which will open in June, as critical to extending
State authority throughout the country. She described
Liberia's preparations for UNMIL's gradual drawdown,
and requested continued coordination with UNMIL to
ensure a smooth transition.

Council members discussed the challenges to
improving Liberia's internal security, including
financial limitations, staffing and supporting remote
security outposts, and the threat posed by international
drug traffickers and organized criminals. The mission
met with UNMIL's leadership and the United Nations
country team, hosted by the Indian all-female formed
police unit, which continues to demonstrate the value of
women's participation in Liberia's security institutions.
They also put on an excellent presentation of their
martial arts skills during police training exercises.

With the United Nations leadership, we discussed
the difficulties of increasing Liberia's police capacity,
including its ability to train and support a force large
and capable enough to allow UNMIL to draw down
responsibly. The Council was briefed on the challenge
of addressing human rights abuses, especially sexual and
gender-based violence. UNMIL stressed the ongoing
positive coordination with Liberia's leaders in planning
for the transition period.

Our meeting with roughly 30 Liberian civil society
leaders focused on the obstacles to lasting national
reconciliation. In a vibrant exchange of views, the
leaders pressed for increasing the role and voice
of women in Government, enhanced interreligious
dialogue, and addressing corruption and impunity. The
Council also visited an UNMIL-supported programme
in Congo Town that offers livelihood training to women
who were engaged in harmful practices to other women
and girls. The programme provided its participants with
alternative income-generation skills and helped sensitize
them in culturally appropriate ways to decreasing the
practice of female genital mutilation.

Concluding this leg of the trip, the Council visited
the Firestone rubber plantation, one of Liberia's top
employers, where we discussed the opportunities and
challenges facing businesses operating in the country.

On 22 May, the Council returned to Liberia to
visit the PTP refugee camp located in Zwedru, close
to the Ivorian border, where we were briefed by the
Executive Director of the Liberia Refugee Repatriation
and Resettlement Commission and by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) on the Ivorian refugee situation in the eastern
part of Liberia. UNHCR and other relief organizations
on the ground deserve credit and our gratitude for the
valuable humanitarian work they have undertaken to
support the refugees in eastern Liberia.

We then heard from the refugee representatives
and refugees themselves, who shared their experiences,
their hopes and what they perceived as obstacles to
their return to cote d'Ivoire. Although the majority of
Ivorian refugees have already returned home, those
who remained cited fear of persecution, as well as land
expropriation issues, as reasons preventing them from
returning to Cote d'Ivoire. It appeared that accurate,
timely reporting on the situation from their homes could
help to counteract rumours and inaccurate information
that circulated within the camps. Some refugees we met
were clearly Gbagbo loyalists who said that they would
not return until President Ouattara was gone, if at all.

Representatives of UNMIL and UNOCI also briefed
the Council on inter-mission cooperation along the
Liberian-Ivorian border. They noted the various security
challenges that emerged following the Ivorian crisis, as
well as the innovative joint steps they have undertaken
to strengthen coordination and cooperation to better
monitor the border situation and to facilitate refugee
repatriation.

Overall, the Council witnessed the considerable
progress that the people of Liberia have made since the
end of the civil war in 2003. We left encouraged about
the future, sober about the ongoing challenges, and
even more cognizant of the need to handle UNMIL's
transition responsibly.

