Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I wish to thank the
Mexican presidency for convening this open debate on
children and armed conflict, a subject in which Italy is
very involved. I would also like to commend
Ambassador Heller for his valuable leadership of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. Finally, I express my deep
appreciation to Special Representative Coomaraswamy
for her commitment to defending and promoting the
rights of children who are victims of armed conflicts.
In taking the floor, Italy endorses the statement
made by the representative of the European Union. We
also support the comments made by the representative
of Canada on behalf the Group of Friends for Children
and Armed Conflict, of which Italy is a member.

The protection of children's rights during armed
conflicts is one of Italy's foreign policy priorities.
During our 2007-2008 term on the Security Council,
we proposed the insertion of child protection
provisions into United Nations mission mandates. We
are glad that this has become standard practice and we
encourage the Council to continue to ensure that such
provisions are included in all relevant United Nations
mission mandates.

Moreover, just one year ago, we organized in
Rome an international conference, in cooperation with
the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
UNICEF and the non-governmental organization Save
the Children. The participants included several former
child soldiers and youth advocates of the Network of
Young People Affected by War. I cannot but stress the
importance of listening carefully to the voices of those
who have lived through such a terrible experience -
as we have today.

Finally, Italy is financing numerous projects in
various countries, targeting conflict and post-conflict
situations, with a special focus on children. We also
support rehabilitation and education programmes
through UNICEF and other United Nations agencies.

Italy welcomes the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/181) and strongly endorses its
recommendations. We join other delegations in calling
on the Security Council to adopt more vigorous
measures against persistent violators. Impunity is
indeed a critical problem. In that regard, we believe
that the International Criminal Court (ICC) has a key
role to play. In our view, the Security Council and its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
should examine ways to develop practical cooperation
with the ICC in fighting impunity.

We also attach great importance to the action
plans and welcome the signing and implementation of
plans that lead to the release and reintegration of child
soldiers.

Child Protection Advisers on United Nations
missions perform essential duties, including training.
Adequate training in child protection is one of the core
priorities set out in the relevant Security Council

resolutions. In that regard, Italy is considering
supporting a new initiative by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, in cooperation with the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF and
Save the Children, to develop a comprehensive and
systematic training programme, for all peacekeeping
personnel, on child protection and child rights. We
hope that other donors will be interested in supporting
this strategic project.

I conclude by expressing our strong support for
the United Nations campaign for the universal
ratification of the Optional Protocols to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. Universal ratification is an
ambitious but realistic goal. It would reflect our
determination to put an end to the worst violations of
the rights of the child, which are also a major threat to
the stability and welfare of our societies.

