The Secretary-General: I would like to begin by
commending you, Sir, for having organized this very
important meeting at the beginning of the new year,
2012.

At the outset, I would like to welcome most
warmly the delegations of Azerbaijan, Guatemala,
Morocco, Pakistan and Togo, which have joined the
Security Council as the newest non-permanent
members. I look forward to their active participation
and to their committed involvement in the various
agenda items before the Council. Their contributions
will be greatly valued by the Council, as well as by the
Secretariat. I wish them a very productive engagement
in this Chamber.

I would also like to express my deepest
appreciation to the delegations of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon, Lebanon and Nigeria for
their committed involvement and hard work during the
past two years. They have done much to bring credit to
the Council, and their contributions will be long
remembered.

The African Union (AU) is a vital strategic
partner to the United Nations, and South Africa is
utilizing its presidency to deepen that relationship. I
welcome its continued engagement.

I also recognize Ambassador Ramtane Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, and welcome the recent and first-ever AU
report on United Nations-AU cooperation. I thank the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Jean
Ping, for his initiative and leadership. As Secretary-
General, my remit is global, but I attach great
importance to the role of regional and subregional
organizations, as recognized in Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter.

Here at the United Nations, activities to enhance
stability in Africa take up a significant part of the
agenda of the Security Council and they are among my
leading priorities. Over the past decade, the AU and
subregional organizations have significantly bolstered
their own role in building an architecture for peace and
security on the African continent. Together, our
collective efforts in conflict prevention and mediation,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are making a real
difference throughout the continent.

Of course, there is more room for improvement.
We often face complex and fast-moving crises, and we
are establishing mechanisms to build common
understanding and approaches. The annual meetings
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council are one important example. There
will be differences. That is natural. Organizations with
different mandates, membership and perspectives will
occasionally have differences in approach. The
question is how we manage those differences - how
we work together. My report (S/2011/805) and this
discussion are about building on our successes,
improving coherence and harmonizing decision-
making from a firm foundation of shared values and
principles.

Over the past few years, we have strengthened
our partnership with the African Union at the
Secretariat level in several concrete ways. First, the
United Nations-African Union Joint Task Force on
Peace and Security has proven to be an effective
mechanism for consultations on an array of issues,
including Cote d'Ivoire, Libya, Somalia and the Sudan.
Secondly, we have revamped our Office in Addis
Ababa to further strengthen our cooperation, including
by improving early-warning information that will help
foster timely action and joint threat analysis. Through
military and police planners based in Addis Ababa, we
have supported the AU's planning for its expansion of
the operations of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). We also continue to work closely on other
key areas, such as elections, conflict prevention and
post-conflict reconstruction. Thirdly, our regional
offices, peacekeeping operations and special political
missions are cooperating closely with the AU and
subregional organizations.

Examples abound, including the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and joint
mediation efforts there, United Nations logistics and
planning support to AMISOM, joint efforts to combat
the threat posed by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA),
cooperation between Special Envoy Menkerios and the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel led by
President Mbeki, and much more. The United Nations
Office for West Africa, working closely with the AU
and the Economic Community of West African States,
has also been active in defusing tensions throughout
the subregion. The newly established United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, in cooperation with
the Economic Community of Central African States,
can play a similar role.

Fourthly and finally, joint assessment missions
have also been essential in ensuring a common
understanding of emerging issues. For example, we
recently deployed such a mission to the Sahel to assess
how developments in Libya are affecting the region.
We also have just dispatched a joint mission to the four
countries affected by the LRA. And under the
leadership of the AU, we have worked together to
develop a strategic concept for future AMISOM
operations, which is now under consideration by the
Security Council.

I am greatly encouraged by the concrete progress

we have made in recent years. Let us pledge to do even

more to enhance our partnership. We can do so by

learning new lessons, developing new tools and

intensifying our engagement with civil society and

women's groups active in mediation and conflict
prevention, particularly at the local level.

As we look ahead, we will need to ensure
flexibility, so that each new situation is addressed on
its own merits. We must also promote innovative
arrangements in complex situations that may require
joint actions, joint operations or enhanced partnerships.
As we do so, let us strive to maximize our collective
efforts and limited resources, and ensure that each
partnership arrangement has a clearly defined division
of labour and roles and responsibilities for each
organization. Regional organizations have comparative
advantages. So does the United Nations, not least the
weight of international law and the primary
responsibility of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Finally, let me say that I am eager to attend the
African Union summit later this month. It will be my
sixth African Union summit in a row. I look forward to
my meetings with African leaders and to continuing to
explore how we can make our strong partnership even
stronger in the years ahead.

