Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, please allow me to thank you, Mr. President,
for personally presiding over this meeting despite your
very busy schedule. I would also like to thank the
delegation of Argentina for its efforts in arranging this
meeting. We are very pleased that the Deputy Secretary-
General is here with us at today's meeting; she has made
a very important statement. I would also like to thank
Ms. Bertini from the World Food Programme (WFP) for
her statement.

At present, armed conflicts still exist in many areas
of the world, not only endangering the peace and stability
of those areas but also causing great damage and harm to
the civilians there. Over the past several decades, the
United Nations and related international organizations
have done much work towards promoting the peaceful
settlement of regional conflicts and providing assistance
to the civilians caught in conflict, and they have achieved
certain results. However, what is very disturbing to us is
that the personal security of more and more United
Nations and associated personnel and humanitarian
personnel is not duly protected. This has already had a
negative impact on the performance of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and humanitarian assistance.

The Chinese delegation supports the efforts made
by international security personnel to maintain peace and
stability in the areas concerned, as well as to provide
necessary humanitarian assistance to the civilians who are
victims of these armed conflicts. We condemn attacks of
any form against the United Nations and associated
personnel, and humanitarian personnel. We request that
the countries concerned take timely and effective

 

measures to bring the perpetrators of these atrocities to
justice.

However, it is very regrettable that some people who
have already been proved to have committed such atrocities
are still free and at large without being punished under the
law. We urge the Governments concerned and the parties
to the conflicts to abide by international humanitarian law
and human rights law and to actively cooperate with the
United Nations and related international organizations in
their endeavours to protect the security of United Nations
and associated personnel, and humanitarian personnel.

Like many countries, China believes that the mandate
of each and every United Nations peacekeeping operation
should be clear, appropriate and feasible and should include
an extensive plan for security beforehand. At the same
time, the Member States and the United Nations Secretariat
should maintain close cooperation on this question.
Similarly, we believe that such personnel, in performing
their duties, should abide by international law and by the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and
should abide by and respect the laws of the host countries.

The presidential statement that we are going to adopt
has fairly comprehensively reflected the positions of parties.
Therefore, we are in favour of this statement.

At the same time, we also believe that the United
Nations must establish effective mechanisms and adopt
highly effective measures to address such problems, rather
than merely issuing statements. The facts have shown that
limiting ourselves to issuing statements is ineffective in
solving problems of any kind. We must follow up our
statements in order to show that the United Nations will
never tolerate such atrocities.

The question of the protection of United Nations
personnel, associated personnel and humanitarian personnel
involves security, peacekeeping, legal, humanitarian and
other issues. It should therefore be jointly discussed and
managed by a variety of United Nations bodies. We believe
that today's debate will help further enhance the importance
that other United Nations organs attach to this question, and
we hope that the Security Council will be able to shoulder
its Charter responsibility and strengthen its coordination and
cooperation with other United Nations organs so that this
matter may be jointly handled in a satisfactory manner.

