Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
Mr. Jan Kubis, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for his briefing, and to
assure him of our full support to him in implementing
the tasks with which he is entrusted. We are also grateful
for the key role played by UNAMI in fulfilling its
mandate, which we just renewed through the unanimous
adoption on 14 July of resolution 2367 (2017). We urge
it to continue its work in coordinating and encouraging
dialogue with the goal of strengthening the process of
peace and reconciliation in Iraq.

We welcomed the Iraqi Government's
announcement on 10 July confirming the liberation of
the city of Mosul from Da'esh control. We recognize
the profound courage, sacrifice and determination that
the security forces and the people of Iraq in general
have continued to show in their fight to eliminate that
terrorist group's presence in their country once and for
all. We also acknowledge the interim precautionary
and protective measures that the Iraqi security forces
have taken in their campaign against Da'esh in order
to prioritize the protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure. We would like to emphasize that as long
as this terrorist group is still being expelled from the
territory of Iraq and people are being liberated from
its control, it is vital to ensure that there is full and
unrestricted humanitarian access to United Nations
aid and that the human rights of those caught up in the
conflict steps are respected and upheld.

According to the reports issued on 4 July by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, to
date, since the start of anti-terrorist operations in Mosul
in October 2016, more than 900,000 internally displaced
persons have been registered as coming from that city
alone, 709,000 of whom are still unable to return home,
in addition to the more than 3.4 million people who
have been displaced internally since the conflict began.
Furthermore, according to the Secretary-General's
report (S/2017/592), 445,000 civilians have died just in
the period from May to June of this year, bringing the
total number of deaths resulting from the conflict to

some 82,000.
We are also concerned about the information in
the report about serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law by Da'esh such as
mass burials of civilians, abductions and the sexual
enslavement of thousands of women. It has used
improvised explosive devices and carried out suicide
attacks in squares, markets and other very crowded
areas, as well as using innocent civilians as human
shields. In that regard, we firmly condemn all acts
of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable, regardless
of where, when or by whom they are committed. We
particularly condemn terrorist acts that make cowardly
use of civilians, especially women and children, as
human shields.

We reaffirm the importance of ensuring that we
combat such practices by all possible means at our
disposal, within the framework of the Charter of the
United Nations and our obligations under international
law, and that those responsible for such acts are
investigated, prosecuted and punished. With regard to
explosive devices, we believe that while the area is still
being liberated from Da'esh's control, we should focus
on demining activities and on clearing all explosive
remnants of war in order to ensure that the huge number
of displaced persons can be returned home safely.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia would also like
to pay tribute to the determination and effort of the
Iraqi people to reach a political solution that will help to
begin peacebuilding and to involve the Iraqi people in
establishing their country's sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. In that regard, we hope that the
electoral schedule and the legal mechanisms needed to
ensure that it is met can be agreed on with the consensus
of all the political parties and stakeholders involved to
the benefit of the population as a whole.

We also appreciate the efforts of the Iraqi
Government to identify missing Kuwaiti citizens
and property and to return property taken during the
conflict. We take note of the Iraqi Government's positive
actions in that regard, such as the public call broadcast
on mass media on 15 May inviting all those with
information on missing Kuwaitis to come forward, and
the explorations done in the potential burial locations of
Khamisiyah and Samawah. We hope they will produce
positive results. Lastly, we encourage all stakeholders
to continue working to achieve concrete results through
the reconciliation efforts that are so fundamental to
the process of stabilizing relations between Iraq and
Kuwait and which the Council discussed in its press
release of 14 July.
