Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): I thank you, Madame
President, for organizing today's open debate on the
situation in the Middle East. We thank Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing, and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine for his statement.

We welcomed the holding of direct Israeli-
Palestinian talks between Prime Minister Netanyahu and
President Abbas in Washington, DC, Sharm el-Sheikh
and Jerusalem, with a renewed sense of optimism. Both
parties committed themselves to negotiating in good
faith a framework agreement that would lay the
foundation for a final peace treaty. The expectation of
the international community was that this momentum
would be sustained towards the long-awaited creation of
an independent and viable Palestinian State living in
peace and security alongside Israel. Uganda is
convinced that there is no viable alternative to a
negotiated solution and that comprehensive and durable
peace lies in a two-State solution.

We urge Israelis and Palestinians alike to
summon the necessary courage to engage without delay
in substantive negotiations on all core issues, including
security, borders, settlements, refugees and Jerusalem.
In this regard, we commend the efforts undertaken by
the international community and regional partners in
facilitating negotiations. There is no doubt that the
negotiation process will require courageous decisions
and concessions by both parties.

My delegation is deeply concerned about the
recent developments that led to the stalling of direct
talks. The continued settlement activity of Israel is a
recipe for conflict. In this regard, the recent demolition
of the Shepherd Hotel and the planned construction of
a new settlement are not conducive to negotiations. In
our View, such actions constitute an obstacle to peace.
We reiterate our call upon Israel to freeze all settlement
activity, including natural growth.

Uganda salutes the Palestinian Authority, under
the leadership of President Abbas and Prime Minister
Fayyad, for the significant accomplishments towards
fulfilling its obligations under the Road Map,
particularly in the security sector, institution-building
and economic development.

We are also concerned over the situation in Gaza.
While we welcome the easing of the blockade, it is
evident that it continues to hamper humanitarian relief
and reconstruction efforts in that area. We therefore
call for Israel's complete lifting of the blockade. It is
essential that both parties exercise maximum restraint
6
and adhere to the ceasefire, in accordance with
resolution 1860 (2009) and other relevant resolutions.

On the subject of Lebanon, we are concerned
about the continued violations of resolution 1701
(2006), and reiterate our call on all parties to fully
implement that resolution.

