Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): At the outset, we would
like to express our appreciation to you, Sir, for
organizing this important debate. We also wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for his laudable work
at the helm of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, and to the Force Commanders of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL) for their comprehensive
presentations.

Lebanon believes that United Nations
peacekeeping operations require a partnership among
the Security Council, the Secretariat, troop-
contributing countries and host countries. After paying
careful attention to the presentations of the Force
Commanders, we would like to salute their dedication
and service for peace. This direct interaction avails us
the opportunity to understand the urgent needs from the
field and in turn helps the Council to better respond to
those needs.

I have two questions. One is similar to that asked
by the delegation of the United States concerning
cooperation between MONUSCO and UNAMID.
Perhaps General Nyamvumba could give us his
thoughts about the major logistical challenges facing
UNAMID.

In our region, the Middle East, an end to the
Israeli occupation in Palestine, Syria and the remaining
parts of Lebanon - the root cause of the conflict - is
a prerequisite for any comprehensive resolution and
successful exit of United Nations peacekeeping
missions.

Everyone has referred to what happened
yesterday in the south of Lebanon. When a
peacekeeping mission is tested and peacekeepers
attacked, only solidarity and determination remain key
for putting an end to any kind of recurrence. In this
context Lebanon expressed its unequivocal
condemnation of the attack. Suffice it to mention here
that the President of the Republic of Lebanon, General
Michel Sleiman, made a statement in which he
condemned the attack and urged authorities "to
multiply efforts to uncover the perpetrators and punish
them".
He said that in Beirut, and here in New York my
delegation associated itself with the press statement
issued by the Security Council to condemn the attack
(SC/10341). My delegation expresses sincere sympathy
to the injured peacekeepers and their families, and we
are confident that General Asarta Cuevas will convey
our deep appreciation to the men and women working
in UNIFIL.

Almost five years after the adoption of resolution
1701 (2006), the Government of Lebanon is strongly
committed to the implementation of that resolution in
its entirety. We call on the international community to
put an end to Israeli violations of our sovereignty by
land, air and sea. In his most recent report
(S/2011/406), the Secretary-General refers to those
violations and calls for their immediate cessation, since
they undermine not only the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006), but also the work and
credibility of UNIFIL and the authority of the
Lebanese Armed Forces.

Only two days after the vote of confidence in the
new Government, the Prime Minister of Lebanon
visited southern Lebanon and UNIFIL headquarters.
During that visit, he acknowledged the important role
that UNIFIL is playing in the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006). In that regard, we sent a letter
two days ago requesting a renewal of UNIFIL's
mandate with no amendments.

When Major General Asarta Cuevas spoke about
strategic dialogue and cooperation, he referred to the
consultations that took place last week. Let me
reiterate before the Council what my delegation had to
say regarding this. The Lebanese army is fully engaged
in a strategic dialogue with UNIFIL. Lebanon
commends the efforts and sacrifices of the UNIFIL
forces operating in South Lebanon, and expresses its
appreciation to all contributing countries. It attaches
great importance to strengthening coordination and
cooperation with UNIFIL, in accordance with the
agreed rules of engagement, in order to ensure proper
implementation of the mission entrusted to it.
Assistance in building up the capabilities of the
Lebanese Armed Forces is necessary. A stronger
Lebanese army would enable the Lebanese
Government to continue to extend its authority over its
territory.
I should like to ask Major General Asarta Cuevas
a question. What, in his opinion, would be the best way
to prevent disproportionate use of force by Israel along
the Blue Line, similar to what happened on 15 May,
when civilian demonstrators were shot at, despite the
fact that they had not crossed the Blue Line?

