I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Mohamed Ibn Chambas and Ms. Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim, Coordinator of the Association for Indigenous Women and Peoples of Chad, for their comprehensive briefings. I would also like to commend the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel for the work it has been doing in the region. Today's meeting takes place in a very challenging context in West Africa and the Sahel: the volatile security environment, the worsening humanitarian situation and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Against this backdrop, I would like to highlight three points. First, we welcome progress in the region on several fronts, including the holding of elections as well as other forms of progress in political process in several countries, as outlined in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/585), despite the added challenges posed by restrictive measures resulting from COVID-19. We note that concrete steps are being taken to increase the participation of women in the political sphere. We commend the efforts of all stakeholders in the region to ensure the consolidation of democracy, peace and security, and sustainable development. We view that it is necessary to continue building the capacity of national Governments and regional organizations in this regard. Secondly, the security situation in the region is still a cause for concern. The number of occurrences of complex attacks against civilians and security forces remains high. This has devastating humanitarian impacts, particularly when the region is facing the COVID-19 pandemic. We are also deeply concerned by the increasing intercommunity violence in the region. We believe that it is crucial to strengthen community-based dispute resolution mechanisms and to continue to pursue stabilization efforts to defuse tensions and dismantle militias. We commend the resolve of the Governments of the region to combat cross- border and cross-cutting security challenges, including through the Group of Five for the Sahel and its Joint Force, as well as the Multinational Joint Task Force. We believe that it is necessary to continue supporting countries in the region in their efforts to address terrorism, violent extremism and organized crime. We also underline the points raised by Special Representative Chambas on the importance of supporting the Economic Community of West African States in implementing its 2020-2024 action plan on the eradication of terrorism. Thirdly, it is important that the dire humanitarian situation be alleviated. Even before the COVID-19 pandemic, the region was already suffering from an acute humanitarian crisis, with a high level of displacement and food insecurity. Growing instability and the COVID-19 pandemic will further drive up the numbers of people requiring humanitarian support. We call on all international partners to provide the much-needed funding to provide life-saving assistance to the people. It is also crucial to facilitate and maintain unimpeded humanitarian assistance and relief, including to hard-to-reach areas. In conclusion, the many challenges faced by countries in West Africa and the Sahel require concerted and comprehensive efforts that encompass security, humanitarian, human rights and development aspects. We share the belief that climate change is exacerbating the security risk, as the Special Representative mentioned, and that it is affecting the humanitarian situation in the region. We fully subscribe to the Secretary-General's view that it is important to redouble efforts aimed at addressing root causes, enhancing investment in human development and promoting social cohesion. International partners should continue to support the national and regional efforts being made to ensure long-term peace and stability in West Africa and the Sahel.
