Mr. Matjila (South Africa): My delegation would
like to express its gratitude to you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting. I also thank
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), for
his briefing.

South Africa supports the efforts of the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative in engaging
in preventive diplomacy, good offices and political
mediation and facilitation in the countries of West Africa
and the Sahel. We welcome the positive developments
in the region, as noted in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/ 1175). However, we are concerned that
the instability and insecurity are spreading to other
countries in the region. That would adversely affect
the progress that has been made in recent years to seek
stability in the region.

That concern is equally shared by the African
Union, particularly with regard to the continued terrorist
attacks in northern and central Mali, Burkina Faso, the
Niger and Nigeria. Moreover, the intensification of
coordination among terrorist groups and the growing
transnational organized crime are a cause for great
concern for South Africa, since that will heighten the
insecurity in the region. It is important that we also
address the root causes of terrorism in order to curb its
spread throughout the continent.

South Africa believes that UNOWAS is positioned
to play an important role in overcoming the challenges
faced by the region, particularly with regard to tackling
the insecurity, instability and terrorism, through its
support of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel and by addressing the root causes of conflict.
Furthermore, the full implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel is vital.

We are of the firm view that the work of the
Security Council should aim to support subregional
and regional multilateral frameworks and the use of
political dialogue in resolving the challenges faced
by the region. Furthermore, coordination among the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Group of Five for the Sahel, the African Union and
United Nations structures is crucial. That is key to
providing a comprehensive approach in promoting
peace and security in the Sahel region, where terrorism,
extremist activities and violent extremism pose a
serious threat to its socioeconomic development.

The international community's ongoing support
for the funding of investment projects in the Sahel in
particular remains a priority. The building of schools
and health centres and improving access to water, for
example, would positively contribute to preventing
communities from falling under the influence
of extremists.

Lastly, South Africa condemns in the strongest
possible terms the attempted coup to overthrow the
democratically elected Government in the Republic
of Gabon. In that regard, we reaffirm the principle
of the African Union, which rejects the notion of an
unconstitutional change of power. We pledge our
solidarity with the region, and we stand by it as it deals
with the many challenges in improving the lives of
its people.

