Mr. De Gucht (Belgium) (spoke in French):
During the Arria Formula meeting devoted to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo yesterday, the
representatives of non-governmental organizations
bore witness to the disastrous humanitarian situation in
the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Millions of people have perished in the Congo during
the last 10 years. The present wave of violence,
unfortunately, has compounded their suffering.
Thousands of people have had to abandon their homes.

I welcome the efforts of the United Nations and
the Security Council in particular, which are continuing
to be fully engaged in a resolution to the crisis in the
Congo. Beyond the commendable efforts of the
Secretary-General, in particular through his Special
Envoy, President Obasanjo, there is certainly a need to
underscore action of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), which represents the largest peacekeeping
operation in the world, and whose capacity has just
been strengthened following the adoption of resolution
1843 (2008).

MONUC is playing an important role, and this
should be emphasized. On the eve of discussion on the
extension of its mandate, which must take place before
the end of the year, there is a need for a debate on the
way in which we can maximize the functioning of this
tool. We must have that debate. Moreover, this is the
thrust of one of the conclusions of the report that the
Secretary-General has just submitted to us.

I would like to share several ideas with Council
members, in particular regarding the underlying causes
of the conflict, which we need to bear in mind during
such a discussion.
08-62035

Human destitution in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo continues to be fuelled by a
lethal mix of two ingredients - the nearly total lack of
any effective State authority, in concert with an
abundance of natural resources and their use for
belligerent purposes. In my view, there is a need to
take these reasons for the conflict fully into account in
formulating MONUC's mandate in order to maximize
its effectiveness.

It is well known to everyone that the Congolese
army is in a lamentable state. Fighting against the
Congres national pour la defense du peuple (CNDP)
has shown that the Armed Forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (FARDC) is badly prepared,
organized and led. The State is not in a position to
establish its authority over vast areas, some of which,
in the meantime, are being administered by the CNDP.
In North Kivu, the Congolese army, for practical
purposes, no longer exists. This army, which has
partially disintegrated, with some of its units turning
against the population because they are not being
properly paid and maintained. This can hardly, in the
short term, form the sole tool on which the
international community, through MONUC, is relying
to restore the authority of the State.

Therefore, the question must be asked as to
whether the concept of joint operations of MONUC
with the FARDC should not be redefined. I would like
to reassure the Security Council that I am not
advocating a MONUC which would fight
independently against all armed groups in the east of
the Congo. There is always room for cooperation and
to support the Congolese authorities. But only with
difficulty can the FARDC form the sole foundation of
our strategy against armed groups, be they foreign or
Congolese.

MONUC must move further up to the forefront
and play a more prominent role in these operations
directed against armed groups. This requires from
MONUC better supervisory functions, and by, if
necessary, assuming command of certain operations, as
was the case for some operations in the past.

No one can deny that the natural resources in the
east of the Congo are one of the major reasons for the
conflict now under way. Any strategy which we wish to
be effective must devote high priority attention to that
dimension. Tackling the sources of financing of armed
groups could turn out to be more effective than any

other military strategy. This idea should be further
taken into account in planning operations. MONUC
should also make maximum use of its capacity in the
area of inspection, to put an end not only to illegal
trafficking in weapons but also to the exploitation and
illegal trade in raw materials, such as coltan or
cassiterite. Such an action on MONUC's part can be
carried out within a broader framework in which the
international community supports the authorities of the
Congo in re-establishing their control over the
exploitation of natural resources. Here, we are thinking
of tracing or certification mechanisms, as referred to
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo during the Nairobi summit on
7 November 2008.

Tackling the underlying causes of the conflict is
pivotal, but this will not make it possible to alleviate
the suffering of the population in Kivu in the short
term. That population has great expectations of
MONUC in this area. The capacity of MONUC is
limited. It cannot be ubiquitous and act everywhere
simultaneously; but where it is present, where it can be
deployed in time and where civilian lives are
endangered, it must act. This is of the highest priority.
It must be absolutely clear that MONUC in that case
can act in an independent fashion and that it will do so
in accordance with its mandate.

The rules of engagement must clearly reflect
MONUC's mandate, and where there are still
ambiguities, the mandate should be clarified. This also
assumes, in our view, that in those places where
uncontrolled elements of the FARDC are the source of
abuses directed against the population, MONUC
should be able to act and to do so in accordance with
the mandate for the protection of the civilian
population that it has.

Belgium views its political and diplomatic action
as a part of that action undertaken by the European
Union, which is playing an active role within the
framework of international facilitation. The choice of a
possible European action here, designed to support
MONUC's efforts, has been referred to over the last
few weeks. For its part, Belgium is in favour of such
action and would be ready to contribute to it. At the
present time, however, we urgently need to consider
how we can provide MONUC with the capabilities
given it through resolution 1843 (2008).
5

For its part, Belgium will be examining the needs

drawn up by the Department of Peacekeeping

Operations. I am confident that Belgium soon will be

able to announce a contribution in terms of aerial

transportation, information gathering and processing
and eventually in training.

Allow me to conclude my statement by
expressing our appreciation for the outstanding work
being carried out by the men and women who are
working in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
difficult conditions to ensure that peace can finally
return to that great country in the heart of Africa.

