Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
shares the concern of the other members of the Security
Council with regard to the current situation in Burundi.
Egypt is fully convinced that the Security Council must
play an active and effective role, in cooperation with
African and regional partners, in supporting Burundi's
efforts to restore peace and stability and find solutions
to its challenges through serious and genuine national
dialogue.

Egypt sought to maintain a positive approach
based on cooperation vis-a-vis the Council and its
discussion on Burundi. We sought to preserve the unity
of the Council so that we could send a strong message
reflecting the desire of the international community to
see stability restored in Burundi. Egypt has consistently
upheld that the deployment of a police contingent
in Burundi should take Burundi's national position
into account and be the subject of consensus among
the members of the Security Council. It should also
enjoy Burundi's support as as to ensure that Burundi's
effective implementation of the resolution, thereby
allowing a constructive interaction between Burundi
and the United Nations.

Despite divergent points of view, Egypt and other
like-minded Council members have taken a positive and
constructive approach to this issue that has led to a result
that takes the concerns of all members of the Council
into account. All these efforts notwithstanding, the
resolution adopted today does not address our concerns,
but rather imposes an option that Burundian authorities
do not support. Moreover, the resolution selectively
addresses the Secretary-General's recommendations
regarding the mandate of the police contingent, which
could result in Burundi's refusal to cooperate in the
implementation of the resolution and could challenge
the credibility of the Security Council. We even fear
that the current situation could have a negative effect
on the African Union's efforts and on the mediation
efforts of the East African Community.

My delegation therefore abstained in the voting on
today's resolution on the police contingent, as the current
language does not take our concerns into account and
does not fully represent the views of all members of the
Council. It may also cost the international community
the opportunity of cooperating with Burundi on
the deployment of the police contingent. This is a
legitimate concern, because the resolution has been
adopted outside of Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, and is consistent with the principles of
peacekeeping operations calling for the participation
and agreement of host countries.

Finally, I reaffirm Egypt's commitment to continue
striving for positive and constructive cooperation
between the Security Council and Burundi with a View
to enhancing the role of the United Nations and helping
to restore stability to Burundi and to overcome existing
challenges.

