Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we would like to join others in expressing
our condolences to the countries and families affected
by the recent tragic aeroplane crash in Ethiopia.

We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his frank
briefing on the latest developments on the ground. We
also express our appreciation to the Deputy Executive
Director of the Afghan Women's Network, Ms. Storai
Tapesh, for sharing with the Security Council her
valuable remarks on the situation of women in
Afghanistan, as well as to the National Security Adviser
of Afghanistan, Mr. Hamdullah Mohib.

Peru is closely following the latest advances in the
peace process in the country. That is why we welcome
the actions taken by the Government of President
Ashraf Ghani to strengthen democracy, such as the
implementation of the law on access to information
on the anti-corruption strategy. We also welcome the
initiatives undertaken by various countries, which
together are creating the conditions to build sustainable
peace. The ultimate aim of that community of visions
and efforts must be to provide the Afghan people with
adequate spaces for internal dialogue that will allow
them to define the type of society and State they wish to
build with a view to putting an end to the violence and
overcoming the difficult humanitarian situation.

In that regard, it is important for the Government
and the Taliban to engage in direct conversations with
each other and with all relevant representative actors,
supported by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and with the help of the
international community. That process must include the
participation of partners in the region if it is to ensure
the sustainability of a potential agreement and lead to
greater stability in the region.

We also believe that, with the cooperation with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
support of the international community, it is critical to
continue to combat the threat of illicit drug trafficking,
whose enormous resources in that territory contribute
to both the financing of terrorism and the generation of
a vicious circle ofviolence and destruction. Suffice it to

say that the number of civilian casualties recorded in the
past year is the highest figure since UNAMA and the
United Nations human rights office began documenting
that information, which reaffirms our conviction that
there is no military solution as an option for peace.

In all those efforts, as I have already suggested,
the active participation of women and young people
must be ensured. At the same time, measures must be
taken to guarantee the human rights of those groups
in accordance with the Afghan Constitution and
accepted international commitments, particularly
given the prevalence of violence against women
and girls. In that regard, we welcome the increased
participation of women in political life, such as the
presence of three women running mates in the future
presidential elections and the occupation by women of
public administration positions, including the Afghan
Permanent Representative to the United Nations,
Ms. Adela Raz.

On the other hand, we note with concern the
existing difficulties, including in logistical terms, with
regard to holding presidential, provincial and district
elections next July, in particular the lack of credibility
and confidence in the electoral commissions and their
members, which has been creating political instability.
We believe that it is urgent to promptly appoint new
members of the electoral commissions and adopt
the necessary measures and reforms to restore the
confidence of civilians in the electoral process. That
will also contribute to strengthening the commitment
and the necessary adequate and inclusive participation
of the various political factions. We believe that it is
necessary to identify good practices and confront
the difficulties and shortcomings that arose in the
parliamentary elections last October in order to take
the appropriate preventive measures to guarantee a
transparent, free and inclusive process.

We conclude by underscoring the need to implement
the Geneva communique, the goal of which is to
strengthen the international community's commitments,
and to expeditiously promote development in
Afghanistan. In that regard, we recognize the crucial
and dedicated work towards the achievement of the
desired sustainable peace in the territory on the part
of Mr. Yamamoto and UNAMA, whose extension of
mandate we fully support.

