Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation appreciates the work done by
the Committee of Experts headed by Mr. Menkerios.
China attaches great importance to the Committee's
report. We will carefully study the report and its
specific proposals. We are very grateful to Ambassador
Valdivieso for the presentation he just made. We
believe that the sanctions committee that he heads will
conduct further discussions on the specific elements of
the report after today's discussions in the Security
Council. I will therefore confine myself only to some
brief comments.

It is the obligation and duty of all Member States
comprehensively to implement Security Council
resolutions 1333 (2000) and 1267 (1999), on sanctions
against the Taliban. We have noted that the report of
the Committee of Experts proposes new measures, such
as the establishment of a new sanctions-monitoring
mechanism. The establishment of such a mechanism is
intended effectively to enhance monitoring. The
Security Council should therefore take actual results
fully into account after that mechanism is established.

The border between Afghanistan and
neighbouring States is more than 5,000 kilometres
long. We would like to know the size and scale
required of a monitoring mechanism in order for it to
be effective. We also wish to know whether the United
Nations will be provided with guarantees of sufficient
resources. China does not wish to see a situation
develop by which excessive haste in implementing
relevant measures leads to the failure to achieve their
objective. If that happens, it will be a monitoring
mechanism in name only, and that will damage the
credibility of the United Nations.

We also wish to point out that the establishment
of a new sanctions monitoring mechanism will require
the close cooperation of States neighbouring
Afghanistan. Before arriving at a decision, the Security
Council should carefully consider and respect the
opinions of those neighbouring countries.

The Committee of Experts has put a great deal of
work into this report, and its efforts should be
acknowledged. The report makes certain allegations,
however, without specifying its sources. Mere
allegations should not be used to prove a point, still
less serve as the basis for action. Greater efforts should
be made in this regard.

I should like to take this opportunity to provide
some information about the border region between
China and Afghanistan with which all Council
members may not be familiar. The border between
China and Afghanistan is located in a cold,
mountainous region. Its total length is 92 kilometres,
and its average elevation above sea level is more than
5,000 metres. The geography is varied and the climate
harsh. There is hardly any human presence in the
region, and access to it is extremely difficult. China
and Afghanistan have not established any travel routes
between the two countries in the border region. Given
these features of the border region between China and
Afghanistan, what does the Committee envisage
doing~ indeed, what can it do - there? That issue
requires further clarification.

