Mr. Burian (Slovakia): Slovakia fully aligns
itself with the statement that will be delivered shortly
by the representative of Finland on behalf of the
European Union. Therefore, Sir, I will limit my
statement to the following comments and, as you
suggested, will circulate the longer text in writing.

Let me first take this opportunity, Mr. President,
to congratulate you and the delegation of Ghana on
having organized this important debate. We believe that
it will be an important contribution to addressing issues
of peace and security in West Africa. We welcome the
presence at our meeting of ministers from countries of
West Africa and the participation in the discussion of
Mr. Chambas, Executive Secretary of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).

In that regard, we would like to emphasize the
important role played by ECOWAS in strengthening
cooperation, good-neighbourly relations and
confidence-building among the countries of West
Africa. Regional cooperation and integration represent,
in our opinion, the best way to ensure peace
consolidation and conflict prevention. This approach is
a guarantee of sustainability and long-lasting solutions.
ECOWAS is an embodiment of cooperative efforts and
local and subregional ownership in addressing common
challenges and problems. In that respect, we support
the strengthening of its mechanisms and capacities for
pursuing peace in the region and deepening interaction
and cooperation with the United Nations to that end.

In spite of substantive progress in peace
consolidation in West Africa in recent years, many

06-4607]
problems and challenges in the region remain to be
tackled.

First, we need to address the cross-border
implications of conflicts, including the destructive
impact of cross-border trafficking of arms, movement
of rebel groups, and so forth. They have been a major
threat to regional peace; as we have witnessed in the
past, a conflict in one country can ignite the whole
subregion. That is why we believe that those threats
can be addressed efficiently only through regional
cooperative efforts.

Currently, our main concern is related to the
volatile situation in Cote d'Ivoire. In that context, we
call upon the main stakeholders in Cote d'Ivoire to
expedite their efforts to implement the road map and
their own commitments undertaken a month ago in
Yamoussoukro. The efforts of Prime Minister Banny
should receive the full support of all neighbours and
countries of the region, with the aim of further
strengthening stability in West Africa.

Secondly, the people of the region live in
widespread poverty and their nations are among the
poorest in the world. One of the reasons for that
situation has been the illegal exploitation of natural
resources. That has not only helped to finance wars,
but also deprived the population of the West African
nations of their sources of potential wealth and
prosperity. If we speak about peace consolidation in
West Africa, we should also speak about the economic
consolidation of the region.

Thirdly, both peace and economic consolidation
are interlinked with the strengthening of democracy,
good governance and respect for human rights. We are
glad to see that the majority of the Governments in the
region have emerged from democratic elections. In
particular, we would like to commend the peoples of
Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and Liberia for choosing
that path after years of bitter conflicts.

We believe that the Peacebuilding Commission
will play an important role in supporting peace
consolidation processes in West Africa. We are
therefore pleased to see that Sierra Leone has become
one of the first countries on its agenda.
We believe that it is crucial that the international
community provide adequate support to peace
consolidation processes in West Africa by providing
both expert guidance and development aid. Donor

support is crucial and important. It cannot, however,
substitute for the reforms necessary to ensure the
sustainable development of a country. To achieve that,
one needs security and a stable economic and legal
environment. Institution-building emerges as crucially
important in that regard. National ownership of those
processes is instrumental to and a prerequisite for
success.

Democratic elections, fighting corruption,
introducing sound economic policies and reforms,
strengthening the rule of law and reform of the judicial
sector all help to increase stability, attract foreign
investment and foster the growth of local industries
and entrepreneurship.

From the national security viewpoint, security
sector reform is pre-eminent. There is widespread
understanding within the international community that
an ill-governed and unreformed security sector
represents a decisive obstacle to the promotion of
sustainable development, democracy and peace and is
one of the main reasons why countries, after a short
period of relative stability, relapse into conflict.

Last month in Bratislava, we organized an expert
workshop on security sector reform and we are
currently preparing a series of round tables on that
topic, to be held in New York this autumn, to stimulate
discussion among Member countries on that important
topic and to define the best way to address the
problems in that area through a coherent and
systematic approach within the United Nations system.

In addition, we would also like to organize a
seminar on that important issue in Africa, where the
question of security sector reform is most urgent. Its
aim would be to sensitize the wider population to the
importance of the issue and to draw on the practical
experience of those who have recent such experience
with both the successes and failures of security sector
reform. We hope that our initiative will be welcomed
as one of the practical contributions of Slovakia to
peace consolidation in West Africa.

Finally, we thank Ghana for preparing the draft
presidential statement on peace consolidation in West
Africa and we support its adoption.
