Mr. Bonser (Canada) (spoke in French): We thank
the Egyptian presidency for the opportunity to speak on
the important issues of peace and security cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU).

(spoke in English)

In the decade since the signing of the 2006
Declaration on Enhancing UN-AU Cooperation, both
organizations have made important strides on a variety
of peace and security issues. From close cooperation
on peace operations, to the establishment of the United
Nations liaison office to the African Union, to annual
consultations between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council, the United
Nations and the AU have increasingly taken steps to
work more closely to promote peace and security in
Africa. Canada is encouraged by this progress.

(spoke in French)

But there is still much work to be done. Terrorism,
organized crime and armed conflict pose threats to
global, regional and national peace and security. As a
result of the evolving threats to international peace and
security, the responsibilities shouldered by the African
Union and the regional economic communities have
increased tremendously. As partners, we must ensure
that our support for these African-led efforts evolve
and rise to meet this challenge.

(spoke in English)

Now, more than ever, it is imperative that the
United Nations and the AU continue to foster a stronger
and deeper partnership, as recommended in the 2015
United Nations high-level reviews on peace operations,
peacebuilding, and women and peace and security.
Canada commends the United Nations liaison office
at the African Union and the AU Peace and Security
Department for developing a Joint United Nations-
AU framework for an enhanced partnership in peace
and security. We strongly support the objective to
deepen United Nations and AU collaboration across
the conflict cycle, from conflict prevention, to conflict
management and resolution, and ultimately to post-
conflict reconstruction.
In this regard, Canada welcomes the development of
the new African Peace and Security Architecture road
map and encourages continued cooperation between
the United Nations and the AU in implementing this
vision. We recognize the inextricable links between
peace and security and good governance, we also
encourage the AU and the United Nations to further
enhance their cooperation in operationalizing the
African Governance Architecture, complementing the
efforts of the Architecture's road map to move towards
a more holistic approach to conflict.

Canada remains committed to working closely
with African member States at the United Nations and
to strengthening the relationship between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council. This is an important step to realizing our
collective vision for sustainable peace in Africa.

