Mr. Niyonzima (Burundi) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council - a responsibility that does honour to you and
your country. The Council will undoubtedly benefit
from your experience and leadership. Through you,
Sir, I would also like once again to congratulate the
new members of the Council, who are bringing in new
blood and new ways of looking at the issues before the
Council.
I would like to point out that we, the partners, do
not always understand things in the same way or at
the same speed. In spite of the very real difficulties
that Burundi faced in 2011, the Security Council
considered that our country was on a good trajectory in
overcoming the problems. The report of the Secretary-
General (S/20l3/36) notes outstanding improvement
in all areas and sectors. Resolution 2090 (2013) refers
to extrajudicial executions, politically motivated
assassinations, a lack of public freedoms and so on.
It even mentions the International Criminal Court.
My delegation is not enthusiastic about the use of
terminology that could cause misunderstanding with
regard to the reality on the ground. We regret that lack
of flexibility on the part of a number of delegations
when it comes to such language. It seems to us unfair,
given the efforts that our country has made in areas
such as human rights and combating impunity.

In his briefing to the Security Council on 24 January,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Burundi, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, said that
"Burundi has continued to make further progress in
consolidating peace and stability" and that "Burundi is
a far better place to be in and to live in" (S/PV6909, p. 2).
Burundi has made very significant process in all areas.

With regard to the democratic process, Burundi set
up the National Independent Electoral Commission on
the basis of consensus. We have also adopted a law on
the opposition, which will allow for an ongoing political
dialogue among political partners.

With regard to strengthening good governance
and national institutions, Burundi has adopted a zero-
tolerance policy when it comes to combating corruption,
set up an anti-corruption brigade and a State inspector
general and established a revenue office. We have also
set up other institutions, in particular a national council
for communications, a national security council, a
forum for ongoing dialogue among political parties, an
ombudsman's office and so on.

With regard to peace and security, after the
stunning success of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme for former combatants,
Burundi undertook a security sector reform programme
and established a national permanent commission
to combat the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons.

In the area of justice and human rights, Burundi
has established an independent commission on human
rights, strengthened the independence of the judicial
branch and put in place a mechanism for transitional
justice. The latter concluded the preparation of
legislation on the truth and reconciliation commission,
which is now before the Parliament.

We have accomplished many things - too many to
enumerate here - that merit praise and commendation
from the international community.

Burundi has been on the agenda of the Security
Council since 2004. In a few years, we have made great
strides in putting our country back on track towards
peace, security and stability. The Council is in a very
good position to understand what that means.

On the request of the Government pertaining to the
end of the commitment of the United Nations Office
in Burundi (BNUB) and its gradual conversion into a
country team over 12 months, an official request was
addressed to the Secretary-General and reiterated by
the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry for Foreign
Relations and International Cooperation before the
Council on 24 January. Resolution 2090 (2013) says
nothing about that. The only mention of BNUB's
conversion into a country team relates not to the desire
of the Government, but rather to the benchmarks that
have been proposed - which some of our partners
have judged as unmet for some time. That is why this
resolution raises question marks and concerns. The
resolution departs completely from the spirit and letter
of the report of the Secretary-General to the Council
(S/2013/36), which calls for more understanding and
assistance for the leadership of Burundi.

The people of Burundi, mindful of their past and
confident of their vision for a better future under
President Pierre Nkurunziza and his Government,
are determined to make progress in fighting for
good governance, human rights, democracy and
development. The Government of Burundi takes note of
today's resolution and reiterates to the Security Council
and the international community its full cooperation in
addressing pending challenges.

