Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the
Committee Chairs for their important briefings to the
Council today.

Terrorism is regrettably an agile and evolving threat
that requires us to be a step ahead and to anticipate
developments. Since our last meeting on this subject
(see S/PV.7071), the Council has taken further steps
to address the threat of terrorism. In December, the
Council adopted resolution 2129 (2013), directing the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
to implement its core mandate of assessing States'
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and to identify
emerging issues, trends and developments.

One serious emerging trend is terrorists' kidnapping
for ransom payments to finance their operations. That
is a significant challenge for us as we seek to constrict
terrorist financing, and it is a terrible threat to nationals
of all countries. In January, the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2133 (2014) to tackle this growing
problem. The resolution sent a strong political signal
and made clear the Security Council's commitment to
addressing the upward trend of terrorist kidnappings and
breaking the vicious cycle whereby ransom payments
strengthen terrorist groups and then incentivize future
incidents of kidnapping. The upcoming special meeting
on kidnapping for ransom will help States to better

understand that pressing issue and will provide an
opportunity to discuss practical information, including
prevention measures, to break the vicious cycle.

The nature and composition of Al-Qaida may have
changed, but the threat it poses to nations across the
world has not. Nearly 15 years after it was established,
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime remains an essential tool
for combatting terrorism. Boko Haram's abduction of
the schoolgirls in Nigeria on 14 April and its campaign
of violence and intimidation demonstrate the horrors
that terrorist groups can inflict on innocent people. The
United Kingdom was the first country to proscribe Boko
Haram and strongly supported its addition to the 1267
Monitoring Team's list ofgroups subject to financial and
armed sanctions. We co-sponsored Nigeria's proposal
that the United Nations take action. The international
community as a whole supports Nigeria's efforts to
tackle terrorism. At the Paris summit on security in
Nigeria, Nigeria's neighbours, the United Kingdom,
the United States and the European Union all agreed
to pursue sanctions against Boko Haram at the United
Nations. We look forward to supporting further efforts
at the United Nations in New York.

As we approach the mandate review next month,
we must work to strengthen the implementation of the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime and advance measures to
ensure that processes are fair and clear so that sanctions
are credible and robust. We must also encourage States
to make use of the regime to take advantage of the
global reach that United Nations sanctions offer. To
effectively combat the threat of terrorism, we need that
global reach and must also work together to anticipate
and stifle terrorist activity.

Mr. President, I congratulate your delegation on the
successful open debate on non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction earlier this month (see S/PV.7169),
which commemorated the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1540 (2004), and on the accompanying
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7, adopted by the
Council. That mandate remains as important today
as when it was adopted in 2004, and we urge States,
especially Council members, to ensure universal
reporting on its implementation.

