Dr. Chan: Much has changed since I briefed the
Security Council on the Ebola outbreak in September
2014 (see S/PV.7268). The dire situation at that time
rallied an unprecedented response on the part of the
international community and individual Governments
that brought in military expertise, medical teams,
critical equipment and supplies, and considerable
financial resources.

That generous surge of support had an impact.
Surveillance and response capacities have vastly
improved. We have a very good picture of current chains
of transmission and know how to break them. Smooth
genome sequencing of viruses can be done within 48
hours of case detection, giving clues for the detective
work of tracing the origins of each and every single
case. New cases in Liberia have again stopped. Guinea
and Sierra Leone have together reported only three
cases during each of the past two weeks, representing
the lowest numbers seen in well over a year. That is a
night-and-day difference from the situation less than a
year ago.

I can assure the Council that the progress is real,
and it has been hard earned. Most credit for this
progress goes to unwavering leadership at the highest
level of Government. At the same time, I must caution
against a false sense of security. All it takes is a single
undetected case in a health facility, one infected contact
fleeing the monitoring system, or one unsafe burial to
ignite a flare-up of cases. Further setbacks, such as
that experienced by Liberia at the end of June, can be
expected. We are grateful to Liberia for reporting that
event immediately and for mounting such an impressive
response.

International organizations continue to support
national efforts, with several thousand specialists
working alongside national staff in villages and towns,
as well as in the capital cities. If the current intensity
of case detection and contact tracing is sustained, the
virus can be soundly defeated by the end of this year.
That means going to zero and staying at zero. Fears
that the virus could become permanently established in
humans in that part of Africa have receded, and thatis
also very good news.

The outbreak - by far the largest, longest, and
most severe ever known - shocked the world and
challenged the international community, crying out
for the most powerful possible response. It called for
something we had never done before. What explains the
scale and duration of the outbreak? What allowed the
virus to rage out of control? What are the vulnerabilities
that might let similar or even worse events threaten
the world? What specific preparedness measures can
prevent their occurrence?

Most agree that the lack of public health capacities
and infrastructures created the greatest vulnerability.
The concept note prepared by Nigeria to guide this
meeting (8/2015/600, annex) - for which we thank
you, Madam President - documents the importance
of regional arrangements. Strengthening these
arrangements is a good place to start, especially when
it improves vigilance and increases the surge capacity
needed for a very rapid response. Innovative regional
and subregional initiatives have a critical role to play.
The World Health Organization (WHO) offers its full
support, backed by the provisions of the International
Health Regulations. Decentralized international
organizations like WHO and others, with their regional
and country offices and its networks of collaborating
laboratories and centres, provide strong platforms for
coordinated technical support and capacity-building.

The African Union and the United States Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention are jointly establishing
a communicable disease control system that will help
African nations to be better prepared for outbreaks.
The first step later this year will be the establishment of
an African surveillance and response unit, which will
include an emergency operations centre and workforce.
This will help African nations to participate fully in
the International Health Regulations. Those regulations
have been agreed by all nations and provide the bedrock
for safeguarding security in the face of disease threats.

West African nations have dealt bravely and boldly
with the outbreak, receiving magnificent support from
across Africa. They have shown how the right kind
of health care greatly increases the prospects that
people with Ebola will survive. They have analysed
the health and social needs of around 13,000 survivors,
who experience long-term complications ranging from
tiredness and severe joint pains to visual impairments
that can lead to blindness. They have mounted a vaccine
clinical trial in Guinea, and early results have been
extremely encouraging. Public acceptance of the trial
has been very good. We have learned the importance of
listening to the concerns of communities and winning
their trust and cooperation. We will continue the studies
and mobilize funding for rapid deployment once the
vaccine is approved by regulators

As a contribution to Ebola's legacy ofpreparedness,
WHO is putting together a blueprint for the rapid
development of new medical products for any future
outbreak. Next month, WHO, the United States Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention and national
counterparts will evaluate the performance of three
rapid point-of-care diagnostic tests. If the results
are good, that innovation will be another important
contribution to outbreak containment and preparedness
for the future. Right now, the rapid screening of patients
for high-risk procedures, such as those in maternity and
surgical wards, helps restore confidence in the safety
of health facilities for patients and health professionals
alike. This is part of recovery.

The Ebola outbreak in West Africa shocked the
world out of its complacency about the infectious
disease threat. We witnessed the decisive role of
vigilance and readiness in countries that experienced
an imported case. All responded to that imported case
as an urgent national emergency and stopped onward
transmission or held it to just a handful of cases. The
world has learned from the Ebola experience. I am
personally overseeing reforms in WHO that include the
establishment of a global health emergency workforce,
an operational platform that can shift into high gear
quickly, performance benchmarks that show exactly
what we mean by "high gear", and the funding needed
to make that happen.

Let me once again thank all States Members of the
Organization and the United Nations system for their
consistent personnel, financial, logistical and political
support for this vital transformation.

