The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Greece.

Like all previous speakers, I wish to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr.
Danilo Turk, for his final briefing on the work of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville
(UNOMB). The purpose of today's meeting is to
officially celebrate the successful completion of
UNOMB's mandate on 30 June. My delegation pays
tribute to the Mission's vital contribution to the
consolidation of peace and democratic governance in
the province of Bougainville.

It is my pleasure to express warm congratulations
to the Government of Papua New Guinea and to the
people and the leaders of Bougainville on their
determination to fully implement the Peace Agreement
of 2001. Our congratulations go also to the President of
the Autonomous Government, Mr. Joseph Kabui.

The road to peace and democracy bas been long
for the people of Bougainville. On their journey, they
had the most faithful and reliable of allies: UNOMB,
which held effectively the chairmanship of the Peace
Process Consultative Committee, facilitated the
dialogue between rival parties and contributed to the
successful conclusion of the weapons disposal plan and
the destruction of some 2,000 weapons.

Our sincere thanks go to Mr. Tor Stenbock,
Director of UNOMB and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and to all other staff members of
the United Nations Mission, who served the interests of
peace in Bougainville over the past seven years. They
set a remarkable example to be followed by other
United Nations peacekeeping missions.

Let me conclude by commending once again the
members of UNOMB for their dedication to the cause
of peace and their overall work and by wishing the
people of Bougainville and Papua New Guinea a
prosperous and peaceful future.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of New Zealand. I invite her to take a
seat at the Council table and to make her statement.

