Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Sir, for your dual role, as President
of the Council and Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), in organizing
today's important meeting. I would also like to
thank Ms. Nakamitsu and Mr. Ballard for their very
informative briefings.

I should add that France associates itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union and supports the statement that the
representative of Spain will make on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Resolution 1540.

The past few months have seen a heavy assault
on fundamental aspects of our collective security,
in violation of rules that we all value and of which
resolution 1540 (2004) is a crucial part. The proliferation
of biological, chemical and nuclear weapons and their
means of delivery, and the risk of their use by non-State
actors, have become a dangerous reality. But we should
make no mistake - the repeated assaults on the
non-proliferation regime that we are witnessing in Asia
and the Middle East are far from being a monopoly of
non-State actors, and terrorist groups in particular. In
Asia, we have seen North Korea's crash development
of its nuclear and ballistic programmes and its
chemical-weapon attack in Malaysia this winter. It is
also the case in the Middle East, particularly in Syria,
where the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime
and Da'esh has been confirmed by the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism. That is made even
more worrying by the fact that the suspected continued
existence of toxic chemical stocks in Syria increases
the likelihood that they will be more accessible to
terrorist groups.

In this difficult context, we must work harder than
ever to mobilize in order to prevent the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction by anyone, and by
non-State actors in particular. That demands above all
that we do better at considering the risks of exploiting
technological advances for the purposes ofproliferation,
a subject that the 1540 Committee has to address. In
that regard, I would like to commend the analytical and
advocacy efforts of the Group of Experts in support of
the Committee.

Needless to say, we must all work harder to
intensify and assess our implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). We must all prevent and discourage the
financing of proliferation, ensure the highest possible
levels of security for sensitive goods and materials
on our territories and strengthen export controls,
especially considering the risk of the use of emerging
technologies. For its part, France has modernized its
national legal framework for combating proliferation,
criminalizing proliferation activities and punishing
their financing. We are also very involved in working to
prevent the risk of terrorists acquiring sensitive nuclear
materials and we are an active supporter of the efforts
of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.
I should also mention the role of the European Union,
whose dynamic and continuing awareness-raising
efforts have contributed to this cooperative action.
The EU adopted a new decision last month giving
€2.6 million to support the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). We also welcome other actions that have
already been undertaken or announced, including
regional workshops for training points of contact in the
implementation of the resolution.

However, the sum of our individual actions is not
enough. As stated in the concept note, resolution 1540
(2004) is a unique platform for cooperation. We have
to make this happen by concrete actions through two
means: further anchoring the logic of assistance and
cooperation in our efforts and taking the specificity of
each country concerned into account. As Coordinator
of the Working Group on Assistance, France attaches
particular importance to strengthening the regional
dimension and to improving the coherence between
the needs and the assistance offered. The Committee's
newly updated template for requests for assistance, for
example, should contribute to that end.

Finally, we must take stock of current challenges by
strengthening synergies with forums facing the same
issues, be they within the United Nations or outside it,
such as the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
the World Customs Organization, or such export-
control regimes as the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the
Missile Technology Control Regime, of which France
is the secretariat, the Wassenaar Arrangement and
the Australia Group, whose plenary meeting is being
held in Paris this week, from 26 to 30 June 2017. These
interactions should be encouraged and strengthened.
The Council can count on France's steadfast
commitment on this priority issue.

