Mr. Mantovani (Italy): Let me start by thanking
the Special Coordinator, Mr. Williams, for his briefing,
as well as for his endeavours in the pursuit of a
solution to the Middle East crisis.

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement that the
European Union presidency is to deliver later on.

The most significant development in the Middle
East peace process is the intensification of direct talks
between Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas,
particularly their meetings of 6 and 28 August. We
hope that the parties will continue their efforts with a
forward-looking spirit. In that respect, we particularly
appreciate the initiative launched by President Bush to
convene an international conference this autumn with
the double objective of verifying the process of
rebuilding the institutions and supporting the bilateral
political negotiation process. Although we hope to
learn more about its contents and format, the initiative
represents a clear signal of the United States'
commitment to foster a final settlement in the
framework of the efforts underway at the multilateral
level. The conference opens up the unprecedented
possibility of linking direct progress between the
parties to the need for regional stability disclosed in the
Arab League's important peace initiative.

On the inter-Palestinian side, while the apparently
implacable conflict between Fatah and Hamas persists,
the international community should lend its efforts to
fostering national reconciliation as soon as the
conditions exist. We should aim to support President
Abbas, so as to enhance his role as a credible and
legitimate interlocutor with Israel. The President of the
Palestinian Authority needs to be in a position to offer
Palestinian public opinion visible results, especially in
terms of improving the conditions of everyday life.

My delegation does not believe in any new
proposal that envisions a solution between two peoples
and three States. The Palestinian people must remain
unified in the shared objective of establishing an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State
that exists in peace and security with Israel and its
other neighbours.

Italy supports the efforts of President Abbas and
the legitimate government of Prime Minister Fayyad.
We hope that the current de facto division of the
Palestinian Territories can be overcome, and we remain
willing to dialogue with all the Palestinian political
parties whose programmes and actions reflect the
principles enunciated by the Quartet. The Palestinian
Territories remain divided, and in the Gaza Strip there
has been a sharp deterioration in the humanitarian
situation. These are matters of deep concern to Italy.
We must continue to ensure that emergency relief
supplies reach those who are in need, and we are
confident that all the parties will work in good faith to
keep a humanitarian corridor open.

It is now time to be ambitious, if we wish to seize
the window of opportunity created by the renewed
dialogue of the parties. Obviously, to move toward the
two-State perspective in which we all believe, we need
to promote the building of mutual trust between the
parties, with measures aimed, on one hand, at
improving the overall conditions of the Palestinian
people, and on the other, at establishing the prospect of
an independent Palestinian State on sound institutional,
economic and security foundations. In that regard, we
are confident that the work of the Quartet's Special
Representative in the area of capacity-building will
make a decisive contribution.

We believe, nevertheless, that being ambitious
requires the courage from both parties to start to
address, at least in general terms, the core issues for
the final status: Jerusalem, the territorial borders and
refugees, mindful of the significant progress made on
all three issues in the previous negotiations in Camp
David and Taba. We have to ensure that the announced
conference will play a fundamental role in the
advancement of the peace process, also through an
enlarged regional dimension.

From that perspective, Italy strongly supports
more resolute action on the part of the Quartet to
revive the diplomatic process and to offer a definitive
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict, in compliance with
Security Council resolutions and the objectives of the
Road Map.

On the subject of Lebanon; with regard to the
Lebanese domestic situation, we wish to express the
hope that with the approach of the presidential
elections the general situation in the country will not
deteriorate further. The news that we are hearing from
Beirut give reason for concern: the forces acting
against the stability of Lebanon are, unfortunately, still
a real threat. It is imperative for the international
community to maintain its support for the Government
of Prime Minister Siniora.

Among the many problems that need to be solved
in Lebanon, probably the most crucial right now is the
election of the President of the Republic, which we
hope will take place on schedule after a free and fair
electoral process leading to the election of a candidate
who is accepted by all of the Lebanese.

While it is true that Lebanese political forces
should make every effort to resume talks and overcome
the impasse afflicting the country, it is also
indispensable that all the countries of the region,
particularly Syria, help to promote a political solution
to the Lebanese crisis. For our part, we have never
ceased to underline this and have repeatedly invited the
Syrian authorities to play a positive and effective role
in the stability of Lebanon and the entire Middle
Eastern area.

We believe it is essential, for the sake of a
progressive normalization of the situation on the
Lebanese-Israeli border, that the question of the two
Israeli soldiers kidnapped by Hizbollah be addressed
quickly and settled in a positive manner, also in the
framework of a comprehensive exchange of prisoners.

The failure to find a solution to the Shab'a
farmlands question is also a cause for concern, since
the issue represents a dangerous hotbed of tensions on
the border with Israel and fuels the claims of armed
groups. We appreciate the work conducted in recent
months by the United Nations cartographers and hope
that a proposal can soon be outlined as a basis for
starting the necessary consultations between the
concerned parties, so that the farmlands area can be
rapidly placed under United Nations control while
awaiting an agreement on the borders between Syria
and Lebanon.

