I would like to thank Special Representative Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing and for the excellent work that she and her team are doing in support of the Iraqi Government. As indicated by the Special Representative, Iraq is facing a series of significant challenges, including in the political, economic and security fields. In addition, the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated the situation even further. We welcome the measures taken by the Government of Iraq to contain the spread of the virus. Considering the urgency of effectively addressing these multiple challenges, and in order to respond to the needs of the people, it is crucial that all political actors put their differences aside and that national unity and solidarity prevail. We welcome last Thursday's development, with the Iraqi Parliament's approval of the new Government led by Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi. We hope that the remaining ministerial seats will be filled promptly and that women will be included when assigning the remaining posts as part of efforts to ensure their full participation in the political process. This is an important step towards responding to the legitimate aspirations of the Iraqi people. We call on the international community to support Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi in his efforts to realize a democratic, peaceful and prosperous Iraq. We call on the new Government to accelerate structural reforms, including economic reforms, improve governance and take effective measures to counter corruption and implement the rule of law. To improve the stability of Iraq, it is essential to implement security-sector reform and bring all armed forces under State control. As set out among the priorities of the new Government, we encourage Iraq to complete the electoral reform process, to hold free, fair and credible elections, and to continue engaging with the United Nations for technical assistance and support. As regional tensions continue to affect stability in Iraq, we reiterate that all actors must respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq. We fully support the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and call on all actors to refrain from all military action, which would threaten the stability of Iraq. It is also crucial not to allow the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to make gains from the increased challenges, including those caused by COVID-19. The continued support of the international community to the security and reconstruction of Iraq remains crucial. The continued reports of human-rights violations against protesters, civil- society activists and human-rights defenders are deeply worrying. As the restrictive measures related to COVID-19 will soon be lifted, it is crucial that the authorities secure freedom of speech and assembly, protect peaceful protestors from violence, investigate all violations and ensure accountability. Unfortunately, the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic has the greatest impact on vulnerable populations. This calls for additional measures to prevent gender- based violence, including support to victims of domestic violence. We also urge the Government of Iraq to engage with the United Nations in finding lasting solutions for the large number internally displaced persons and to secure their safe and dignified return to their places of origin. In conclusion, I would like to express Estonia's full solidarity with Iraq in these difficult times and call on the new Government to work together with the United Nations and its international partners towards stability, prosperity and peace.
