At the outset, allow me to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIRK), for the quality of his briefing. The new Government of Kosovo has prioritized economic recovery, the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the pursuit of dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. That positive momentum should spur all political forces in Kosovo to unite and compromise in order to achieve the Government's economic recovery plan to address the multidimensional consequences of the health crisis. Allow me to commend the relevant agencies, funds and programmes, including the Mission and the United Nations Kosovo team, for their constructive engagement in the COVID-19 response, including the allocation of resources to public health institutions and operational support in the implementation of risk- reduction measures. The resumption of dialogue in July, facilitated by the European Union, is a decisive step in the normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina. It is therefore crucial that regional and international actors support the parties in that process in order to create the necessary conditions for a comprehensive peaceful settlement of the conflict. In any peace process, confidence-building, partnership and cooperation are of paramount importance. In that regard, the launch of the intercommunal confidence- building platform aimed at advancing the recommendations of the United Nations Kosovo Trust-Building Forum, is a welcome step. Furthermore, the participation of young people in the peace process, especially in the areas of decision-making and reconciliation, requires a participatory approach involving central, local and civil society institutions, as well as international partners. The increasing number of requests for the recognition of the status of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence remains a major concern. To that end, the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, is necessary. We commend the tripartite Security and Gender Group, chaired by UN-Women, for its support of shelters for victims of violence through the provision of online schooling for children living there. In conclusion, the Niger urges the parties to engage in constructive political dialogue, and good-faith negotiations, and to respect agreements reached freely.
