Mr. llkin (Turkey): I would like to join previous
speakers in thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing. I
welcome among us the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Somalia and thank him for sharing his views with us.
My thanks go also to the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union.

We welcome the Secretary-General's reports on
the situation in Somalia (S/2009/132) and on
combating piracy (S/2009/146). Both reports indeed
contain detailed and useful information about ongoing
developments in the country. I shall limit my remarks
on three topics based on those reports.

The first is on the political developments. Turkey
welcomes the election of the new President. Likewise,
we welcome the appointment of the Prime Minister and
his new Government. Turkey has been supporting the
Djibouti peace process and hopes that the recent
developments herald a better and brighter future for the
war-torn people of Somalia. We would like to see
formation of a unity government as a sign of the
willingness of the Somali people to shape the destiny
of their own country.

That said, at this critical moment, it is also our
duty as friends of Somalia to underline the serious
difficulties awaiting the new Government. However,
while doing so, we should be careful not to create an
unnecessarily pessimistic mood in and about Somalia
which could be counter-productive. Indeed, the
unprecedented challenges and difficulties that lie ahead
for the Government of Somalia cannot be ignored or
denied. It is exactly for this reason that we have to
empower the new Government with our support and
assistance so that it can address these challenges. For
that, first and foremost, it needs financial assistance.

In return, the new Government should take rapid
and effective steps towards the implementation of the
Djibouti agreement through national reconciliation and
political dialogue. It has to pursue an outreach policy
vis-a-vis the other groups with a view to including
them in this process to the extent possible.

In the short and medium term, with the support of
partners and friends, it should have proper security and
police forces. Moreover, sustainable programmes to
disarm, demobilize and reintegrate should be
implemented. Since the Government cannot operate on
donations and foreign assistance, it has to seek means
to generate revenues for the immediate expenses of the
State. Swift action is also required for the rehabilitation
or the re-establishment of judicial and corrections
systems in Somalia. Human rights violations and other
humanitarian issues, especially impunity, have to be
addressed.

For the Government to achieve the targets on its
agenda, it has to feel itself secure. This brings me to
my second point, which is about the need for regional
and international peacekeeping operations. Turkey
highly commends the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) for its contribution to peace and
stability in Somalia. We praise the dedication and the
courage of the Ugandan and Burundi forces, who are
serving peace under most difficult conditions. They
deserve our full support.

Turkey was one of the sponsors of resolution
1863 (2009), which envisaged the deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia,
subject to a further decision of the Council. Turkey
sincerely hopes that this deployment would materialize
soon. Yet, developments show that we might face
certain delays. We may have to rely solely on
AMISOM. for some time to come. Therefore, it
becomes imperative not only to enhance the
capabilities of AMISOM. forces, but also to provide the
funds that AMISOM. needs. In that sense, Turkey
welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to
convene a donors conference for the establishment of a
trust fund. Turkey will contribute to the fund.

The third point I would like to mention relates to
the acts of piracy off the coast of Somalia, which
continue to be a source of concern for the international
community. In order to operate in the Gulf of Aden and
off the coast of Somalia in the fight against piracy and
armed robbery at sea, the Turkish Government has
allocated a frigate with air assets. The frigate has
joined the international efforts carried out under
Combined Task Force 151, which was recently
launched. Turkey is also a founding member of the
Contact Group on Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia, and
actively participates in the working groups formed
under the Contact Group. Having said that, we should
continue to concentrate and cooperate on the
elimination of the root causes of piracy, which are
embedded in Somalia.

Somalia finally has a unity Government operating
from Mogadishu. For that Government to be
successful, first and foremost, the people of Somalia
should develop full faith in it. We must help the Somali
Government develop an image that will gain the
confidence of its own people.

