Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to welcome
Prime Minister Hariri as he presides over today's
Council meeting and to thank him for his very
insightful statement. Japan congratulates Lebanon on
having organized this discussion on an important topic.

Intercultural dialogue is an essential tool for
conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. As the Secretary-General asserted in his
opening statement, the United Nations Charter calls for
international cooperation in solving global problems
and promoting fundamental freedoms without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion. It
underscores the relevance of intercultural dialogue to
the work of the United Nations.

First of all, the importance of intercultural
dialogue for conflict prevention cannot be
overemphasized. Lack of respect and tolerance for each
other's ways of life, religions and cultures has been a
common cause of conflict. Mistrust and prejudice
between peoples and their differences have all too
often led to tension and even war. Diversity within
societies and between countries in fact deepens the
richness of humankind so long as the culture of peace
and intercultural dialogue are promoted.

The Security Council should place greater
emphasis on the peaceful settlement of disputes before
violence erupts. The Security Council should
encourage more dialogue between parties by making
the best use of all tools available in an effective and
timely manner before a situation further deteriorates.

The United Nations Charter envisages the role of
the Secretary-General to include giving early warning
to the Security Council. The Secretary-General may
play an active role in the promotion of intercultural
dialogue. The recent Security Council retreat
concluded that the Security Council and the Secretary-
General should jointly maximize the use of available
means to promote dialogue and prevent conflicts. In
particular, the Council should consider how the United
Nations can increase the number of mediators and
political representatives of high calibre. Once conflict
abates, intercultural dialogue has to be placed at the
heart of efforts to resolve conflicts and reach peace
agreements. Freedom to exercise religious belief and
respect for cultural heritage must be embedded in the
framework of every peace agreement in order to end
conflicts and prevent their recurrence. Above all,
people of different religions and cultures must learn to
coexist peacefully. Confidence-building and
reconciliation measures should follow.

Intercultural dialogue is also an important
element of a successful post-conflict peacebuilding
strategy. The Security Council should recall the
thematic debate on peacebuilding last month under the
Japanese presidency. In its statement (S/PRST/2010/7)
the Council recognized the importance of inclusive
dialogue, reconciliation and integration. Education
plays an important role here because it can nurture
mutual understanding, and a culture of peace can take
root where differences can be settled through dialogue
and the rule of law without resorting to violence.

Japan is a strong advocate of human security,
with its conviction that every individual - irrespective
of religion, race, sex or place of residence - is entitled
to enjoy a peaceful, healthy life with dignity, free from
fear and free from want. Intercultural dialogue
presupposes the importance of promoting the human
security of people concerned. Japan has been bold in
increasing opportunities for intercultural dialogue,
including organizing dialogue among civilizations
between Japan and the Islamic world, exchange
programmes for youth, women and young diplomats
from various cultural backgrounds, and an Islamic,
Israeli and Palestinian youth exchange programme to
advance the Middle East peace process. We also
appreciate the strong initiative of King Abdullah of
Saudi Arabia on dialogue among religions and
civilizations.

Intercultural dialogue is the most effective
instrument for maintaining peace and security. Japan is
committed to enhancing human security through active
intercultural dialogue.

