Mr. Dauth (Australia): It is now time for the
members of the Security Council to get beyond the
acrimony, narrow political ambitions and separate
agendas that have hamstrung the Council in recent
months and to seize this opportunity to shoulder their
responsibilities. It is time that the members of the
Council look to the future for Iraq and the Iraqi people.
It is time that the members of the Council focus on
what is at stake and provide the guidance that the
international community is waiting for on humanitarian
needs, long-term reconstruction and the elimination of
weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.

The Security Council's inability to agree on how
to deal with the threat posed by Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction was a great disappointment to Australia and
to many other nations - to nations that depend on this
body to help maintain international peace and security.
Let us be clear. The Council failed the international
community; it failed to enforce its own resolutions.
The question for Council members today is whether
they will allow that situation to gather momentum - to
become a trend towards impotence - or whether they
can stop the Council from sliding towards irrelevance
and can help Iraq get back on its feet after decades of
abusive leadership. If Council members do not rise to
that challenge, the Council will simply be bypassed by
nations that believe the Iraqi people are deserving of
their assistance. It is worth observing that the situation
in which the Council finds itself is one of its own
making, and only its members can set it back on track.

Australia is a part of the coalition to disarm Iraq
because we believe an Iraq with weapons of mass
destruction represents a grave threat to our security and
to international security. Australia hopes that Iraq can
be disarmed soon with a minimum of harm to civilians
and to coalition forces. Our participation in the
coalition is in complete accordance with international
law. Existing Security Council resolutions - including
resolutions 678 (1990), 687 (1991) and 1441 (2002) -
provide authority for the use of force to disarm Iraq of
weapons of mass destruction and to restore
international peace and security to the region.

We are matching our words with actions. We have
provided an initial contribution of $17.5 million to
United Nations humanitarian agencies, to the
International Committee of the Red Cross and to other
non-governmental organizations. We have two ships
with 100,000 tons of Australian wheat food aid waiting
offshore to start deliveries. And Australian navy divers
have been helping to clear the port of Umm Qasr of
mines, which will allow the safe delivery of
humanitarian supplies and equipment.

We will not stop at that. We are already
positioned to play our part in longer-term
reconstruction work to help Iraq return to its rightful
place in the international community. But it is our
strong preference that the Security Council play its
part. In this, Australia asks the Council to recall the
vital and constructive role that the United Nations
played in assisting East Timor during its historical
transition to independence.

Members of this body have the responsibility to
ensure that the greatest possible flexibility is provided
to United Nations agencies in Iraq in order to allow
them to get their job done. We urge Council members
to agree on tools that will allow rapid and effective
delivery of immediate humanitarian assistance to Iraq
and that will assist in longer-term rehabilitation and
reconstruction. That applies most immediately to
resolutions on restoring the oil for food programme and
on longer-term reconstruction issues.

We urge Council members to avoid indulgence in
narrow, overly legalistic approaches that would tie the
hands of the international community with regard to
helping Iraq. The Council will bear responsibility for
the humanitarian consequences if it fails to swiftly
ensure passage of a transitional oil for food resolution.

And we urge Council members to face up to the
facts: Iraq is now being disarmed militarily in part
because the Council was unable to deal effectively with
Iraq. It need not have been this way. If the Council had
spoken with one voice - if it had made it clear that
Saddam Hussain's cat-and-mouse games would no
longer be tolerated - then Saddam just might have
recognized that he had no choice but to disarm
peacefully. This disunity must not continue. If
members allow narrow self-interest to prevent the
Council from setting in place useful and effective
mechanisms for Iraq's recovery, they will bear a heavy
responsibility for consigning the Council - and with it
the wider United Nations role - to a marginal place in
contemporary history.

