Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): I take
the opportunity to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings. We are
pleased to note the progress made by both Tribunals
in implementing their respective strategies to finalize
their work and ensure the transition to the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and to
promote the conditions necessary for the Mechanism to
effectively implement its mandate.

We welcome the measures adopted by both
Tribunals, which, while ensuring due process, have
enabled the harmonization of working methods in order
to accelerate the work pace. We welcome the fact that
such measures have enabled the ICTR to conclude its
trials of the 93 accused, issuing its final judgement in
December 2012, as initially planned. We appreciate the
fact that the Tribunal has met all announced forecasts
for the past six months in terms of both completed trials
and appeals. We welcome the Tribunal's plans to issue
judgements in 2014 in five of the six cases before the
Appeals Chamber, and we understand why the sixth case
had to be postponed until 2015. In addition, we support
the measures to ensure the capacity of the ICTR's
Appeal Chamber, in particular the quick replacement
of Judge Vaz. Maintaining its capacities will enable the
Tribunal to dispose of nearly all of its ongoing appeals
in 2014 according to schedule.

With respect to the ICTY, we note with satisfaction
that, in the period under consideration, 12 judgements
and 13 appeals have been completed and that the
Tribunal intends to complete all of its trials in 2013. We
support measures to strengthen the Appeals Chamber
of the ICTY, as its judicial activity increasingly
involves appeals, which will facilitate the discharge
of its mandate. We note that the ICTY has indicated
that certain judgements and arrests will be carried out
later than expected. Therefore, we must continue our
support with a View to assisting the Tribunal in finding
suitable staff.

Dialogue continues among the two Tribunals,
the Mechanism, the Office of Legal Affairs and the
Council's Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, capably and effectively chaired by
Guatemala. It will continue to be the appropriate
framework to review ways and measures to overcome
any practical or institutional difficulties in carrying
out the completion strategy of both Tribunals. The
constructive discussions on the forthcoming election
of an additional judge to the ICTY Appeals Chamber
perfectly illustrate the commitment of the members of
the Security Council to continuing to support the two
Tribunals.

In that context, the important cooperation
of Member States with regional and subregional
organizations and the two Tribunals, in accordance with
their respective Statutes and the Residual Mechanism,
must be highlighted. That cooperation should involve
not only additional efforts to arrest the fugitives still
sought by the ICTR, but also the accelerated action
on communications and requests for legal assistance
from both Tribunals. Referral of matters to national
jurisdictions has greatly facilitated the programme of
work of both Tribunals and the gradual transition to
the Residual Mechanism. The ICTY's referral of all
cases involving intermediate and lower-rank accused
to national jurisdictions, pursuant to resolution 1503
(2003) of the Council, and the referral by the ICTR of
10 cases to national jurisdictions will further enhance
complementarity in strengthening the national judicial
institutions of affected countries and promoting
reconciliation.

We welcome the announced launching next month
of the branch of the International Residual Mechanism
in The Hague, one year after the opening of the Arusha
branch. In that context, we also note the preparations
of the ICTY under way to transfer certain follow-up
and judgement matters to the Residual Mechanism, as
well as other functions of the Tribunal, including the
monitoring of sentences, requests for assistance from
national authorities and the protection of victims.
We welcome the fact that the Arusha branch is now
authorized to hear appeals filed against the Tribunal and
adjudicate requests to review the Tribunal's judgements,
matters involving contempt and false witness and the
three major fugitives as soon as they are apprehended.
We also welcome the close cooperation between the
two Tribunals to ensure that the two branches of the
Mechanism benefit from significant administrative
support.

Activities to raise awareness among the younger
generation, including workshops and exhibits on lessons
learned from the judgements and crimes covered by the
two Tribunals, should be encouraged. Also, activities to
distribute information on both Tribunals to all national,
regional and international actors must be continued.
The significant number of judgements and arrests by
both Tribunals form an important foundation for such
awareness-raising activities.

The contribution of the International Criminal
Tribunals to international criminal justice must be
recognized and preserved. The protection ofthe heritage
of the two Tribunals has judicial as well as moral value.
In that spirit, it is important to continue to guarantee
access to information relating to the two Tribunals,
their mandates and their contributions, in order to fight
impunity, strengthen the international judicial system
and enhance reconciliation. It is also essential to take
specific measures to ensure ownership of the archives
and other commemorative symbols and documents by
the populations of those regions affected by the crimes
that have been judged by the two Tribunals.

