Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We would like to
express our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening and presiding over today's meeting. We
agree with most of your views and recommendations
with regard to Darfur and the situation in the Sudan.

We also want to thank the African Union-United
Nations Joint Special Representative for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), Ambassador Jeremiah Mamabolo, for his
enlightening briefing, as well as the useful information
provided by Ms. Ursula Mueller.

We are particularly grateful to UNAMID for
their continued efforts in Darfur in their pursuit of
peace albeit under difficult security and climate
change-related challenges. The united efforts of the
United Nations and the international community have
led to substantial progress in building peace in Darfur
and the wider region. Our continued efforts should
preserve the gains that have been made in recent years.
It is our hope that the developments in Khartoum will
not negatively affect the gains made thus far.

We should continue to build on the gains made
in advancing the Darfur peace process and the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. It is important that the international community
continue to support those important processes and
encourage all stakeholders to implement the outstanding
provisions of the various commissions and agreements.
It is imperative that adequate support be provided to
internally displaced persons, particularly focusing
on the prevention of sexual violence against women
and children.

The importance of humanitarian support to affected
areas in the Sudan remains a significant lifeline for
many people. It is essential that there be an eventual
transition from humanitarian support to reconstruction
and development in the Darfur area as UNAMID
ultimately exits. Let me pay tribute to development
partners for their kind generosity and humanitarian
assistance to Darfur and the wider Sudan.

South Africa supports the fact that UNAMID should
continue its mission and the course for the drawdown.
But I would like to ask Joint Special Representative
Ambassador Mamabolo if he is proposing a revised
timetable for the drawdown in Darfur given the current
political situation in Khartoum.

We would like to make the following remarks on
the situation in the Sudan and Khartoum.

First, with regard to the wider Sudan, it is critical
that the Sudanese people seize this opportunity to
address all their current differences and ensure an
inclusive arrangement for all Sudanese people as they
find a durable settlement for the current crisis because
the developments in Darfur are inextricably linked to
those in the Sudan and the wider region.

Second, South Africa underscores the importance
of a credible and inclusive transition and transparent
processes and arrangements that will assist in unifying
the Sudan.

Third, the international community should rally
behind the aspirations ofthe Sudanese people as a whole
as they find a pathway to the future of their country.

Fourth, in its engagement in the Sudan the
Council should further be guided by the regional
approaches and through the African Union (AU) and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. The
African Union Peace and Security Council communique
of 15 April on the situation in the Sudan urgently
appeals to all the AU partners and the international
community to support their efforts through the adopted
communique. The unity of the Council in supporting
that approach is vital.

Fifth, the Council should support the Secretary-
General's endeavours in supporting the African Union
in trying to find an acceptable settlement of the Sudan
crisis through peaceful means.

Sixth, South Africa is of the firm view that support
to the Sudanese economy is essential. The need to
address the socioeconomic needs of the Sudanese
people will be paramount in the rebuilding of the
Sudan, as that constitutes part of the root causes of the
current impasse.

Seventh, on accountability, we should give space to
the Sudanese to utilize their own internal mechanisms
to address accountability issues and chart their future.
That will also lay the groundwork for the future peace and
reconciliation of the Sudanese people and, if possible,
promote ethnic, religious and regional tolerance.

Lastly, it is important that the Council call for
calm and for the situation to be resolved peacefully and
amicably through inclusive political processes.

We would like to express our appreciation to the
AU High-level Implementation Panel, led by former
President of South Africa Thabo Mbeki, former
President of Nigeria Abdulsalami Abubakar and former
Foreign Minister of Algeria Ambassador Lamamra.

The Sudan is the biggest African country in terms
of landmass. It borders with more than nine African
countries and numerous countries currently facing
security challenges, as we all know. The manner in
which the Council approaches the Sudanese crisis and
its resolution may have a particular impact on Darfur
and the neighbourhood.

Let us find a common cause and assist the Sudanese
in finding one another as they build peace. We hope
that our own national interests will not outweigh the
interests of the Sudanese people.

