Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-Genera Jeffrey
Feltman for his briefing on the situation in Ukraine.
Argentina reiterates its concern at the continued
deterioration in the security situation in the east and
south of Ukraine and at the escalating violence.

It is especially imperative that all parties strictly
conform, in their actions, to international law and the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. In that
regard, we recall the obligation of all States to settle
their international disputes by peaceful means, so as
not to threaten international peace and security, while
acting in full accordance with the Charter of the United

Nations, upholding the principles set out in Chapter I,
Article 2, and recognizing the significant role of the
relevant regional organizations.

The only possible solution is one that is reached
through dialogue and negotiation - we have said
that before and we reaffirm it. Any confrontational
rhetoric or any interference in matters that fall within
the domestic jurisdiction of States, whether they be
military, political or economic, must be avoided. In that
regard, we welcome the meeting held on 26 August in
Minsk between the Presidents of Russia and Ukraine.
We hope that it will lead to new meetings in order to
resolve the differences politically. Similarly, we echo
the Secretary-General's call for continuing discussions
with a View to forging an solution to the conflict. We
acknowledge the intense efforts and good offices of
the Secretary-General. It is necessary for the parties to
unconditionally observe human rights and international
humanitarian law and ensure proper accountability
with regard to the violations and abuses of human
rights and international humanitarian law that have
been committed.

Finally, as we have done in the past, Argentina
emphasizes the Security Council's primary
responsibility for ensuring the maintenance of peace
and security, in accordance with the role assigned to it
by the Charter. We regret that so far, despite the many
times we have met to discuss the situation in Ukraine,
the Council has not been able to overcome its division
and play a positive role to help the parties find common
points on which they can base a political and diplomatic
solution. It is therefore crucial that we redouble our
efforts to create conditions so that dialogue, which is
so urgent, can begin in such a way that solutions can
be found to the disagreements. In particular, the actors
with the greatest influence should use constructive
diplomacy. We reaffirm that the international
community must focus its efforts on bringing the
parties into a constructive dialogue and find a peaceful
way out of the situation, with full respect for human
rights, international humanitarian law and the rights
of all minorities and while framing its actions strictly
within international law and the Charter of the United
Nations.

