Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation commends
you, Sir, for convening this open meeting of the Council to
consider the situation in Burundi. We believe that the
participation of the larger membership of the Organization
will contribute positively to the process of Council
consideration of the subject.

We appreciate the briefing given this morning by
Assistant Secretary-General Ibrahima Fall on the current
situation in Burundi. We were dismayed to learn from Mr.
Fall and from other sources that the situation on the
political, economic and humanitarian fronts remains very
bad and very disturbing. It is therefore imperative that the
international community and this Council redouble their
efforts to nudge the peace process forward and to
encourage the Burundian parties to work together for an
enduring political settlement. We hope that today's open
meeting of the Council will provide the necessary impetus
for these efforts.

My delegation does not believe that a lasting
solution of the Burundian conflict can be attained through
military means. In this regard, we note with concern the
current impasse in the political dialogue. We urge the
international community, particularly the regional States,
to continue to galvanize efforts to bring the parties
together to end the fighting and to commit themselves to
the political process. We urge the Burundians to search
for a lasting solution to their tragic conflict at the
negotiating table rather than on the battlefront.

Like other members of the Council, Malaysia fully
supports the initiatives of the regional leaders and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) to assist Burundi in
finding a negotiated settlement to the conflict. We
welcome the African lead, while believing that the
Security Council and the international community also
have equally Vital roles to play. In this context, we wish
to pay tribute to the memory of the late former President
of Tanzania, Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, whose untimely
death has left a vacuum which must be filled as soon as
possible so as not to lose the momentum that he
generated with his tireless efforts. It is imperative,
therefore, that the current consultations among leaders in
the region to find a new Facilitator result in an early
decision. Time is of the essence. But it is equally
important to find someone with the energy, dedication and
stature of the late Mwalimu - one who can command
the respect and confidence of the parties.

We believe that the Arusha peace process remains
the most viable avenue towards achieving lasting peace.
We were dismayed to hear of the polarization that has
emerged among the Burundian parties and would urge
them not to lose faith in the Arusha process. We believe
that, while the hurdles are significant, they are not
insurmountable. The mediation efforts of the new
Facilitator must be given every chance to succeed,
representing as they do the most realistic opportunity for
pursuing dialogue among the key players. The momentum
towards peace generated during the early stages of the
Arusha peace process must not be allowed to grind to a
halt.

We note with grave concern that, as in many other
conflicts, the unfortunate victims of the conflict in
Burundi are the innocent civilians who are caught in the
middle. The deteriorating security situation, following an
escalation of violence in rural areas, has resulted in large-
scale population displacement and forced a suspension of
humanitarian assistance. While every effort should be
made by the international community to resolve the

 

conflict at the political-diplomatic level, there is an urgent
need to ensure continued humanitarian assistance to the
affected population so as to avoid further hardship and loss
of lives. The situation on the economic front is also a
matter of serious concern. Earlier expectations of
improvements in the economy following the removal of the
economic embargo by Burundi's neighbours have failed to
materialize, due mainly to the continuing Violence and
insecurity.

Unimpeded provision of and access to humanitarian
assistance are imperative if the situation in Burundi is to be
stabilized. Further human displacements will have serious
ramifications for peace and security throughout the Great
Lakes region. Preventing them should therefore be a high
priority of the international community. Malaysia condemns
the attack on the humanitarian mission in Rutana province
on 12 October resulting in the tragic death of two
representatives of United Nations agencies. We welcome
the decision by the Government of Burundi to institute a
thorough investigation of the incident and the subsequent
prosecution of those responsible.

Narrow sectarian interests must give way to the larger
interests and concerns of the Burundian people at large. The
international community can no longer allow acts of
unbridled violence to continue with impunity. Those who
commit serious violations of international humanitarian law
should be held responsible for crimes against humanity. We
also note that the recent spate of attacks on civilians has
resulted in the Government of Burundi's resettling some
130,000 people in regroupement camps, as confirmed by
Assistant Secretary-General Fall during his briefing.
Although such drastic measures are prompted by safety and
security considerations and may well have resulted in an
improvement in the security situation, we would urge that
the needs and welfare of the people placed in such camps
be fully assured and adequately provided. In any case, they
should be allowed to return to their Villages and homes as
soon as possible.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to underscore that
the responsibility for ending the conflict lies with the
Burundian people themselves, particularly their leaders. The
genuine political commitment of the leaders is imperative
if a process of political dialogue is to succeed. We call on
all Burundians to end their ethnic and factional differences
in the larger interest of their country. They must seize the
opportunity provided by the Arusha process and begin the
task of rebuilding a united nation under a constitution
which enjoys the widest possible support. The memory of
the many Burundians who have perished and that of
Mwalimu Nyerere and his efforts should inspire them to
succeed.

