Mr. Mammadyarov (Azerbaijan): Azerbaijan
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013) and
expresses its hope that the unanimous and strong
position demonstrated today by the Security Council
will contribute to finding a political solution to the
conflict in Syria, bringing an end to the suffering
inflicted on the Syrian people and ensuring compliance
by the parties concerned with their obligations and
commitments under international law.

We are grateful to the head and members of the
United Nations Mission to Investigate Allegations ofthe
Use of Chemical Weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic
for the work they have done in extremely difficult
and challenging security and political conditions. It
is essential that the Mission complete its investigation
into all allegations of the use of chemical weapons in
Syria and submit its final report. The continued support
of that process by all concerned is critical to that end.

Azerbaijan strongly condemns the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, particularly the killing of civilians
that resulted from it. Resolution 2118 (2013), which was
just adopted, affirms that the use of chemical weapons
constitutes a serious violation of international law and
also qualifies that act as a threat to international peace
and security. It is important that the Security Council
has expressed its strong conviction that the individuals
responsible for the use of chemical weapons in Syria
should be held accountable.

Azerbaijan welcomes the understanding reached
earlier between the Russian Federation and the United
States regarding the safeguarding and destruction of
Syria's chemical weapons stockpiles, as well as the
decision adopted today to that end by the Executive
Council of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW). The key objective is
obviously to ensure compliance with all aspects of the
OPCW decision and full and faithful implementation of
the Council resolution.

It is critical that, while establishing concrete
legally binding obligations, the resolution provides for
review on a regular basis of implementation efforts
in Syria and that, in the event of non-compliance, it
envisages imposing measures under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations. By endorsing the
Geneva communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex) and calling for the convening of an international
conference on Syria, the Security Council has paved
the way for achieving peaceful transition, stability and
reconciliation.

It is imperative that all parties cease armed
violence, engage constructively in the political process
and commit to the implementation of the Geneva
communique. It is important that the resolution just
adopted once again reaffirms the strong commitment
of the Council to the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria. Proceeding from that
aforementioned understanding, Azerbaijan decided to
support and co-sponsor resolution 2118 (2013).

