Mr. Sahovie (Serbia and Montenegro):
Mr. President, I would like to join other speakers in
thanking you for organizing this debate on national
reconciliation in post-conflict situations and the role
that the United Nations can or should play in that
respect.

Indeed, the issue of reconciliation is crucial for
my country and, for that matter, for the entire region of
South-East Europe, parts of which have experienced a
series of conflicts over the past decade. Unfortunately,
there are also many other areas in the world where, in
different circumstances and against a different
background, reconciliation must be achieved as an
element of post-conflict stabilization.

This brings us to the question of whether there is
a set of general principles or a number of general steps
to be taken in post-conflict situations to facilitate
reconciliation and eventually achieve that objective.
Certainly, a level of stability has to be introduced
before practical steps towards reconciliation are
attempted. Establishing security, including
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, is a
basic precondition. Subsequently, in the process of
post-conflict governance, institutions need to be put in
place, the judiciary should begin to function and
economic recovery has to be jumpstarted. There are
certainly many other areas that post-conflict societies
have to deal with along the way to national
reconciliation. However, all these measures should be
tailored to the actual needs and traditions of the
country in question, taking into account the
circumstances that triggered the conflict in the first
place. Ready-made solutions cannot merely be imposed
from the outside. A genuine internal process is
necessary and local actors must take responsibility for
pushing it forward.

My delegation aligns itself with today's statement
by the European Union. Nevertheless, I would like to
elaborate, from my national perspective, two examples
relevant to the topic under discussion.

The first is the former Yugoslavia. Obviously, this
is a complex situation, since peoples that once lived in
one multinational society now need to achieve
reconciliation in an inter-State context. Indeed,
following the end of military operations in 1995, inter-
State relations have improved. All countries involved,
including mine, share the aspiration of joining
mainstream European and Euro-Atlantic integrations.
There is a realization that good-neighbourly relations
must be developed in this process. In fact, the
improvement of relations with neighbours is a top
priority of my Government. The international
community is encouraging this approach, which is very
helpful. While much certainly remains to be done in
order to further improve relations, concrete positive
results are already visible.

However, on a different level, improvement is not
so visible. Mistrust still prevails at the grass-roots
level. There are different opinions on crucial questions
of responsibility for what had happened. Perceptions
differ on who were the victims and who the
perpetrators. Basically, within and among the societies
in question, an understanding of some sort needs to be
reached on the causes and consequences of the
conflicts and wars before substantial reconciliation can
be sought.

In that regard, the role of justice is central. Of
course, there is a tribunal established by the Security
Council to prosecute persons responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law in the
former Yugoslavia since 1991. The aim, as stated in
Security Council resolution 827 (1993), was to bring to
justice those who were responsible for those violations,
to contribute to the restoration and maintenance of
peace and to contribute to ensuring that such violations
are halted and effectively redressed. Some of the
aforementioned aims have been achieved. True, some
of the persons indicted are still at large and they must
be brought to justice.

The question is what impact the Tribunal has had
so far in terms of reconciliation. In my country, the
Tribunal's work and practices have not, unfortunately,
contributed much to the promotion of the cause of
reconciliation. The reasons for that are many and
complex, and I do not want to imply in any way that all
shortcomings are on the side of the Tribunal. For
example, some aspects of the Tribunal's activities went
beyond the stated aims of resolution 827 (1993),
actually entering the sphere of domestic politics.
Hence, the Tribunal has been and continues to be
largely perceived by our public as a political tool rather
than an instrument of justice. As a consequence, the
work of the Tribunal has become a high-priority issue
on the domestic political agenda, significantly
overshadowing its role of bringing the perpetrators of
crimes to justice. When political and legal questions
mix and individual and collective responsibilities
overlap, confusion is created that is harmful to any
attempt at reconciliation.

We therefore believe that internal efforts to
administer justice are of vital importance. The
domestic judiciary is, in the long run, much better
positioned to seek justice for victims. Domestic
verdicts would be more easily accepted than those
passed by international - that is, foreign - courts or
tribunals. It is also necessary for Governments to
promote strongly a culture of lawfulness if there is to
be a hope of true reconciliation.

The second example is the province of Kosovo
and Metohija in my country. Now in their fifth year
under United Nations administration, ethnic
communities remain as far apart as ever. Of course,
their positions changed in a reversal of fortune
following the 1999 intervention by the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization, but they are still in confrontation
and one of them - the Serbian community - is
struggling to survive. Only symbolic numbers of
refugees and internally displaced persons have returned
and no perpetrators of crimes against non-Albanians
have been brought to justice.

The underlying problem is that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) has not yet succeeded in creating even basic
conditions conducive to the opening of a political
debate among the communities about the modalities for
their coexistence in Kosovo and Metohija. Again, as in
the previous example, there are many reasons for this
failure, and they are very complex indeed. What
appears to be clear is that much greater resolve and
consistency are necessary on the part of UNMIK in
order to begin, first, to create a safe environment for
non-Albanians and fully to ensure their human rights,
and then to include them meaningfully in political life.
Half measures, leaning towards one side and neglecting
the other, will just perpetuate the conflict between
communities. When a degree of normalcy is
introduced, a very long period of sustained, primarily
domestically-generated effort will be needed if any
reconciliation is to take place in Kosovo and Metohija.

Our experience points to several conclusions
about the possible United Nations role in reconciliation
processes. Reconciliation relies primarily on the
existence of a strong political will among the parties to
the former conflict to open such a process. This will
should then be translated into a set of activities
promoted and guided by the authorities. Civil society
also has an extremely important role to play. However,
the United Nations and other international
organizations can assist in creating conditions
conducive to reconciliation.

Understanding the nature of a conflict and
healing are lengthy processes, sometimes spanning
several generations. This fact alone is a serious
limitation to United Nations involvement that the
Organization needs to overcome if it wants to engage
systematically in reconciliation activities. Crises
emerge in various parts of the world, shifting attention
from one place to another. At the same time, every
United Nations operation, from the moment it is
launched, contemplates an exit strategy.

The most valuable contribution the United
Nations can make to post-conflict societies is helping
them to rebuild as quickly as possible functioning
political structures that offer the possibility of bridging
various competing loyalties. Assistance in
strengthening the rule of law in general, and
specifically the judiciary, should be among the top
priorities. The role of international justice is sometimes
unavoidable. However, all efforts must be made to
separate the administration of justice from domestic
political considerations in countries under the
jurisdiction of international tribunals or courts. The
newly-established International Criminal Court has a
potential to meet this requirement.

Bearing all this in mind, it might be useful to look
at the possibilities of combining the capabilities of the
United Nations and regional organizations in the field
of assisting post-conflict reconciliation. The United
Nations can provide the necessary assistance in the
short to medium term, while regional organizations
could in many respects be better positioned to engage
in such an endeavour on a long-term basis. Such broad
international support by the United Nations and
regional actors in strengthening institutions and a
democratic base can help post-conflict societies to
embark on a reconciliation process, to look for the truth
and to go through often-needed catharsis.

