Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): We are most grateful to
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his very
comprehensive briefing on the recent developments in
Kosovo. Despite multiple political, economic and
security concerns, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has made
considerable progress in the implementation of its
mandate. We pay tribute to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Hans Haekkerup, for his
very able leadership of UNMIK. We believe that they
have a tremendous responsibility, and we feel that they
are assuming it very well.

We commend the relentless efforts of UNMIK in
maintaining peace in extremely difficult situations.
With the promulgation of the Constitutional
Framework, UNMIK's involvement in ensuring its
effective implementation remains crucial. Of the very
many challenges facing UNMIK, the registration of all
the minority communities, including the Serbs, and
securing their participation in the forthcoming
November elections in Kosovo are among the top
priorities.

We note with concern that some Serb leaders are
reluctant to participate in the registration process and
have in fact hardened their radical positions. We refer
in particular to the Serb National Council-Gracanica.
We call on the Serb community to engage itself fully in
the political process, which remains the only way for it
to protect and promote its interests and jointly shape
the destiny of Kosovo. We also urge it to cooperate
fully with UNMIK and participate in the Joint Interim
Administrative Structure.

The Kosovo Albanians, for their part, must
respect the rights of the minority communities and
create a safe and secure environment conducive to
inter-ethnic dialogue.

Mauritius notes with satisfaction that the Kosovo
Turkish community, which did not participate in last
year's municipal elections, has now committed itself to
participating in the Kosovo-wide elections.

We deplore the incidents and upsurge of Violence
in the Mitrovica and Pristina regions, where a number
of people have been injured and where aid personnel
from the international community have been targeted.

We do, however, welcome the promulgation of
legislation to combat organized crime, illegal weapons
possession and terrorism. The establishment of the new
pillar I will further strengthen the law enforcement and
criminal justice systems in Kosovo. With these positive
changes, and barring other mishaps, we may
reasonably hope for a democratic, stable and peaceful
Kosovo society in the near future.

We welcome the improvement of relations
between the UNMIK team and the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. President Kostunica's
offer to work closely with UNMIK for a multi-ethnic
Kosovo society during the Council's mission to
Belgrade is indeed a great leap forward in the
reconciliation process. With the opening of the UNMIK
office in Belgrade, dialogue and cooperation on issues
of mutual concern will be enhanced. Consequent closer
collaboration between the Kosovo Force (KFOR), the
UNMIK police and the Yugoslav police should ensure
a safe and secure environment for the return of the
minority communities to their homeland. The Yugoslav
authorities should continue to play an important role in
persuading the Kosovo Serb community to participate
in the UNMIK-led process and to register themselves
for the forthcoming elections.

We note with regret that the issue of the missing
Serbs has seen little development. We welcome the
signing between UNMIK and the international
community of the memorandum of understanding on
the missing persons with a view to identifying the
missing persons through DNA testing. The Serb
community should be given every assurance that the
international community is committed to finding the
truth about the missing persons. We call on the Kosovo
Albanian leaders to cooperate with UNMIK to address
this problem. This is very important to build the
necessary confidence and feeling of security among the
Serbs.

Likewise, the handing over of detainees to
Kosovo remains to be completed. Though some of
them have been returned by the Yugoslav authorities,
there are still more, including children, women and
elders, who are held in Serbia. We call on the Yugoslav
authorities to accelerate the process of handing over all
the remaining detainees to UNMIK, which, in turn, will
ensure the review of their cases.

Kosovo has been the scene of great human
tragedy. Thousands of people, including women and
children, have been killed mercilessly. Thanks to the
prompt intervention of the international community, we
have been able to stop this tragedy. It is now time to
build peace and reconstruct the economy in a climate
of justice, fair play and tolerance, where each ethnic
community can live free of fear and in harmony.

Coming from Mauritius, we know that this is
possible. We exhort the international community to
support this process fully.

