Ms. Lind (Estonia): Deliberate attacks on civilians
are war crimes, and they are simply unacceptable. It
is with a heavy heart that we look at the increasing
numbers of incidents placing civilians, including
medical and humanitarian personnel, under direct
attack in armed conflicts. We are witnessing obstacles
placed to obstruct the delivery of medical equipment
and people in need who are not receiving necessary
medical treatment.

Over the past years, we have seen a growing number
of violations of international humanitarian law. In this
vein I thank the Uruguayan presidency for convening
the today's open debate to address this issue.

Estonia also aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

Resolution 2286 (2016), adopted unanimously by the
Security Council, was a landmark decision addressing
the grave situation that medical and humanitarian
personnel face today. It is important to underline
that they are under the protection of international
humanitarian law and that States have obligations to
respect that. In that regard, Estonia will continue to
support the implementation of resolution 2286 (2016).
It is without doubt States that have the primary
responsibility to ensure the protection of their own
people. For that, we have to start with conflict
prevention. Respect for civilian populations and health
care in armed conflicts must be present at all times. In
order to bring that into practice, Estonia has ratified
the main instruments of international humanitarian
law with respect to the protection of civilians and has
introduced the necessary domestic regulations for
their enforcement. We have taken it to heart to ensure
that our personnel do not violate international law
when carrying out their obligations in Estonia or on
a mission. The Estonian Defence Forces are provided
with training on the obligations for the protection of
civilians under international humanitarian law. That
includes basic overviews of the field, briefings on rules
of engagement before every deployment and advanced
training in international humanitarian law.

Perpetrators must be brought to justice. States
must ensure that those responsible do not operate
with impunity. In that respect, let me underline the
importance of accountability and the role of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in cases where
investigations or prosecutions at the national level are
not possible. We encourage States to cooperate with
the ICC and the Security Council to refer matters to
the ICC.
