Mr. Mutaboba: I am honoured to present to the
Council the latest report of the Secretary-General on
the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
(S/201 1/655). I believe that this is a timely opportunity
to share with the Council the most recent developments
2

in Guinea-Bissau and review the current situation and
the best course of action for future efforts to
consolidate stability in the country, as this is our last
meeting before the end of the current mandate of
UNIOGBIS, in December this year. The national
authorities, with the assistance of international
partners, have continued to steer the country in the
right direction and have consolidated important recent
gains, resulting in a better political and security
environment. There is nevertheless a need to continue
to build upon these gains, as we gradually approach
critical phases of the reform process that require strong
international support, and as the country embarks on a
sensitive electoral process in 2012.

UNIOGBIS has continued to support national
efforts to effectively coordinate international assistance
for credible security sector reform (SSR) under the
principle of full civilian control of the military. In that
context, significant work has been done to
operationalize the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP) road map for
fast-tracking SSR. Following the approval of the
document at the highest level by the three parties
concerned - the Government of Guinea-Bissau,
ECOWAS and the CPLP - a memorandum of
understanding detailing the modalities governing the
implementation of the road map on the ground is
expected to be signed by the three parties in the
coming weeks.

Throughout the negotiations between the three
parties, UNIOGBIS was regularly consulted and
insisted on the importance of framing the memorandum
of understanding within the context of existing
provisions related to the SSR implementation,
including those deriving from Security Council
resolutions and the outcome of the consultations
between the European Union and the Government of
Guinea-Bissau. In the meantime, it should be noted
that the CPLP member States maintained their
engagement in connection with the implementation of
projects on the ground that are part of the road map and
contribute to overall SSR efforts.

The delays in the disbursement of international
financial assistance for the implementation of the road
map, including the $63 million pledged by ECOWAS,
remain a serious impediment to the activation of the
pension fund scheme for the retirement of military and
security personnel. The Government of Guinea-Bissau
11-57874
has already contributed $200,000 to the pension fund
and committed to providing an additional $300,000
before the end of the year. The Government
contribution is the only disbursement made to the
pension fund so far. Yet it is essential to guarantee the
financial resources necessary to launch the fund
without further delay, so as to allow for the expeditious
rejuvenation of the military leadership and the
enhancement of civilian oversight over the armed
forces. In that context, I welcome the efforts made by
the Peacebuilding Commission country-specific
configuration to hold a high-level event to raise
awareness about and seek the financial resources
necessary for the pension fund scheme. I cannot stress
enough the urgency of this matter.

In parallel, I am happy to report that the reform
of the policing services has seen substantial progress.
As a result of a thorough screening of police officers
through the first phase of the vetting and certification
process completed with the support of UNIOGBIS, the
reformed police services will be free of personnel
known to have demonstrated behaviour unfit for a
police officer. The first model police station in Bissau
is now operational. Its staff benefit from the advice of
United Nations police officers co-1ocated on its
premises. Within the recently approved $16.8 million
second allocation of the Peacebuilding Fund for
Guinea-Bissau, $3 million will be allocated for the
construction of an additional 12 model police stations
throughout the country, which will contribute
significantly to the modernization of policing in
Guinea-Bissau and to the institutionalization of respect
for the rule of law, for the first time in Guinea-Bissau's
recent history.

With regard to efforts to fight impunity, progress
has been conditioned not only by operational delays in
the establishment of capable law-enforcement
agencies, but also, and more importantly, by the
increasing strategic need, or obligation, to strike a
delicate balance between pushing for advancing the
prevalence of the rule oflaw while at the same time not
risking damaging the fragile stability in the country.
While some positive work has been done in the
development of the capacities of the various justice-
sector actors and in establishing good practices of
information-sharing among them, which has led to
positive results, the 2009 high-profile political cases
and related investigations remain to be concluded.
Additionally, the recent changes at the helm of the
11-57874

Judiciary Police and the subsequent replacement of the
Prosecutor-General, while generating a new
momentum considering the commitment made by the
newcomers to depoliticize the judiciary system, also
created inevitable additional delays, in addition to the
recent reshuffling in the key Government and judiciary
system positions.

The opposition political parties recently
organized a series of peaceful public demonstrations of
protest calling for progress on these very same
investigations. In this regard, UNIOGBIS played a
significant role in ensuring that these demonstrations
did not lead to further episodes of tension among key
political and military actors in Guinea-Bissau. We
believe that the chances of achieving concrete positive
results in the fight against impunity and the
consolidation of the rule of law in Guinea-Bissau,
without jeopardizing the existing stability prevailing in
the country, will benefit from a strong engagement of
the international community in the process, including
enhanced coordination among partners. The authorities
of Guinea-Bissau, the opposition, civil society
organizations and the population as a whole must feel
reassured that the international community will neither
tolerate further episodes of instability in the country
nor accept that the perpetrators of serious crimes
against the State remain unprosecuted. An important
factor in achieving this will be for Guinea-Bissau's
international partners to remain committed to
advancing the institutional reforms envisaged in
Security Council resolutions 1876 (2009) and 1949
(2010), including SSR and the establishment of
political dialogue, while building the foundations for
justice, the rule of law and respect for human rights.

Regarding the national conference, I am pleased
to report that the preparatory phase - consisting in a
series of eight sessions for the defence and security
sectors, two conferences for the Guinea-Bissau
diaspora in Africa and Europe, and 12 regional
conferences - concluded at the end of October with
the last sessions held in Bissau. An in-depth analysis
and drafting of the results of the preparatory phases of
the process is now under way, under the guidance of
the organizing committee.

The national conference is scheduled to be held
between 15 and 18 December. We will continue to
assist the national authorities in the development of
follow-up mechanisms to be established following the
event in order to ensure continuity in the reconciliation
3
efforts by building upon the national conference
process. The objective is also to guarantee an inclusive
dialogue process open to all segments of society,
notably the opposition parties not represented in
Parliament, and to mainstream gender in this very
promising process.

UNIOGBIS has also continued to provide support
to the constitutional review process. The first phase of
the assistance consisted in a series of efforts aimed at
ensuring that those responsible for reviewing the
Constitution are in a position to do so in a broadly
informed manner. Consequently, the Parliamentary
Commission for the Review of the Constitution
established a drafting committee and appointed its
members, whose work will count on the support of
UNIOGBIS. In parallel, UNIOGBIS will also provide
technical and financial support to efforts that will be
carried out at the grass-roots level throughout the
country with a View to disseminating the work being
done and ensuring wide national ownership and
popular buy-in to the new draft constitution.
UNIOGBIS will also provide advice to the national
authorities to help ensure that the constitutional review
process remains non-partisan, particularly in light of
the upcoming legislative elections, scheduled for 2012.

Drug trafficking and organized crime remain a
constant threat to the fragile stability that Guinea-
Bissau has enjoyed over the past 18 months, and bear
the potential to compromise major reforms, including
SSR. The efficient combat against drug trafficking in
Guinea-Bissau continues to be hampered by a variety
of internal and external political and technical factors.
Furthermore, the lack of reliable data on the actual
quantities of drugs that transit through the national
territory adds to the difficulties in addressing the
matter with the national authorities. This aspect was
discussed during Under-Secretary-General Fedotov's
visit in Bissau on 27 October.

Increased international assistance and the
partners' commitment remain imperative if we wish to
see improved results in the fight against drug
trafficking and organized crime in the country.
Initiatives aimed at pooling the efforts of countries of
origin, transit and destination of narcotics should
continue and translate into concrete operational
cooperation. The development and consolidation of
regional initiatives, including the West Africa Coast
Initiative, whose Programme Committee met in Bissau
on 27 October, will also contribute significantly to the
building of national capacities in Guinea-Bissau and
countries of the subregion.

I have tried to describe today the crucial juncture
we are approaching with our efforts to consolidate
stability and create conditions for long-lasting
development in Guinea-Bissau. Increasingly, strong,
coordinated international support for the reform
process is required, as is political backing for elected
authorities. In this context, I would like to stress once
again the cross-cutting dimension of the pension fund
scheme and the progress that even a limited amount of
funding could permit. Its quick operationalization will
have impact not only on efforts to advance SSR, but
also on our collective stabilization efforts, especially as
the country prepares for legislative elections in 2012.

