I would like to thank Ms. Lyons, Ms. Waly and Ms. Akbar for their statements. It is interesting that all the briefers today are women. I also welcome the presence of Ambassador Adela Raz, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, in this meeting. While we continue to closely follow the situation in Afghanistan with great interest, we would like to reiterate our support for the Afghan-led and Afghan- owned inclusive peace process and for the resolution 2513 (2020), which has laid the foundations for the pursuit of long-term peace for the country. We welcome the recent positive developments on the political front. It is encouraging to see the spirit of compromise displayed by President Ghani and Mr. Abdullah in reaching the 17 May agreement. We note consistent efforts to promote women's participation in various aspects of the peace process, including having nearly 20 per cent of the peace negotiations team be women. At the same time, Viet Nam remains concerned about the security situation. Although the numbers of security incidents and civilian casualties have decreased compared to the previous period, the situation on the ground remains very fragile. We strongly condemn the continued attacks of the Taliban and other terrorist groups. We are also concerned about the increasing spread and impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on security, peacebuilding and the socioeconomic development of the country. Transnational crimes and drug trafficking are also issues of high concern, which threaten the security situation. Allow me emphasize the following three main points. First, the most important issue now is to advance the implementation of resolution 2513 (2020), particularly in starting the intra-Afghan negotiations. It is critical that the talks start as soon as possible, with a permanent ceasefire as the first goal. We welcome the efforts of the United Nations, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and other relevant stakeholders in facilitating the negotiations. In this regard, we are encouraged to hear the reports on the possible peace talks in the coming weeks in Doha. We also look forward to seeing further strengthened and active participation of women in this process. Secondly, in parallel to the peace talks, it is vital to improve the security situation. Despite the agreement of a nationwide reduction of violence, the Taliban has been carrying out attacks on the Afghan people, many of whom are women and children. We are deeply concerned that during the past week, the Taliban carried out 422 attacks in 32 provinces and killed 291 Afghan security personnel. The escalation of violence took place only a few days after the Taliban had announced a three-day ceasefire on 23 May. At the same time, health-care personnel have been bearing the brunt of the poor security situation. As the threat of COVID-19 remains, Viet Nam once again urges all parties to heed the call of the Secretary-General to put an end to the fighting, stop targeting civilians and civilian objects, and allow unhindered access to humanitarian and health-care services. Thirdly, the economic and humanitarian situation in Afghanistan continues to face many challenges due to ongoing conflict, the impact of COVID-19 and natural disasters. Long-term peace and stability require strong economic development and sustainable livelihoods for the people. Viet Nam recognizes the efforts of the Government in advancing socioeconomic development and addressing the COVID-19 pandemic. We call on the international community to further assist Afghanistan in eradicating poverty, fostering post-conflict reconstruction and overcoming the challenges resulting from COVID-19 and climate change. We also call on the international partners, as well as UNAMA and relevant United Nations agencies, to further provide technical support to the Afghan authorities in countering cross- border crime and drug trafficking. We would also like to emphasize the importance of increasing protection for vulnerable groups, especially women, children and persons with disabilities. In conclusion, Viet Nam once again emphasizes our full support for UNAMA and for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Afghanistan, as well as for the pursuit of peace, stability and development in the country.
