Mr. Fulci (Italy): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union, of which my country
currently occupies the presidency. The following countries
associated with the European Union have decided to join in
this statement: Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland and Slovakia.
Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway also associate
themselves with this statement.

Since the Secretary-General's report of
9 December 1992, we have assured our full support for the
United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP) operation in the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia. We fully agree with the assessments
contained in the Secretary-General's recent report
(S/1996/373), of 23 May 1996, according to which the
operation has provided a decisive contribution to the
stabilization of the political situation in that country,
sheltering it from the dangers of a spillover of the Bosnian
conflict and thus helping to ease ethnic tensions within its
territory by facilitating the dialogue between its cultural
components. Therefore, this represents an important
precedent in the preventive deployment of United Nations
forces and a success story whose results must not be wasted
or jeopardized.

If the Secretary-General's report reflects an
unquestionable improvement in the situation in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, it is equally clear that
this situation still contains troublesome elements of
precariousness. In the first place, peace and stability within
its borders are still dependent to a large extent on
developments in the rest of the former Yugoslavia, and
especially on developments in the implementation of the
Peace Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In the second
place, internal ethnic tensions continue to persist. Thirdly,
the economic situation is still fragile and precarious.

In our view, these circumstances would make any
withdrawal of UNPREDEP forces at this delicate stage
premature and potentially dangerous and would risk sending
the wrong signal. This is why we welcome the Secretary-
General's recommendation and we support today's draft
resolution, which extends the mandate of UNPREDEP, in
its present configuration, for another six months, to
30 November 1996.

We note the Secretary-General's assessment that a
replacement of the Force with United Nations military
observers would create severe disadvantages and only
modest savings. And we welcome his intention to review
questions relating to the concept and strength of
UNPREDEP and to inform the Security Council
accordingly. Today's draft resolution requests that he do
so and that he report to the Council no later than
30 September 1996 for its consideration, which would
allow the Council to assess the situation after the Bosnian
elections.
Among the positive developments indicated by the
Secretary-General is the signing of the Agreement
between the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on 8 April 1996.
Today's draft resolution welcomes this Agreement and
urges both parties to implement it in full, including the
demarcation of their mutual border, which is of special
importance.

We also welcome the progress achieved in
improving relations between the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Greece on the basis of the
Interim Accord of 13 September 1995. We express our
full support for the Secretary-General's Special Envoy,
Mr. Cyrus Vance, and we hope that the discussions held
under his auspices in the context of article 5 of the above-
mentioned Accord will lead to a positive result.

The situation in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia should not be considered in isolation, but only
in the broader context of developments in the former
Yugoslavia. Given the precariousness of the progress we
have had so far, we consider a continuation of
UNPREDEP in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia to be of crucial importance, not only for the
stability and security of that country, but also for the
contribution that it could make to restoring a lasting peace
to a region that in recent years has been torn by a long
and painful conflict.

