Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): May I
first express my delegation's appreciation to those members
of the Council who have so kindly acknowledged the role
we have played with respect to the resolution just adopted
by the Council, as well as the assistance the United States
provided in the evacuation of other nationals from Liberia.

During the past seven years, the factions in Liberia
have conducted bloody, destructive civil war that has cost
the lives of many thousands of innocent Liberians and
robbed the country of its wealth and resources. Only a few
months ago, Monrovia was in flames. Political and ethnic
factions were engaged in street-to- street fighting. Looting,
including of humanitarian and peace-keeping resources, was
widespread. Thousands were taking refuge at the United
States Embassy, and the United States and others were
working hard to evacuate boatloads and planeloads of
non-Liberians to safety. These tragic events seemed to
mark a new low point in Liberia's descent towards
political and social chaos, and were a profound sorrow to
the friends of Liberia around the world and the
international community, which had tried so hard and for
so long to help.

One especially abhorrent practice in this tragic
conflict - singled out by the Italian delegation for
special consideration and condemnation in the Council's
resolution - has been the recruitment, training and actual
deployment of children in combat. Who can forget the
photographs of child soldiers brandishing and using
assault weapons? Who can imagine the psychological
scars that will be left with these children for years to
come? The Council is determined that this abhorrent
practice shall not continue.

The regional leaders, meeting in Abuja in mid-
August, shared the frustration of the rest of the
international community and took a bold step. They
agreed to reinvigorate their 1995 Agreement, including a
new timetable for implementation and the threat of
sanctions for persons or groups that obstruct progress.
The United States commends the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) under the
new chairmanship of Nigeria to get the warring parties to
end the violence, to disarm their combatants and to begin
the process of national reconciliation, beginning with a
cease-fire and culminating in the holding of free and fair
elections.

The Liberian faction leaders appear to have accepted
this new timetable. Their initial statements and actions
offer hope that progress towards peace and stability is
possible in the coming months. The Economic
Community of West African States Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) has successfully re-established and is
maintaining Monrovia as a safe haven. ULIMO-J has
delivered stolen heavy weapons. A new ECOMOG
commander has taken steps that will make the peace-
keeping force more effective. Ruth Perry has been named
new Chairperson of the Council of State, and we wish her
well in her daunting task of national mediation and
unification.

Yet the recent history of Liberia is littered with
broken promises and lost opportunities for peace. It is
important that the faction leaders realize that the world is
more concerned with their deeds than with their words.

 

The United States will be monitoring closely their actions
under the 17 August Agreement.

It is only on the basis of honest implementation of the
new timetable that the United States is able to support the
Secretary-General's call for increased deployments of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL).
These deployments are justified, wise, and ultimately secure
only if the peace process remains on track. We will follow
events closely and calibrate our actions to coincide with
progress towards implementation of the Abuja Agreement.
In this regard, the United States will examine especially
closely the Secretary-General's 15 October report called for
by this resolution.
The Liberian factions bear a clear, unavoidable
responsibility to respect the status of UNOMIL personnel
and property, as well as those of ECOMOG and other
international and humanitarian organizations and agencies.
In this regard, we expect the faction leaders to take steps to
return immediately all looted property.

More broadly, the ECOWAS States and the wider
international community must insist on compliance and do
everything necessary to ensure implementation by the
parties. I would also like to stress the importance of close
contacts and enhanced cooperation between UNOMIL and
ECOMOG. Flexibility and active promotion of good
relations by UNOMIL will be essential to ensuring that
UNOMIL can fulfil its mandate. In this respect, the
deployment of additional liaison officers is a step forward.

The United States believes that UNOMIL can play a
positive role in the process if the Liberian factions
demonstrate real commitment to the Abuja Agreement. The
United States will be watching closely with every hope that
we are indeed seeing the beginning of the end of this tragic
episode in Liberia.

Finally, personnel serving with UNOMIL have
endured hardship and served under perilous conditions. We
commend them for their sacrifices and reiterate our belief
that their safety remains a prime consideration. We also
express our appreciation to Mr. James Jonah, in his role as
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, for his extremely
useful contribution to the Security Council as it addressed
this issue.

