Mr. Maqungo (South Africa): At the outset, my
delegation would like to associate itself with the
statement made by Malaysia on behalf of the Non-
Aligned Movement.

The South African Government is deeply
concerned at the recent military incursion into northern
and southern Gaza and the West Bank over the past few
days, resulting in the destruction of critical
infrastructure. The South African Government
condemns the Israeli Government's policy of collective
punishment, as it constitutes a direct violation of
international law.
Israel's bombing campaign on 28 June 2006,
which has continued unabated, has resulted in the
destruction of strategic bridges and access roads, as
well as of Gaza's only power plant, causing a cut in
Gaza's water supply as it operates on an electrical
pumping system. In his most recent report Professor
John Dugard, a United Nations Special Rapporteur on
human rights, has highlighted the dire state of Gaza's
medical facilities. The loss of Gaza's only power plant
has now resulted in a lack of electricity and water for
those critical facilities, which can only exacerbate the
humanitarian crisis faced by ordinary Palestinians in
Gaza. Although Israel has legitimate security concerns,
they should not be addressed at the expense of
international law and of the human rights of the
Palestinian people.

The South African Government is again calling
for caution with regard to the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories. Furthermore, the unlawful
arrests of Palestinian cabinet ministers, including the
Deputy Prime Minister and members of the Palestinian
Legislative Council, are unacceptable, and we call for
the immediate release of those individuals. The South
African Government calls on the Israeli Government to
stop its military offensive and to take all necessary
measures to ensure that this situation is not further
exacerbated. The South African Government is of the
view that peace can be achieved only through a
negotiated settlement, based on a two-State solution
that provides for a sovereign Palestinian State and
guarantees the right of Israel to live within secure
borders.

The military intervention and the arrests of senior
Palestinian leaders come at a time when many world
leaders have been interacting with the Palestinian
leaders to seek the release of Gilad Shalit. They also
come hours after the historic Palestinian acceptance of
a plan from leaders of all Palestinian factions. That was
a major step forward and opened up real possibilities of
ending violence and finding a two-State solution.
Given that reality, how can anyone justify the invasion,
arrests and massive destruction of Palestinian
infrastructure? Sadly we have entered a very dangerous
period that will threaten the stability of the region and
international peace and security.

