Mr. Fulci (Italy): We are still horrified by the
circumstantial elements that Ambassador Albright
introduced this morning in the Council, indicating the
very serious possibility that the mass murder of unarmed
people from Srebrenica may have taken place near
Bratunac a short time ago.

We believe that it is in the very interests of the
Bosnian Serb leadership to immediately allow an
international inquiry into this episode, which, if
confirmed, would be one of the most abominable crimes
against humanity since the Second World War. Needless
to say, however, not even such a horrible mass murder, if
confirmed, would justify acquiescence in atrocities
committed by others in the former Yugoslavia.

 

It is in this spirit, and under the effect of such
emotions, that we have just adopted the resolution on the
tragic humanitarian aspect of this Srebrenica case. Like all
other representatives who have spoken, we are deeply
concerned over the fate of more than 7,000 people - our
German colleague mentioned 7,000 to 8,000 people - who
are still unaccounted for several weeks after the occupation
by the Bosnian Serb forces of the safe area of Srebrenica.
In his daily and highly appreciated briefings to the Council,
Ambassador Gharekhan has continued to report on the
absolute lack of news regarding those persons - whether
they are still alive, and the places where they may be
detained.

This situation is totally unacceptable. The Bosnian
Serb forces have agreed to grant the International Red
Cross access to all detained people from Srebrenica and
Zepa. But, so far, these commitments have not been
honoured. Words have not been followed by deeds.

Therefore, the resolution which has just been adopted
is an opportune and timely initiative. Reaffirming resolution
1004 (1995) and the presidential statement of 25 July,
which asked the Bosnian Serbs to immediately withdraw
from the two "safe areas" - a definition which in the
present circumstances sounds highly ironic - it very
rightly expresses deep concern over reports of grave
violations of international and humanitarian law in and
around Srebrenica and demands that the Pale authorities
grant the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
on Human Rights, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and other international agencies immediate access to
persons displaced from Srebrenica and Zepa who are under
the control of their forces.

Furthermore, the United Nations or the Red Cross
should be permitted at once to visit and register any
detained person and conduct an immediate investigation of
the places of the presumed mass graves, informing the
International Tribunal for crimes committed in the former
Yugoslavia about their findings. Further procrastination or,
even worse, denial of such an authorization should simply
not be tolerated by the international community and by this
Council.

The images of the fall of Srebrenica and Zepa which
the media have transmitted all over the world and the
reports of the refugees and displaced persons who have left
those areas are very much alive in the memory of the
Italian people. Therefore, we welcome the present initiative
of the Security Council and very much hope that it will
finally convince the Bosnian Serb leadership to comply
with the most basic, elementary rules of human
behaviour.

