Mr. Kobler (spoke in French): It is an honour and
pleasure to address the Council today to introduce the
second report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/581)
following the adoption of resolution 2098 (2013). Before
I address the most recent developments concerning the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I wish to
underscore my regret for being unable to be physically
present in the Council Chamber today, due to the
ongoing talks in Kampala. I am addressing members
from Kampala itself, having participated as an observer
in the talks into the small hours of this morning.

(spoke in English)

As the Council has just returned from its visit to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, let me focus on
three topics:the Kampala talks, the mission Priorities
and the endeavours to align the Mission structures to
the revised Mission priorities.

At the request of the Facilitator, the Ugandan
Minister of Defence, Mr. Kiyonga, Ijoined the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General to the Great Lakes
Region, Mary Robinson, as well as the other special
envoys to the region, in the Kampala talks on 16 October.
The previous week, I had extensive exchanges with
the Congolese Minister for Foreign Affairs, Raymond
Tshibanda N'tungamulongo, as well as other members
of the Congolese Government, asking them to attend
the talks in person. The Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo ultimately decided to send
a high-level delegation, including Foreign Minister
Tshibanda.

The five envoys, led by Special Envoy Mary
Robinson, closely followed the proceedings of the
negotiations and tried to instil the negotiating parties
with a sense of urgency, given the unique momentum.
Intensive talks on the margin of the plenary sessions
ensued. The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
will give more detail.

The objective was to bring the Kampala talks to
an end by concluding a comprehensive agreement
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) to end the rebellion,
disband the M-23 and allow its transformation into a
political movement within the limits of the Constitution
and the laws of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
As of this morning, that objective has not been reached.
I do not want to conceal my slight disappointment
that, after four long days and nights of negotiations
until the early morning hours of today, it has not been
possible to reach a comprehensive deal despite the
pressure of the five envoys as supportive observers.
A joint meeting with President Paul Kagame on
18 October, the constructive attitude of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular
its Minister for Foreign Affairs, International
Cooperation and Francophony, Raymond Tshibanda
N'tungamulongo, and the incessant and patient efforts
of the Facilitator, the Minister of Defence of Uganda,
Mr. Crispus Kiyonga.

My main role in the process was to pledge the
support of MONUSCO to any agreement, as such an
accord would enable MONUSCO to fulfil its mandate
to disband the M-23, to the protect civilians and to
bring peace to eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Thus, in outlining any potential MONUSCO
role in the implementation of the Kampala accord, I was
fully aware of the dilemma - one also raised by some
Council members - not to be complicit to an imperfect
agreement or to be part of the negotiations, on the one
hand, while contributing to effectively shape the details
of the agreement on a potential role for MONUSCO is
concerned, on the other. In so doing, I was guided by
the following principles.

First, only a fair agreement - not necessarily a

perfect one - would form the basis for a sustainable
solution and effective implementation. MONUSCO
could not support an agreement at any price.

Secondly, as the implementation of the agreement
would fully depend on the goodwill of the parties, the
overall responsibility had to remain with the negotiating
parties.

Thirdly, MONUSCO's role would mainly consist of
providing support to the four phases of the transitional
security arrangements and the subsequent disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process. Thus, despite
not being party to the agreement, MONUSCO needed
to agree on the practicalities mentioned in the annex
relating to the transitional security arrangements, as
the negotiating parties could not decide on those issues
without MONUSCO's consent.

Fourthly, the arrangements detailing MONUSCO'S
potential role would remain subject to the approval of
the Security Council.

Those guiding principles were communicated to
both the Facilitator and the negotiating parties. With
the permission of Council members, we will continue
in that line during the ongoing negotiations here in
Kampala.

Last night ended with the Facilitator initialling
eight out of the 11 paragraphs with the consent of the
parties. Considerable progress has been made on the
question of amnesty for M-23 combatants and on the
security arrangements. I believe that the remaining
gaps can be bridged; that is why it is all the more
regrettable that this unique opportunity could not be
seized upon to reach an overall deal. I urge the M-23 in
particular to use the dynamics of the past two days to
move more constructively and without delay to resolve
the remaining issues in the next few days in order to
restore peace to the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I welcome the assurances of Minister for
Foreign Affairs Raymond Tshibanda N'tungamulongo
that the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains committed to concluding the remaining
points of the agreement, and that he will be ready to
return to the negotiation table once the negotiation
teams clarify the outstanding issues.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
my heartfelt gratitude to and admiration for the
President of Uganda, Mr. Yoweri Museveni, and of
his Minister of Defence, Mr. Crispus Kiyonga, who
left no stone unturned to make minds and intractable
positions converge. In addition, I would like to thank
in particular Minister for Foreign Affairs, International
Cooperation and the Francophony, Raymond Tshibanda
N'tungamulongo, for his exceptional patience and
unrelenting perseverance in leading the Congolese
delegation towards the peaceful settlement of the
conflict with an illegal armed group.

Regardless of the progress in Kampala, the situation
on the ground remains volatile and of great concern. In
recent days, we have observed a considerable military
build-up on both sides of the front line. At the same
time, the M-23 has fired twice at unarmed United
Nations helicopters, and has strengthened its offensive
positions threatening United Nations peacekeepers.
The Special Envoy and myself have condemned those
military attacks on peacekeepers in the strongest terms.
However, for the sake of safeguarding an environment
conducive to a negotiated settlement, I decided not to
retaliate, in accordance with the rules of engagement.

In an attempt to verify allegations that the M-23
is reinforcing its military positions in areas along the
borders with Rwanda and Uganda, I have requested the
Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism to investigate a
suspected ammunition site in M-23-controlled territory.
The inspection was supposedto take place on 18 October.
The military command of the M-23, however, prevented
the inspectors from fulfilling their duties. The mission
had to be aborted. It is not acceptable that the M-23
defies the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, which established the confidence-building
mechanism to reduce potential regional tensions.
Information gathered indicates that the M-23 has also
strengthened its front line in the South, near Goma.

Another issue of deep concern is the persistent
reports on the return of several hundred refugee families
that have crossed the border into M-23-controlled
areas, where apparently they are being constrained to
settle. Reportedly, young men among the returnees
are being recruited for training for the M-23. Since
the emergence of the M-23, the Mission has sheltered
almost 200 surrendering combatants, who consistently
and credibly claim to have been recruited on Ugandan
but mainly on Rwandan territory. I have myself spoken
to those who stay in our disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration camp in Goma.

That and other kinds of external involvement must
stop. Those developments also underscore the urgent
need to seek a viable political solution. That process
has to be accompanied by regional confidence-building
measures. I have gone to Kigali several times in the past
two months since taking up office, and I will continue to
do so. It is important to strengthen confidence-building
between MONUSCO and the Government of Rwanda.
I feel encouraged that it is the view of the Government
of Rwanda that peace and stability and the restoration
of State authority in the east is better for the whole
region than continued military confrontation, human
suffering and illegal exploitation of mineral resources.
I would be grateful if the Security Council could lend
its full support in bringing the Kampala negotiations
to a swift end and foster a sustainable and irreversible
solution to the conflict.

Those situations are never easy, and the
implementation of the agreement depends on the
political will of the parties. But the M-23 is not our
only concern. The Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda (FDLR), the Allied Democratic Forces, and
many Mayi-Mayi groups that terrorize the population
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo also
continue to represent a significant threat to civilians
and to State authority.

Let me take this opportunity to brief the Council on
the priorities of the Mission as I see them after my first
two months in office.

Resolution 2098 (2013) has given the Mission
new tools and a renewed determination with which to
address those challenges and grasp those opportunities.
The Mission's organizational structure and core
priorities must be better aligned with the mandate. The
Mission priority must also be aligned to support all
six national commitments of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. Finally, the military and
civilian structure in the eastern region also have to be
aligned. As we move to redefine priorities, reconfigure
the Mission's structure and align the resources
needed, the Mission's senior management and I have
identified the following drivers of change to guide our
decision-making and planning.

First, the restoration of State authority and the
protection of civilians are central to all our efforts to
stabilize eastern Congo. MONUSCO aims to help the
Congolese State reclaim control of areas that armed
groups and criminal networks have dominated, in some
cases for decades. Building on integrated planning, a
new concept is being developed to assist the Government
in restoring State authority and stabilizing areas cleared
of armed groups, known as islands of stability.

Second, the military posture of the force must
adapt to the new realities. The entire MONUSCO force
must be deployed and operate with a proactive stance to
deter violence and ensure the security of civilians, the
core of our mandate. The operations in support of the
Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo
(FARDC) assault on Kibati were a clear illustration of
the approach of "one mandate, one mission, one force".

We engage all our forces and assets with the
objectives of protecting civilians and maintaining
military pressure in support of reviving the political
process. We aim to increase the force's flexibility
so that it is able to deter violence by intervening in
advance rather than reacting after events. We are
also improving information gathering in support of
proactive operations. Force Commander General Dos
Santos Cruz, Deputy Force Commander General Jean
Baillaud, who is with me today, and I are in contact
with the troop-contributing countries on this threat.

Third, security sector reform (SSR), and especially
army reform, are critical to the Mission, in terms of
the implementation of both resolution 2098 (2013)
and the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
The benchmarks for security sector reform are clearly
defined. Our approach must be practical. At the national
level, the Mission is focused on providing good offices,
coordination and technical advice. That way, we hope to
advance the implementation of policies, build political
will, and support dialogue between the Government and
partners. During a meeting chaired by Deputy Special
Representative Soumare on 11 October, international
partners agreed to coordinate their SSR initiatives
via an expanded SSR coordination working group, to
be chaired by the Congolese Minister of Defence and
supported by MONUSCO. That coordination structure
should considerably accelerate defence and security
reforms.

Fourth, the Mission will focus on the benchmarking
of the national commitments under the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. The Government is
committed to an agenda of progress. In that context,
MONUSCO supports the national oversight mechanism
for the Framework. Stakeholders discussed and

validated benchmarks for three of the commitments:
security sector reform, consolidation of State authority
and decentralization. On 19 September, President
Kabila convened for the first time the steering
committee of the national oversight mechanism to
approve that set of benchmarks. We encourage the
Government to integrate those approved benchmarks
into national planning processes so as to ensure
coherence and full implementation. Despite a boycott
by part of the opposition, the Security Council presence
at the closing ceremony of the national consultations on
5 October emphasized strong support for the process.
Both security sector reform and oversight over the
national benchmarks are among the priorities of my
Deputy, Mr. Moustapha Soumare.

Fifth, the priority is to stimulate regional
cooperation. As trust is still low, MONUSCO
is working in close partnership with the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region, Ms. Mary Robinson, to encourage regional
confidence-building. Rebuilding relations of trust
among neighbouring States is paramount to hope for
a prosperous and stable Great Lakes region. Military
action and strengthening civilian capacities in the east
will have to be supported by countries of the Great
Lakes region.

Sixth, with the appointment of Abbot Apollinaire
Malu Malu Muholongu at the helm of the Independent
National Electoral Commission, the electoral process
seems to be revived. Consultations with donor partners
and national stakeholders have gradually brought
forward a consensus on a road map and subsequent
sequencing of the different elections. That road map
will pave the way for the adoption of an electoral
calendar and the development of a realistic budget,
which together would be a clear signal that the electoral
process is again on track.

The seventh priority is zero tolerance for sexual
terrorism and child recruitment. Over the past year,
there have been some notable advances in the fight
against impunity for sexual crimes, including cases
involving some undisciplined elements of the national
security forces. Between May and June, Congolese
judicial authorities issued 13 arrest warrants against
senior M-23 officers and political leaders, for war
crimes, crimes against humanity and participation in
an insurrection.

However, a number of important cases remain
stalled. One example is the case of serious human
rights violations, including mass rape, committed
by FARDC soldiers in November 2012 in and around
Minova as the Congolese Army retreated from the front
lines. I recognize the steps taken by the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However,
the military justice investigation has so far registered
limited progress. My colleagues and I are in regular
contact with the Government to provide regular updates.

With regard to child recruitment, in the coming
days I will publicly present our report on child soldiers
of the major armed groups, namely, Mayi-Mayi
Nyatura, the FDLR and the M-23. Almost 1,000 cases
of child recruitment were documented between January
2012 and August 2013. The human misery behind those
statistics remains staggering, moving and unacceptable
under any circumstances. One child soldier is one child
soldier too many.

To better respond to the priorities that I have
outlined, I intend to restructure the Mission along the
following three lines.

First, we need a strengthened operational presence
in the east. For greater impact in stabilization activities,
the Council will observe in the near future a major shift
of our civilian staff in the east to deploy them closer to
communities affected by conflict, in tandem with the
force's deployment. The Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Abdallah Wafy, has already
been permanently reassigned to Goma as Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
operations in the east. The operational substantive units
still based in Kinshasa will follow him.

Secondly, we are reconsidering MONUSCO's
presence in the areas not affected by armed conflict.
MONUSCO'S presence will be reduced. The weight of
the country team should be increased.

Thirdly, the future of the United Nations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo belongs to the
country team. The cooperation of the Government in
the road map for handing over responsibilities to the
country team is of the utmost importance. To that
effect, the establishment of a joint intersectoral task
force will closely guide and monitor planning and
implementing commitments. Those ideas will become
part of the mission concept in the next few weeks and
will be submitted to Headquarters.

Before concluding, allow me to express my deepest
appreciation and respect to the Governments of all
troop-contributing countries of MONUSCO for their
commitment to peace, stability and the protection of
civilians in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo. Imet
courageous men and women among the troops. I thank
the stroop-contributing States for their endeavours.

I would also like to present my sincerest
condolences to the families of Major Mshindo Hatibu
Shaaban and Private Munga Hugo Barnabas, members
of the Tanzanian contingent who lost their lives during
the fighting at Kibati.

(spoke in French)

As the Council will have understood, the Mission
is in full swing. It is evolving at this very moment in
order to fully respond to the mandate the Council has
entrusted to it. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank my predecessor, Roger Meese, for his immense
knowledge and for having entrusted to me a well
organized Mission. I am particularly impressed by and
filled with admiration for the Congolese staff, who are
often exposed to security risks greater than what we
experience at the international level. Both men and
women in all sections are working with impressive
devotion and expertise. They are the backbone and the
very flesh and blood of the Mission.

The Mission is evolving. It is adapting to the situation
and to the new vision of the international community.
For that change to take place effectively, I am happy
to be able to rely on the support of the Council and
all our partners. I would particularly like to thank all
the Permanent Representatives of the Council for their
recent Visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Their determination and energy are important evidence
of the commitment of the international community for
sustainable peace.

