Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for initiating this important discussion
on transnational organized crime and drug trafficking.
By holding this debate, the Council is making a very
significant statement of intent just two days after the
release of the World Drug Report 201]. We also want
to thank Mr. Yury Fedotov for his invaluable briefing,
which brings into sharp focus not only the scale but
especially the inevitable consequences of illicit drug
trafficking for international peace and security.

Drug trafficking remains an endemic, organized
and lucrative transnational crime, which in turn is a
major threat to global peace and security. In Africa,
illicit drug trafficking, cultivation, processing and
abuse are unrelentingly on the rise, inevitably
constituting barriers to the continent's development
efforts. International drug cartels from other regions of
the world continue to exploit the under-resourced law
enforcement capability of most African countries,
turning them into major transit points for prohibited
drugs and arms.

The subregion most affected by these nefarious
activities is West Africa, which is fast emerging as a
major warehouse and transit hub for cocaine and illicit
drugs. The activities of drug cartels in the subregion
constitute devastating impediments to subregional
efforts to promote human prosperity, the genuine
creation of wealth, the development of productive work
and peacebuilding.

It is against this backdrop that we welcome
yesterday's release of the World Drug Report 201]. We
agree with the Secretary-General when he notes that
the report "paints a sobering picture of the threat posed
by illegal drugs". Mr. Fedotov's own observation that
the gains we have witnessed in the traditional drug
market have been offset by the fashion for synthetic
designer drugs vividly points out the complexity of the
challenges we face ahead of us. We share not only his
sense of urgency but also his assessment that
confronting the global drug problem is a shared global
responsibility. We believe that the four potential areas
of international collaboration, building regional
capacity, reinforcing criminal justice systems and
adapting cross-disciplinary strategies, to which the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
is directing its response, will undoubtedly increase the
scope and strength of the international response. This
approach obliges all of us to always take into account
the larger question of drug supply and drug demand
control channels, as they are two sides of the same
com.

Nigeria supports the mainstreaming of crime
prevention in conflict prevention strategies, conflict
analysis, integrated mission assessment and planning.
To achieve this objective, it is important to build the
capacities of regional and national authorities to enable
them to fulfil their international obligations on narcotic
drugs, terrorism, arms control and transnational
organized crime.

Only four days ago, the high-level policy
committee of the West Africa Coast Initiative (WACI)
held its inaugural session with the participation of the
United Nations, INTERPOL and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). At the
meeting, stakeholders began to map the direction that
support for the ECOWAS regional action plan on
trafficking might take. WACI's transnational crime
units for Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea-Bissau also
greatly complement the effort to combat West Africa's
drug trade. Such initiatives are important for our
subregion as we endeavour to close off transit routes
for cocaine and other narcotics. We very much look
forward to their planned expansion into other countries
in need of support in the subregion.

We cannot overstate the need for cooperation,
coordination and concerted action by the international
community. We already have the legal instruments and
tools to make crime unattractive and unprofitable.
What we need most at this time is to mobilize the
requisite political will and, indeed, the resources to win
the war against organized crime and organized
criminals.

