Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I wish to join others in
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your initiative to
convene this very important meeting on conflict
prevention. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
broad and thoughtful introductory statement at this
meeting, and in particular for the excellent proposals
he put forward. My delegation also wishes to commend
him for his commitment and dedication to conflict
prevention.

Like the HIV/AIDS pandemic, conflicts are in the
process of devastating Africa. The situation requires a
concerted and multifaceted approach by the Security
Council and other partners to prevent them. That is the
reason why my delegation commends you,
Mr. President, and your delegation for initiating the
comprehensive draft presidential statement which we
will issue later today. It takes forward and elaborates
the Council's work on this very important subject.

The root causes of conflict in Africa remain
poverty and underdevelopment. History has proved that
if we are to achieve any progress in conflict prevention,
these problems have to be solved. The underlying
causes, such as the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons and the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, in particular diamonds, further exacerbate
the situation. I will return to this point later.

The primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security rests with the Security
Council. However, the effective prevention of the
outbreak or re-emergence of conflict requires concerted
efforts from a number of actors, including Member
States, the Secretary-General, regional organizations
and international agencies. Since its successful mission
to Jakarta and Dili last year, the Council has been
making increasing use of similar missions as part of its
preventive diplomacy, a practice that should be
continued and expanded.

The Secretary-General, through his good offices,
increasingly plays an essential role in conflict
prevention through, inter alia, his capacity to mediate
and negotiate and by dispatching envoys or special
representatives to areas of conflict or potential conflict.
Of utmost importance also is the information he
provides to the Council about matters that may pose a
threat to peace and security. The Council should
support the Secretary-General in his efforts and make
all necessary resources available to him.

My delegation highly appreciates the important
role that women are playing in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts and in peace-building. We
strongly support their increased participation in all
aspects of conflict prevention and resolution.

Regional organizations and arrangements, in line
with their mandate under Chapter VIII of the Charter,
are also playing an increasingly important role in the
maintenance of peace and security and in conflict
prevention, as was proved in recent situations.
However, when it comes to intervention by regional
organizations, this must be done with the authorization
of the Security Council as provided for in Article 53 of
the Charter. Furthermore, the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States must be respected.

My delegation welcomes the expanding
relationship between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), especially in
conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peacemaking and
conflict resolution.

The huge risks and costs, both in civilian life and
in financial terms, and the destruction, human rights
abuses and suffering caused by conflicts lend urgency
to the need for the Council to shift focus faster from
reaction to conflicts to conflict prevention. To achieve
this, the Council must continuously examine and
evaluate the means and measures at its disposal to
prevent conflicts. Central to this is the most valuable
aspect of conflict prevention, namely, the creation of a
culture of prevention. Ways to accomplish this need to
be identified. In addition, it must be recognized that
measures such as early warning, preventive diplomacy,
preventive deployment, preventive disarmament and

pre- and post-conflict peace-building are
interdependent and complementary components of a
comprehensive conflict prevention strategy.

Furthermore, the existing tools for conflict prevention,
such as those provided for in Article 33 of the Charter,
can be further strengthened and complemented.

For early warning we must adopt effective
measures to avert tragedies in different parts of the
world. The United Nations should thus not only
strengthen and improve its own early warning
mechanisms but should also contribute further, together
with the international community, to the establishment
and functioning of similar systems with regional
organizations and arrangements. It is regrettable that
some of these already existing systems are hampered
by insufficient financing for appropriate operations.
Effective conflict prevention by the Council rests
on early action in response to early warning through
the above-mentioned mechanisms. The prerogative,
therefore, rests largely with the Council in many
situations to foster the necessary political will to react
to warnings and to threats against peace and security.
The action required would be either to prevent conflicts
or to prevent a recurrence of hostilities after peace
arrangements, often fragile, have been reached. In this
regard, it remains crucial for the Council to deploy
fully and speedily in the Democratic Republic of
Congo in order to prevent further escalation of the
conflict. Similarly, in Sierra Leone, the troop strength
and the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) need to be strengthened.

I now wish to say a few words on some of the
underlying factors that fuel conflicts, particularly in
Africa. Primary among these are the illegal exploitation
of and trade in natural resources, in particular
diamonds, and the accumulation of and illicit
trafficking in small arms and heavy weapons. In order
to prevent conflict, efforts to curb the exploitation and
trafficking should be elaborated and strengthened.
Furthermore, Member States should adhere to their
legal and moral responsibilities to strictly implement
the existing measures against these activities. We
commend the steps already undertaken by Member
States and other organizations to implement these
measures.

In conclusion, Mr. President, for the Security
Council to continue to play its role in conflict
prevention, a strong political commitment from all
Member States, complemented by provision of
adequate resources, remains crucial. In short, they form
an integral part of the effective prevention of conflict
and the maintenance of international peace and
security.

