Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Egypt's initiative to convene today's open
debate. With Africa Day just ahead of us on 25 May,
it is of great significance to discuss United Nations-
African Union (AU) cooperation in peace and security.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous;
Ambassador Kamau, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission; Ambassador Menkerios, Head of the
United Nations Office to the African Union; and
Ambassador Antonio, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations, for their briefings.

Ever since 2006, when the United Nations and the
AU started the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme
for the AU, United Nations-AU peace and security
cooperation has been strengthened and produced
good results. The United Nations has deployed with
the Hybrid Operation in Darfur, provided logistical
support to the African Union Mission to Somalia,
enhanced efforts for a political settlement to such hot-
spot issues in Africa as those in South Sudan and Mali,
and supported post-conflict reconstruction in Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire. The strengthened
United Nations-AU cooperation in peace and security
has played a positive role in maintaining peace and
stability on the African continent.

China would like to make four comments with
regard to future cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU in peace and security.

First, they must always adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. The
United Nations is the core of the international collective
security mechanism, and the Security Council has the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. China supports further cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. The Charter advocates equal
sovereignty, non-interference in the internal affairs of
other countries, and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Such ideas have played an important guiding role in the
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU.
The United Nations should further support the AU in
seeking the peaceful settlement of disputes through
dialogue, consultations, good offices and mediation on
the basis of respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of all the countries.
Secondly, they must always adhere to the concept of
common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security. To find solutions to hot-spot issues in Africa,
it is important to consider the historical background
and current realities, and to take comprehensive
measures to achieve and promote security through
cooperation. China welcomes the African Peace and
Security Architecture road map for 2016 to 2020, which
prioritizes conflict prevention, crisis management and
post-conflict reconstruction. China hopes that the
United Nations will strengthen cooperation with the
AU and support the AU in implementing the Peace and
Security Architecture road map in order to achieve
win-win cooperation and common security.

Thirdly, they must enhance mutual coordination
and coherence and respect the ownership of the African
countries. When it comes to seeking solutions to the
hot-spot issues in Africa, the AU has rich experience
and enjoys unique geographical, historical and cultural
advantages. It can play an irreplaceable role. China
welcomes the work of the United Nations-African
Union Joint Task Force on Peace and Security in
recent years and the annual joint consultative meetings
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council. Such mechanisms can bring into full
play the comparative advantages of each organization
so that they can complement each other and promote
each other's work thereby forming synergies.

China welcomes the AU's adoption of the
Partnership on Africa's Integration and Development
Agenda 2017-2027 at its Johannesburg Forum in 2015,
which can further promote the partnership between
the AU and the United Nations. China hopes that
both parties will fully utilize the relevant mechanism,
strengthen coordination in seeking a political settlement
to hot-spot issues in Africa, and support the settlement
of African issues by Africans in the African way.
Meanwhile, it is important to draw on lessons learned
and experience in a timely manner and to further
explore flexible, pragmatic, positive and effective ways
of cooperating.

Fourthly, we must prioritize support for the AU
in enhancing its collective security mechanism. In the
field of peace and security, the AU faces difficulties
in the area of human and financial resources. It
therefore needs the continued support and assistance
of the international community. We welcome the AU
appointment of Mr. Kaberuka as High Representative
for the African Peace Fund. We hope that the United
Nations will provide more support to the AU collective
security mechanism, in particular in training,
institution-building and logistical and financial
support. We also hope that the United Nations will
further support the African Standby Force and the
African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crisis in
addressing regional terrorism and piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea so as to effectively increase the continent's
overall collective security capacity.

China attaches great importance to enhancing
peace and security cooperation between China and
Africa. To date, China has participated in 16 United
Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa. At present,
over 2,600 Chinese peacekeepers are deployed in
seven United Nations missions, including in Mali,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan,
Darfur and Liberia. China has also dispatched naval
convoys to Somali waters in the Gulf of Aden to assist
the countries of the region address piracy.

In December, at the Johannesburg Forum on
China-Africa Cooperation, President Xi Jinping of
China proposed 10 cooperation programmes, one of
which involved enhancing cooperation between China
and Africa in peace and security. President Xi Jinping
has declared that China will continue to participate
in United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa,
provide the AU with $60 million in assistance, support
the African Standby Force and the African Capacity
for Immediate Response to Crisis, and help African
countries build their capacities in such areas as
national defence, counter-terrorism, the prevention of
explosions, and customs and immigation control. China
is ready to work with all African countries to actively
implement the outcome of the Johannesburg Forum and
to support the AU in implementing its Agenda 2063.
We are ready to work with the international community
in further promoting United Nations-AU cooperation,
maintain peace and stability in Africa, build a new
kind of international relations centred on win-win
cooperation, and make joint efforts to build a future
that is more secure and better.

