Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I wish to start by thanking
the Italian presidency for organizing this important
briefing on the issue of foreign terrorist fighters.
I would like to express our appreciation to Under-
Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov, Assistant
Secretary-General Michele Coninsx, and Ambassador
Kairat Umarov for their informative briefings.

As the reports of the Secretary-General and the
Monitoring Team have highlighted, the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has remained under
continuous military pressure and experienced several
setbacks on the main battle grounds in Iraq and Syria.
The group continues to suffer a reversal of its fortune,
which has resulted in a significant decrease in the
number ofits fighters and the decline of its propaganda,
perhaps because of a shortage of cash. However, the
group continues to enable and inspire a range of
attacks outside the conflict zone, as those same reports
have indicated.

What is more worrying is the fact that foreign
terrorist fighters and returnees from conflict zones
to other regions now present a considerable threat to
international peace and security. The concept note for
today's briefing rightly states that foreign terrorist
fighters have fuelled conflict elsewhere, including in
the Horn of Africa, Afghanistan, Libya and Yemen.

We, in the Horn of Africa, have very much been
at the receiving end of that phenomenon for some
time - long before it began to draw wide international
attention. Now, of course, we are witnessing what is
happening every day in East, West and North Africa,
the Middle East and other regions. For us in the Horn
of Africa in particular, the growing threat posed by
ISIL (Da'esh) and the increasing number of fighters
infiltrating Somalia are indeed a source of great
concern. Therefore, the evolving threat of foreign
terrorist fighters, returnees and relocating fighters
deserve our utmost attention.

We recognize what has been done so far since the
adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), which established a
comprehensive international framework to address the
threats of foreign terrorist fighters, including in some
cases to rehabilitate and reintegrate them. We also recall
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/11 of May 2015,
which stressed, among other things, the need to develop
the United Nations capacity-building implementation
plan to counter the flow of foreign terrorist fighters,
and we appreciate the briefing that we received today
on the progress made in that regard.

We note that the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
through its Executive Directorate (CTED), has
continuously included the issue of foreign terrorist
fighters and returnees in its comprehensive visits to
Member States, and provided useful recommendations
to address the existing threat. In accordance with
these recommendations, the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and other United Nations
entities have provided technical assistance and
capacity-building to those States that are in need of
such assistance. Furthermore, reports of the Secretary-
General, the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities and its Monitoring Team have
continuously addressed the issue of foreign terrorist
fighters and returnees.

We also note the efforts being made by Member
States to stem the travel of foreign terrorist fighters,
inter alia, by sharing information, cooperating,
detecting and preventing foreign terrorist fighters from
travelling through a proper border-control mechanism,
creating laws to prosecute foreign terrorist fighters,
and working on the rehabilitation and reintegration of
returning foreign terrorist fighters and thereby breaking
the cycle of violence.

The assistance being given by the United Nations
system to Member States in addressing the challenges
that they face in dealing with foreign terrorist fighters
and returnees is important. A case in point is the
project of CTED, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and relevant entities to launch a regional
initiative for the Lake Chad basin States in order to
support the development of national approaches to
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration, and to
strengthen regional cooperation. If this project succeeds
as planned, it will serve as a model for other regions.

No doubt the progress made and challenges
encountered in addressing the threats posed by foreign
terrorist fighters and returnees vary from region to
region. While some have done well, others continue to
face difficulties in addressing the required technical,
legal and other related capacities, of which there are too
many to recount here. That is why attempts to combat
the threat through a purely domestic approach cannot
be effective without forging the necessary regional and
international cooperation; hence the need to intensify
our individual and collective efforts in fighting the
scourge of terrorism and violent extremism.

What recent events have shown us is that we should
not take comfort in the recent successes achieved on the
battlefield, and that we must continue to mobilize our
efforts with respect to ISIL, Da'esh and its affiliates,
wherever they may be. However, we need to have far
better cooperation and coordination than the terrorists
do, without which we wll not be able to achieve much.

