Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this timely meeting and the
valuable briefings of the guest speakers.

Peru notes with concern the serious threats
looming over the West African subregion, which
contrast with its vast resources, the resilience of its
population and its geostrategic potential to drive its
sustainable development. In particular, we refer to
the expansion of terrorism and violent extremism and
their close connection with organized crime, as well as
their roles as an aggravating factor of intercommunal
violence. In that regard, we would like to address three
central aspects of that problem from the perspective of
seeking effective actions to address it, and we firmly
condemn the recent attacks that have taken place in
the region, particularly that which occurred in the
Niger, to whose people and Government we extend our
sincerest condolences.

First, it is necessary to attack the link between
terrorism and organized crime. Resolution 2482 (2019),
adopted by the Council in July, specifically seeks to
promote actions aimed at deepening understanding
of the links between the two phenomena in order
to identify, prevent and dismantle them. That can
done by strengthening the capacities of States and
promoting more effective coordination at the national
and international levels; action at those levels must
be consistent with international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, in order to provide
legitimacy to the State's response. We welcome the
meeting of the Heads of State and Government of the
Economic Community of West African States on that
issue, held in Ouagadougou in September. We believe
it necessary, in particular, to identify and dismantle
the chain of logistical support, including especially in
the drug trafficking that has turned West Africa into a
subregion of both production and transit to European
markets and where terrorist groups exchange money or
weapons for their protection at various stages of that
criminal process. That situation is compounded by
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and
natural resources. Such activity corrupts institutions
and erodes social fabric. To that end, it is necessary
to strengthen neighbourhood cooperation by
strengthening intelligence work and border control to
deal with those crimes.

Secondly, it is also essential to combat the negative
influences between terrorism and intercommunal
violence, the root causes of which are climate change,
demographic pressure and the absence of an effective
State presence, among others. The situation is
exacerbated by terrorist groups that destroy systems
capable of providing peaceful solutions to tensions
between pastoral and farming groups in a context of
degraded farmland and erratic rainfall, or that, by
favouring some groups over others or exacerbating
inter-ethnic or inter-religious tensions, increase conflict
in order to exploit it as a source of human resources
for their indiscriminate attacks. It will be necessary
for regional organizations, such as the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, to provide spaces
for dialogue on those conflicts, while promoting
appropriate legislation, the adaptation of new crops
and the creation of impact projects that would generate
income and employment, especially for young people in
rural communities.

A third element, which defines the entire context,
lies in the need to complement the counter-terrorism
response by addressing the root causes of the conflict
from a multidimensional perspective that offers a
better quality of life to vulnerable populations and
strengthens capacities to promote human rights and the
rule of law, in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. To that end, the international community
must contribute effectively to promoting development
from its own regional perspectives, particularly in that
subregion, where various transition processes are being
developed. Along those lines, we believe that there is
no better preventive activity for those conflicts than
sustainable peacebuilding. That will necessarily require
the establishment of societies that are more open and
inclusive of all strata of the population, particularly
women and young people.

