Miss Durrant (Jamaica): I would like to express my
delegation's appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting to address the critical situation of
refugees in Africa.

I also wish to thank Mrs. Ogata for her
comprehensive briefing, in which she addressed the plight
of refugees and internally displaced persons and the
problems faced by host Governments, as well as how the
international community needs to respond to the
challenges posed by humanitarian crises in countries
involved in, or emerging from, conflicts in Africa.

As the President of the General Assembly, Mr.
Theo-Ben Gurirab, reminded us last September,

"These neglected masses of fellow human beings
have been displaced largely by devastating wars,
some resulting from ethnic hatred and others from
contested borders as well as natural disasters. These
are women, children and men who are deprived of
the basic human necessities and who end up being
no one's responsibility. Their fate should be of
common concern." [A/54/PV.], p. 5]

The most recent figures indicate that there are over
6 million people of concern to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in
Africa. This includes over 3 million refugees, over 1.5
million internally displaced persons and 1.3 million
former refugees who have recently returned home.

During a similar briefing to the Council in July
1999, Mrs. Ogata underscored that the implementation of
political agreements between warring factions was critical
to the resolution of some of the worst refugee problems
in Africa. While we are heartened by the signing of the
two peace agreements, in Lorne and Lusaka, dealing with
the conflicts in Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, respectively, it is evident that this is only
a first step in solving the refugee crisis. We agree with
Mrs. Ogata that the Council has a vital role to play in
preventing and containing conflicts and supporting follow-
up to peace agreements. Only by addressing the root
causes of conflicts will the international community be
able to provide lasting answers to the refugee problems
facing Africa.

We all agree that several challenges lie ahead, the
most compelling being the repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration of refugees and internally displaced persons
back into their societies. Equal attention needs to be given
to the security of refugees and the need to allocate
resources to assist host Governments cushion the impact
of refugees on their economies and societies. It is in this
context that my delegation welcomes the proposals made
this morning my Mrs. Ogata.

 

We wish to recognize the progress UNHCR has made
in recent years in addressing the crisis. Some of the steps
taken by UNHCR have included, in some instances, the
settling of refugees at a reasonable distance from the areas
of conflict and borders and assisting host Governments in
maintaining the security and neutrality of refugee camps
and settlements. We hope that Mrs. Ogata will tell us more
about the progress of the UNHCR initiative to maintain the
security and neutrality of refugee camps, especially in the
Great Lakes region.

We were also heartened to take note from
Mrs. Ogata's statement of the initiative taken by UNHCR
and humanitarian agencies in carrying out a substantial re-
integration programme in Rwanda.

UNHCR has also provided draft model legislation,
assisted Governments in providing structures to deal with
refugee issues, and provided training for Government
officials. Nevertheless, we recognize that further steps need
to be taken to ensure that all refugees and internally
displaced persons, notably women and children, are
adequately protected.

Another challenge faced by the international
community is the need to strengthen compliance with
international legal instruments, including the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967
Protocol and, in the case of Africa, the 1969 Organization
of African Unity (OAU) Convention governing the Specific
Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa. It is regrettable that
these international instruments are often not adhered to by
the parties in conflict, much to the detriment of innocent
populations. Refugees and internally displaced persons
should be protected by humanitarian laws as members of
the civilian population. As such, they must always be
treated with humanity and protected from acts of violence.

The role of African regional and subregional
organizations in seeking to address the problem of refugees
and displaced persons must not be underestimated. We
commend the OAU for its initiative in 1998 to convene a
ministerial meeting on refugees and internally displaced
persons, and in making key recommendations for action by
the international community. In this regard, my delegation
believes that the Council must continue to urge Member
States to take measures to address the root causes of
conflicts and to recommit themselves to the relevant
refugee instruments.

Refugee protection, through asylum, protection and
security in Africa, must be strengthened, and durable
solutions, including voluntary repatriation and
reintegration of refugees, provided.

We also need to support the consolidation of the
reintegration process through various means, including
community- based and participatory prograrmnes,
reintegration and rehabilitation programmes, and
international support and commitment. We must also
assist in building Africa's capacity to respond to refugee
and internal displacement. The Security Council must also
work with the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council to fashion a lasting response from the
United Nations.

While considerable attention is given to the
humanitarian aspect of the refugee crisis in Africa, we
cannot ignore the fact that for host Governments, the flow
of refugees constitutes a security problem. We regret the
fact that in several instances, refugee camps are potential
pools for rebel recruitment and pose a threat to the peace
and security of the communities. The health status of
refugees is also a cause for great concern, as noted during
the debate earlier this week on the impact of AIDS.

We also deplore the fact that increasingly, refugees
and displaced persons are deprived of necessary amenities
such as food, water and shelter, owing to obstacles which
are encountered in the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. We must applaud the untiring efforts of
UNHCR and other humanitarian agencies such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross, the non-
governmental organizations, the donor communities and
the United Nations funds and programmes in seeking to
meet the humanitarian needs of refugees and displaced
persons, often at great risk to the lives of the staff
concerned, and Mrs. Ogata referred to that this morning.

The international community has a responsibility to
assist in ameliorating the economic, social and
environmental effects of massive flows of refugees. We
cannot turn our backs on Africa. We need to ensure that
Africa receives equal treatment in the allocation of
resources.

Mrs. Ogata has today given us food for thought. The
Council must heed her advice and take action now.

