Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I would like to welcome our
colleagues and friends from South Africa as they
assume the presidency of the Security Council and to
wish them every success in their work during the month
of October.

We support the choice of topic for today's meeting.
When we speak ofthe need to ensure peace and security
in Africa, it is almost impossible to avoid discussing
issues related to the participation of African youth in
these processes. Today we heard interesting and at times
very moving briefings by representatives of African
youth themselves. There is a reason Africa is called a
young continent. The current generation of Africans
aged between 15 and 24 makes up more than 30 per
cent of Africa's entire population. According to United
Nations data, by 2055 the percentage ofyoung Africans
will more than double. We welcome the fact that
African States devote significant attention to working
with youth. The significance of this category of the
continent's population and the importance of ensuring its
constructive participation in Africa's governance, peace
support and development processes is acknowledged in
Agenda 2063, the core plan of the African Union (AU)
for social and economic development.

We also welcome the continued efforts of the AU
Peace and Security Council to increase the profile
of young people in the maintenance of peace and
security. The AU Commission has created the Office
of the Special Envoy on Youth, who briefed us today,
and has also launched a continent-wide programme,
Youth for Peace Africa, aimed among other things at
implementing the African Youth Charter, adopted in
2006. Young people occupy a significant position in the
efforts to implement the initiative that is the subject of
today's meeting, that of silencing the guns in Africa by
2020. It is referred to in resolution 2457 (2019), which
the Council adopted in support of that initiative. The
road map for an African security architecture for the
period from 2016 to 2020 also addresses the importance
of involving young Africans in the AU's work.

We feel compelled to point out, however, that many
obstacles to youth involvement in the peace process in
Africa remain. In our view, the most significant one
is the problem of the radicalization of the younger
generation. Unformed world views and a lack of life
experience and frequently of a basic education make
young Africans easy prey to radical ideologies.
Extremist groups skilfully exploit this in countries with
unfavourable socioeconomic environments in order
to attract young people to unlawful activity. In their
attempts to get young people on their side, terrorists
commonly and increasingly exploit information and
communications technology, which demands that
we strengthen our collective efforts in the area of
international information security.

We should pay particular attention to the
phenomenon of the use of radically minded young people
to achieve domestic political goals, as this category
sometimes works to overthrow legitimate authorities
under the cover of slogans about democracy and
human rights. We believe firmly that the international
community should pay greater attention to these
problems. It is important to promote the development of
a culture of peace and tolerance among young people.
That is the only way to prevent them from taking part
in acts of violence, terrorism, xenophobia, racial and
gender discrimination, and arms and drug trafficking.
We should take steps to ensure the social integration of
young people who have been victims of armed conflict
by providing them with access to education and skills
development. We should expand mentoring initiatives,
encourage peaceful youth organizations and foster
intercultural and interreligious dialogue among young
people. Much of that is already being done through
the African Union and regional organizations, but we
should scale up those efforts.

Russia is ready to share its experience of working
with young people and countering the spread of
extremist ideologies among them, including the
experience gained by regional organizations such as the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. In support of
young people, every year our Government offers
scholarships and study grants at Russian higher
education institutions to African States. We are open
to seeking new opportunities and promising forms
of cooperation in this area. We intend to continue
substantive discussion of these issues in the framework
of the forthcoming Russia-Africa Summit, to be held in
Sochi from 22 to 24 October.

