Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this meeting and appreciate
the briefings delivered by such distinguished speakers
as Secretary-General Antenio Guterres; Chair of The
Elders, Ms. Mary Robinson; and former Secretary-
General Mr. Ban Ki-moon. We also welcome the former
President of our sister Republic of Colombia, Mr. Juan
Manuel Santos Calderon, to the Council.

We commend the special contribution made by The
Elders to the current global scene as an authoritative
voice of moderation and wisdom in the field of
international relations, as well as a permanent source of
innovative ideas and firm defenders of multilateralism
and the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
This morning, its senior representatives recalled the
central importance of the primary purpose enshrined
in that text, which is the maintenance of international
peace and security and the commitment we have
undertaken to adopting collective measures to prevent
and eliminate these threats to peace. Likewise, it is
essential to promote the peaceful settlement of disputes
or situations that have the potential to lead to conflict.

Nearly 75 years after the signing of the Charter, the
challenges and threats to peace and security are perhaps
more complex, but its purposes and principles remain
valid and unchanged. It is our responsibility to work in
a univocal manner to ensure that the Security Council
plays an active role, promoting and recommending a
more systemic approach to preventive diplomacy based
on timely risk analysis, early warning and management
plans, which the Secretary-General and various
agencies of the system should be able to provide.

With this Vision in mind, I would like to share the
following key ideas that my country supports with
regard to preventive diplomacy in its current context.

First, we highlight the role played by the United
Nations regional political offices as sources of early
warning in territories that are often not included
on the Council's agenda. Their preventive potential
is enormous, but we regret receiving the valuable
information they produce only once every six months.
We believe it essential to develop more expeditious and
flexible mechanisms in order to receive this information
when the urgency of a situation warrants. Their actions
must also be strengthened with greater capacities for
analysis and evaluation of the situation on the ground.

In this regard, the elected members of the Council
have been promoting the holding of periodic informal
meetings with the Secretariat in order to learn, from
a regional perspective and on a rotational basis, about
potential threats to peace and security. We should also
strengthen synergies with regional and subregional
organizations, particularly in order to learn about any
relevant communication or decisions in the face of
possible threats in these areas. This will allow us to
explore possible routes forjoint cooperation. It will also
be important to generate synergies with organizations
fostering development on the ground, which can offer
important complementary information.

We believe that it would be beneficial to make use
of the various meeting formats available to the Council
in a preventive context, such as the Arria Formula
and informal interactive dialogues. We also believe
that recourse to the means of peaceful settlement of
disputes, referred to in Chapter VI of the Charter of
the United Nations, is an underutilized tool that has
a genuine capacity to offer positive alternatives for
action before, during and after conflicts. These include
mediation, which corresponds to a mandate from the
parties and requires their consent at all times, respects
their possible sensitivities and is based on applicable
international law.

In this connection, like other speakers, we strongly
support the efforts of the Special Envoys of the
Secretary-General who, by engaging in mediation or
seeking to develop these capacities at the local level,
assume the special responsibility of guiding the parties
to a dispute or potential dispute, as a visible element
of an international rules-based system. Likewise, we
welcome the timely decision of the Secretary-General to
establish a High-level Advisory Board on Mediation. We
believe that this opportunity should be taken advantage
of more frequently, both by the Council as well as by
regional and subregional organizations recommended
by the Organization's regional political offices.

Finally, there is no better preventive activity than
the creation of more open and inclusive societies that
promote sustainable development and count on the
active, positive and innovative participation of new
actors such as women and youth.

