Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank South Africa for having organized this
open debate on the role of justice and the rule of law in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
This debate is an important stage in the preparation of
the high-level event on the rule of law that will be held
on the margins of the General Assembly's sixty-
seventh session - an event in which the presidency of
the Security Council has been invited to participate. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing.

I would also like to associate myself with the
statement that is to be made by the observer of the
European Union.

In 2006 and 2010, the Security Council adopted
ambitious and innovative presidential statements
concerning justice and the rule of law. We welcome
that the text of draft statement that the President will
read at the close of our debate is set out in the same
ve1n.

More significantly still, the Security Council has
implemented its commitments in the context of
geographic situations. This synergy between the
Council's thematic work, on the one hand, and its
action in specific situations, on the other, is a key
component of its efficacy.

The successive Council resolutions of 2011 bear
witness to that, with the Council implementing in that
regard the full array of measures anticipated in the
thematic declarations on justice and the rule of law.
Resolution 1970 (2011), which referred the situation in
Libya to the International Criminal Court (ICC),
reflects the intention of the Council "to continue
forcefully to fight impunity with appropriate
means", as stated in the presidential statement of 2010
(S/PRST/2010/ll). Resolution 2009 (2011) established
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) and called on it to support Libya's efforts
to restore the rule of law. It also reflects the Council's
resolve to promote the rule of law in the efforts to
restore peace, which was also reaffirmed in 2010.

There are many other examples, and therefore our
action can be further strengthened in several areas. I
shall cite two.

The first has to do with strengthening our support
for the rule of law in countries affected by conflict. The
Security Council's investment in the rule of law -
whether in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
South Sudan or Cote d'Ivoire - is immense and
lasting. The increased efforts for coherence and
coordination implemented by the Secretary-General
and described in his report (S/2011/634*) are directed
at greater effectiveness. The dialogue between the
Council and the country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission is also a key element of
that coherence. Real needs are better identified. We do
feel, however, that it would be useful to make progress
in the identification and rapid deployment of capacities
that are adapted to those needs.
The report of the Secretary-General on civilian
capacity in the aftermath of conflict (S/2011/527) is
particularly relevant with regard to police, justice and

prison administration. We have had a debate in the
Council on this subject, which should also be examined
in the General Assembly. It is important to encourage
any and all initiatives to expedite work to facilitate
access by countries concerned to the expertise they
need.

The Council should also mobilize to support the
efforts of States in the fight against organized crime,
drug trafficking and corruption. The increase in cross-
cutting threats compels us to support the rule of law in
the most fragile countries, particularly in West Africa
and in the Sahel.

The second area concerns criminal justice. The
fight against impunity for those who commit genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes is an essential
component of our peace and security mission. The
international community and this Council can already
count on the International Criminal Court - a
permanent, fully integrated tribunal with the
competence to prosecute the perpetrators of the most
serious crimes when national judicial institutions lack
either the will or the capacity to bring the authors of
such acts to justice. The International Criminal Court is
involved in numerous situations that are on the
Council's agenda, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or in C6te d'Ivoire, and the Council itself has
referred two situations to the Court.

We must remain firm and consistent in our
message to the perpetrators of atrocities, in particular
those who plan and order crimes to be committed as a
means to attain or remain in power. Their individual
criminal responsibility is at stake.

In that regard, we welcome the unambiguous
position of the Secretary-General, who has asked his
representatives on the ground to, on the one hand,
always respect judicial process but, on the other, to
limit their contacts with wanted criminals to what is
essential for their mission and finally never to accept
provisions concerning amnesties or immunities in
agreements that are sponsored by the United Nations.

International criminal justice can be an effective
instrument for preventing crime and thus for promoting
lasting peace, provided that it has the unwavering
support of the international community and of this
Council.
One possible route for improving our efforts in
2012 could be to better ensure follow-up in

12-2096]
cooperation between States and the International
Criminal Court when that cooperation has already been
decided by the Council in a resolution adopted under
Chapter VII of the Charter, as with resolution 1593
(2005) on Darfur. That is also one of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General in his
report.

The draft presidential statement prepared by
South Africa contains a new provision recalling the
importance of cooperation with the ICC and the other
international tribunals. We welcome that.

Before concluding, I wish to recall the
importance that we attach to the peaceful settlement of
disputes, which is one of the pillars of the Charter, and
to the role of the International Court of Justice as the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations. The
number of inter-State disputes that have been brought
before the Court and the requests for opinions from
organs of the United Nations attest to its vitality.

Issuing judgments is an essential responsibility
that gives structure to the international order. But in
this domain, and for criminal justice, implementing the
decisions of judges is just as fundamental. We must
focus our attention on that in the coming years.

