Mr. Mitsialis (Greece): We welcome the
Secretary-General's report (S/2012/376) and the
statements made today by Under-Secretary-General
Amos and on behalf of High Commissioner for Human
Rights Pillay. Moreover, Greece aligns itself with the
statement just made on behalf of the European Union.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate on
the report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts and for your kind invitation
to my delegation to participate in it.

Developments during the 18 months that have elapsed
since the previous report of the Secretary-General on
the protection of civilians (S/2010/579) have clearly
demonstrated that the volatility of the international
environment has led to political unrest and conflict.
Thus, the Secretary-General's report is a comprehensive
account on one of the most pressing issues that needs
to be addressed, the safety of people in time of conflict
and the challenges the international community faces
with regard to that problem.

Despite some encouraging developments duly
highlighted in the report, such as the landmark
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) on Libya, there
is reason for grave concern. Civilians account for the
majority of casualties during a conflict. The death and
injury of civilians, conflict-related sexual violence,
the impeded provision of humanitarian assistance and,
more important, the lack of accountability are alarming
realities that must be immediately addressed, along
with the worrying dimensions of the displacement of
populations.

Aggression against civilians can no longer
be tolerated. Respect for and compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law lay
the foundations for the protection of civilians from the
horrific consequences of conflict. In that respect, it is
imperative to work to reduce the still unacceptably high
level of impunity for perpetrators of attacks against
civilians.

At the same time, we would like to commend the
efforts of all actors involved in the protection of civilians.
Governments and non-governmental institutions have
taken important steps towards full compliance with the
international legal framework and have been working
to set up mechanisms for conflict prevention and
post-conflict reconstruction. Many challenges remain,
but we believe that through enhanced international
cooperation we can achieve better results.

However, for the purpose of preventing atrocities
and in order to ensure multilateral involvement on the
subject of the protection of civilians in areas of conflict,
we need to have accurate and independent information
on the situation on the ground. That is where the role
ofjournalists - and hence their protection in armed
conflicts - comes in. Journalists are not only the
voice of truth in conflict areas; above all, they are
civilians themselves, and, as the relevant provisions of
humanitarian law stipulate, they must be protected as
such.

In his report, the Secretary-General seized the
opportunity to highlight the relevance of resolution
1738 (2006) and the call contained therein to all States
to prevent attacks againstjournalists in armed conflicts
and prosecute those responsible. Five years after the
adoption of resolution 1738 (2006), media professionals
continue to be the victims of violence, as we have all
witnessed lately. Greece has consistently stressed the
importance of their role during armed conflicts and the
necessity of protecting them. In that light - and on
the occasion of the celebration of World Press Freedom
Day - Greece and France, along with UNESCO,
organized last May a round-table discussion on the
challenges and possible solutions to this threat against
the right of expression.

Considering the multitude of cases of serious
violations of those rights that have taken place around the
globe in the past 18 months, and assessing the challenges
ahead, we firmly believe that an intensification of
international cooperation would be conducive to a
more efficient response on the part of the international
community towards this problem. The United Nations
plan of action on the safety ofjournalists and the issue
of impunity, as endorsed by the Chief Executives Board
for Coordination last April, constitutes a praiseworthy
effort in the direction of combating the phenomenon
of attacks against journalists. Proposed actions
such as strengthening United Nations mechanisms,
consolidating partnerships among organizations,
raising awareness and fostering safety initiatives are
incremental steps in the process of ensuring the safety
of journalists and need to be put into practice.

Having drawn the necessary lessons from the past,
our goal should be to chart a new course forward in
order to provide media professionals and their assisting
staff with safeguards that ensure their protection
and to create a safe environment for them. That will
ultimately ensure that the flow of information is free
and unobstructed and the international community
duly informed.

In concluding, I would like to reiterate that Greece
will continue to be at the forefront of this struggle,
supporting all positive initiatives and actively involved
in the fight against impunity for the perpetrators of
such acts againstjournalists.

