Mr. Santos (Mozambique): I wish to associate
myself with the expressions of sympathy to the peoples
and Governments of India and Pakistan for the natural
disaster that struck the two countries, causing death
and destruction.
Allow me at the outset to join those who preceded
me in congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
during the month of January and on the brilliant
manner in which you are conducting the affairs of the
Council. I would also like to pay special tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Sergey Lavrov of the Russian
Federation, for the exemplary manner in which he
guided the work ofthe Council last month.

I wish to take this opportunity to once again
express our profound appreciation to the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, for their relentless efforts and
dedication to ensure a smooth historical transition in
East Timor. Mr. Vieira de Mello's leadership has been
crucial in ensuring a good transition process. We thank
him for his informative briefing today.

We welcome the presence of Mr. Jose' Ramos-
Horta, a Nobel Peace Prize laureate and determined
fighter for East Timor's self-determination and
independence. We admire his courage, and we value
the message he delivered today to the Council.

We want to take note with appreciation of the
presence of the President of the General Assembly at
this meeting; he made a very good gesture by joining
us here in the Security Council and sharing his findings
from the visit he made recently to East Timor and
Indonesia. We also thank the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme and the
representatives of the World Bank and International
Monetary Fund for their briefings; they perform the
task of bringing sustainable development to East
Timor.

We are pleased to note that the security situation
in East Timor is relatively stable. This is a factor that
will certainly contribute decisively towards a smooth
transition to independence, bringing the people of East
Timor into the community of nations. In this regard, we
would like to praise the firm action by the
peacekeeping forces of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) in dealing
with the threat to security posed by the activities of
militia infiltrated from West Timor. It remains
imperative to continue dealing decisively with the
problem of refugees and militia activity from West
Timor if the transition process is to remain on the right
track.

To that end, the authorities of Indonesia and
UNTAET must continue their cooperation in order to
ensure security in that area and allow the activities of
humanitarian agencies, including the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to
alleviate the suffering of refugees. An information
strategy must be designed to allow refugees in West
Timor to make informed decisions with regard to their
future.

We also congratulate UNTAET on fulfilling
effectively its mandate in several areas in East Timor.
UNTAET has achieved considerable progress in
sensitive and vital areas such as training the East
Timorese police, deploying civilian police throughout
almost the whole country, developing a system of law
and order, public administration and initiating
education and basic health services.

However, the task of UNTAET, and indeed of the
international community as a whole, remains
challenging. The transition in East Timor will be
smooth only if, inter alia, the East Timorese police
force is effectively trained in timely fashion to perform
its duty; if the refugee problem, associated with militia
activity in West Timor, is dealt with; if a national
public administration is put in place; if an effective
justice system is established; and if infrastructure,
including roads and power supply, is rehabilitated or
constructed. A lot needs to be done in these areas.

We welcome the consensus of the people of East
Timor to hold elections and attain independence during
the current year. This represents the political maturity
that the people of East Timor have demonstrated
throughout their quest for self-determination and the
establishment of their own State.

The consultations within the framework of the
National Council of Timorese Resistance, involving all
East Timorese political actors constitutes an indication
that the people of East Timor are committed to building
a new nation founded on fundamental principles of
democracy, freedom and the rule of law.

It is now more pressing than ever to take stock of
the progress already achieved and plan for the huge but
certainly surmountable challenges in the way of the
transition process in East Timor.

The international community must now
demonstrate its solidarity with the Timorese cause by
making available the necessary resources for the timely
completion of the UNTAET mandate and lay the
foundations for a future independent State of East
Timor. As proposed by the Secretary-General,
resources from assessed contributions must be made
available at adequate levels, and UNTAET must be
allowed to use the resources in a more flexible manner
as it prioritizes and discharges its complex mandates in
East Timor.

The current pace of implementation of
UNTAET's mandate and of other projects by
international organizations seems to indicate that a
strong United Nations presence will be required in East
Timor after its independence. We are of the view that
such a presence should be adequately planned and
given a proper mandate.

We are pleased to note that the elections that will
precede the declaration of independence in East Timor
will be conducted by UNTAET. It is of utmost
importance to build internal capacity in terms of
electoral planning, with a View to allowing the East
Timorese to manage their elections in the future.

We also call on the international community to
continue supporting East Timor after its independence,
as the East Timorese build their own sustainable
system of governance. The provision of technical,
financial and other forms of assistance will be crucial
in order for that nation to rise and stand among the
community of nations. This is a case in which we need
to implement what we advocate as regards post-conflict
peace-building.

The right of self-determination is one of the
essential foundations of international relations to which
Mozambique has always attached great importance. It
is in this regard that my country is now giving to the
East Timor transition process a modest contribution: a
small contingent of civilian and military personnel in
that territory.

We look forward to welcoming an independent
East Timor to the United Nations.

