Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank all of today's briefers
and extend a warm welcome to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Burkina Faso, His
Excellency Mr. Alpha Barry.
I wish to begin my statement by conveying our
deepest sympathy to the families of those who were
killed and to the authorities of Mali, Burkina Faso
and the Niger following the recent terrorist attacks
that claimed the lives of dozens of members of those
countries' security forces, including the attack on
Monday, with reports suggesting the lamentable loss
of 24 soldiers of the Malian armed forces, as well as
the continuing loss of innocent civilian lives as a result
of the intercommunal violence and terrorism that are
plaguing the Sahel subregion. We fully condemn those
attacks and acts of irrational violence.

We remain extremely concerned about the
deterioration of the security and humanitarian situation
in the Sahel, fuelled by the spread of terrorism and
the increase in intercommunal violence, with the
mounting latent risk that the situation may spread to
other countries in the region, threatening the stability
of the whole of West Africa. It is therefore essential
to redouble our efforts and act firmly to contain and
respond to the threat, adopting a comprehensive
approach that takes the political dimension, security
and development into account. We recognize that this
task is not an easy one owing to the complexity of the
security situation prevailing in the Sahel, particularly
in Mali, where terrorist groups are taking advantage
of the vacuum created by States' limited capacity to
ensure security, justice, governance and economic
opportunities for their mostly young population.

In the light ofthe situation, we stress the importance
of continuing to decisively support Sahel countries,
including the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel), in their domestic struggle to achieve
the peace, security and political and economic stability
to which their citizens are entitled. In that connection,
recognizing that the solution cannot be exclusively
military, I wish to highlight some elements that we
believe are priorities at this critical juncture.

First, we urge the Government of Mali, signatory
armed groups, civil society in general, including
women, youth and religious leaders, to pursue efforts
towards common empowerment and to resolve their
differences through a national inclusion dialogue with
a view to effectively implementing the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali without further delay.
In that regard, we commend the work and role played
by civil society organizations, such as that represented
by Ms. Diallo.

Secondly, the offensive against the violence
committed by armed groups and terrorists and the
transnational organized crime prevailing in the Sahel
must be strengthened, and the international community
must continue to support national security forces and
the Joint Force, whose operations are essential and
complementary to those of other actors present in
the region. In that respect, we call for continued and
improved cooperation among the various security
forces operating on the ground.

Finally, we call for continued progress on the
operationalization of the Joint Force, including
the conduct of a number of operations in the three
demarcated border areas, the implementation of the
human rights and international humanitarian law
compliance framework in order to improve the security
of the population in the course of military operations,
and the deployment of the police component, whose
coordination with the justice systems in the G-5 Sahel
countries will be essential to combatting impunity and
bringing to justice those responsible for crimes.

