Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the opportunity to speak today in my
capacity as the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. I have had the honour to preside over that
important Committee in the second part of this year, so
the comments I am about to make are my personal
observations based on my experience. They are not
attributable to any other delegation, nor should they be
seen as a record of the work of that subsidiary organ.
For a factual account of the work achieved over the
past two years, I refer to the biannual briefings by the
Chairman to the Security Council, the most recent of
which was delivered on 13 November (see S/PV.6217).

I am pleased to note that Croatia has inherited the
Committee in good standing from previous Chairs. Our
basic approach to the new function was to keep the
momentum going and to focus on achieving concrete
results and fulfilling realistic objectives. We have
benefited from the constructive atmosphere in the
Committee. Any positive accomplishment is the result
of all 15 members' working together. In the same vein,
fulfilling our mandate would not have been possible
without continued support and cooperation of Member
States. In addition, we have established close working
relationships with the Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and his expert team, as well as with the
Secretariat, and I take this opportunity to express my
gratitude for their valuable assistance.

When the Croatian Permanent Representative
took on the chairmanship in January 2008, she did so
in the wake of the adoption of resolution 1787 (2007),
which postponed the review of the mandate of CTED
due to the appointment of the new Executive Director,
3

Mr. Mike Smith. In January 2008, he presented to the
Committee a revised organizational plan for CTED,
which included several welcome innovations, such as
more consistency in CTED's assessments, the
establishment of five cross-cutting functional groups, a
proposal to carry out flexible visits, stronger linkages
with donors and enhanced cooperation with other
Security Council subsidiary bodies as well as within
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force. The
implementation of those initiatives has brought new
energy and focus to the operations of the Committee
and CTED.

The organizational plan charted the way forward
for CTED and served as a necessary element of
Security Council resolution 1805 (2008). The
resolution not only extended the mandate of CTED
until the end of 2010, but also set the direction for the
Committee for the next few years. Among other things,
the resolution encouraged informal briefings for all
interested Member States on the work of the Committee.
Since we strongly believe that transparency is one of
the guiding principles in our work, we have heeded this
call of the Council and organized such briefings at
regular intervals. I wish to inform the Council that I
will give the final informal briefing, together with
Mr. Smith, this coming Wednesday.

Over the past two years, the Committee has
devoted a significant part of its operations to analysing
and adopting, through its subcommittees chaired by
France, the Russian Federation and Viet Nam, the
Preliminary Implementation Assessments (PIAs). This
new tool has greatly enhanced the dialogue with
Member States on the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). It also serves as the basis for two major
initiatives, namely, the stocktaking of the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) and the drafting of the report
of the Committee on the survey of the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) by Member States.

Stocktaking may be best described as the
Committee's second reading of the PIAs after it has
received responses from Member States to the original
documents. It has proved to be a complex and lengthy
exercise, which is putting to the test the Committee's
and CTED's resources, especially at the subcommittee
level. I would like to commend all those involved in
this effort. Having said that, I believe that the
cooperation of Member States is essential, and I call on
them to remain committed to the dialogue with the
Committee and CTED in this ongoing process.
Regarding the survey, allow me to stress that I am
particularly pleased that it was during the Croatian
chairmanship that the Committee adopted that report,
the first of its kind since its establishment in 2001. The
second, updated version has recently been approved,
and the Council will hold consultations on that issue
immediately after this morning's meetings. I believe
that the survey should become the principal outcome of
the Committee's work, useful for its outreach not only
to counter-terrorism practitioners, but also to the wider
public.

We have tried to keep the work of the Committee
more relevant and interactive by organizing, on the
basis of a CTED proposal, a series of thematic
discussions of all major areas of implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), as well as by intensifying its
dialogue with international, regional and subregional
organizations. Since the beginning of 2008, the
Committee has heard briefings by a dozen relevant
organizations and United Nations bodies, including, for
example, the European Union, NATO, the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the South
American Financial Action Task Force on Money
Laundering, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. At our last meeting,
which will be held on Thursday, 17 December 2009, a
representative of the Council of Europe will brief the
Committee on the major developments in the counter-
terrorism field in that partner organization.

Furthermore, I would like to report that the
Committee is currently testing a new paperless
document distribution system, based on the self-service
work space designed for team collaboration already in
use in most Main Committees of the General Assembly.

Before concluding, allow me to express my
appreciation to the delegation of France, which assumed
the function of Acting Chairman of the Committee and
played a crucial role in preparing the interim review of
the work of CTED.

Finally, regarding the Working Group established
pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004), I can report that the
Group has neither held any meetings nor submitted any
documents to the Council in the past two years.

