Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (Spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate France on its victory at the
2018 FIFA World Cup and Russia on having organized
the tournament well.

I congratulate the Swedish delegation on its
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of July. I also wish to thank Mr. Ghassan
Salame, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his briefing on recent political and
economic developments in Libya. I would further like to
thank His Excellency Ambassador Carl Orrenius Skau
for the briefing he delivered on behalf of the Chair of
the Sanctions Committee on Libya established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011). I congratulate Ms. Stephanie
Williams on her appointment as the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

Recent meetings of the various Libyan parties, the
latest ofwhich was held in Paris, represented a glimmer
of hope for all Libyan people that the country might
be extricated from the horrors of political paralysis
that it has endured in recent years, which negatively
affected all aspects of the life of Libyan citizens,
including by promoting instability and deteriorating
security in the country. In this regard, we commend
all efforts aimed at uniting the Libyan people and call
up the international community to urge the Libyan
parties to reach agreement and arrive at a settlement
that is acceptable to all so as to release Libya from its
ongoing ordeal.

We reaffirm the need to organize parliamentary
and presidential elections, which should be preceded
by the implementation of the constitutional and legal
arrangements necessary to the holding of the elections.
We also reaffirm the importance of creating a climate
conducive to the organization of these elections
by calling on all parties to accept their results. We
caution against the continuing search for solutions
that are at odds with the resolutions and declarations
of the Security Council, the most recent of which was
presidential statement S/PRST//2018/11, of6 June 2018.

Despite all the efforts undertaken at the
international and national levels, it is clear and
unfortunate that some parties are aggravating the day-
to-day lives of Libyan people by acting with the sole
aim of causing the current situation to persist. They
obstruct any attempt to restore security and stability
in the country and to unite Libyan parties under the
country's flag. The recent attacks against oil facilities
in the oil crescent region by a lawless group, led by
an individual who is currently being prosecuted in a
Libyan court, triggered a crisis that has ended thanks
to the good-faith efforts of many individuals in Libya
and the world and that threatened cause a significant
deterioration in the Libyan economy. In this regard, we
welcome the joint communique issued by the United
States, France, the United Kingdom and Italy on 12 July,
wherein they welcomed the resumption of operations
by the National Oil Corporation, which are critical
to all Libyans owing to the company's legitimacy in
accordance with Security Council resolutions and
the Libyan Political Agreement. These countries also
welcomed the contributions of the Libyan National
Army to stabilizing the oil sector.

We call on both the Security Council and the
international community to grasp the fact that critical
measures are necessary against anyone who impedes
the interests and aspirations of the Libyan people to
establish a civil State in which they enjoy stability,
democracy and justice.

The United Nations resolutions calling for Libyan
ownership of the political settlement have not been
translated into reality. Negative foreign interference
in Libya has exacerbated the situation and created an
environment conducive to crises and mistrust among
the Libyan parties. We reaffirm the fact that the Libyan
people reject this ongoing, unjustified interference.
They aspire to build their country's institutions and
establish a balanced relationship with the world, based
on mutual respect and common interests in line with the
principles of the United Nations and international law.

We call on those States to understand the logical
equation whereby Libyan stability is inextricably linked
to their own stability. Indeed, without stability in Libya,
these countries will encounter major issues that will in
turn cause other problems in those countries, such as
illicit migration, accusations of violations of migrants'
rights, human trafficking, the existence of terrorist
groups, and so on. All ofthese phenomena and problems
can be eradicated only if there is a good will and good
faith on the part of these States, and specifically if they
help to find a solution for the political stalemate that
has paralysed the country.

My country has called upon the Security Council
to set up an international technical commission under
the auspices of the United Nations that will consider
the revenues, expenditures and other transactions of
the Libyan Central Bank in Tripoli and A1 Bayda. This
request is geared towards safeguarding the Libyan
people's interests and is a sine qua non in the wake of
divisions among the Libyans. This step would lead to
uniting the Libyan financial institutions in order to
eliminate financial corruption and achieve economic
stability in the country. We hope that the Council
will establish the committee so that it can assume its
functions as soon as possible.

In conclusion, we reiterate what we have already
stated to the Council with regard to the high-level
meeting convened by the Secretary-General on
20 September 2017, at which a United Nations action
plan was announced with a view to bringing an end
to the crisis in Libya. We reaffirm the key role the
United Nations must play in achieving a settlement to
the Libyan crisis. In this regard, the Government of my
country reiterates its commitment to cooperating with
the United Nations through the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, ending political divisions, reunifying
institutions and moving towards a new horizon that
will end the suffering that has plagued the daily lives
of Libyans.

