Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing. I also extend my
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of Israel
and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for their
statements.

At the end of July, some days after our last
open debate on the situation in the Middle East (see S/PV.7007), Palestinians and Israelis returned to the
negotiating table, giving new life to the peace process
and overcoming the inertia of a dangerous stalemate
that had been ongoing for almost three years. That was
an auspicious moment in a regional context, which,
as we have all noted, is marked by uncertainty and
upheaval.

However, three of the nine months that the parties
established as the time period for reaching an agreement
have gone by, and despite the fact that the negotiations
have been carried out with a great deal of reservations,
the information that we have indicates that the progress
so far has been complex, which is understandable, but
also extremely slow. That is partly because, instead
of beginning with the broad and widely accepted
principles, there is questioning of the parameters of the
two-State solution, which are contained in international
law and supported by the overwhelming majority of the
international community. Among those parameters is
that the pre-June 1967 borders should be the basis of
any negotiation.

In various newspapers around the world, we are
already seeing that lack of respect for the principles
upheld by the international community. Some articles
that I have been reading in the past few days have said
that the question is not whether there will be conflict in
the future between Isreal and Palestine. There will be,
and that cannot be prevented. Preventing catastrophic
changes involves putting an end to the oppressive reign
of an obsolete idea and allowing for both sides to see
the world as it is and adapt to it.

Those remarks, which have been underscored
in different ways, have been published in important
newspapers around the world, including in Latin
America. They undoubtedly strengthen the idea that
Argentina has been putting forth and which we stress
again. We believe that the Security Council should
express itself on the entirety of the situations that we
have been describing as situations that either positively
or negatively affect the Palestinian-Israeli situation
and take concrete steps to complement the negotiations
and support the two-State solution. I think that it is
important for the Council to express itself on behalf
of the overwhelming majority opinion favouring a
two-State solution. In doing so, the Council could help
to counteract those who I do not want to classify, but
perhaps I would call them "free thinkers", who think
that the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
or of international law or the 1967 solution are obsolete
and that instead we need to be realistic and pragmatic.

Enormous atrocities have been committed in
the world with the call for realism and pragmatism.
Therefore, once again we urge the Security Council
to express itself on the principles that it maintains in
order to give a definitive solution, so that there can
be real, lasting peace with secure borders for Israel
and a consolidated Palestinian State. While there
have been brave acts, such as the release of the first
group of Palestinian prisoners detained prior to the
signing of the Oslo Accords, since the beginning of the
negotiations we have seen other developments as well
that are completely incompatible with the peace process
and that deepen the mistrust and do not contribute to
creating favourable conditions for dialogue.

We repeat, as others have done, that illegal
settlements campaign has increased on the West Bank,
as have demolitions and displacement in East Jerusalem
and in Area C, ongoing confrontations between
protesters and the Israel Defense Forces and tragic
developments such as the one we saw in August in
Kalandia, rocket launches against Israel and unceasing
confrontational rhetoric.

At the same time, the humanitarian situation in
Gaza continues to deteriorate, suffocated by a blockade
that has been in place for more than six years. We
know and agree that the next several months will be
decisive in putting an end to an occupation that has
lasted for more than half a century and that is a morally
reproachable, politically unacceptable and strategically
unviable.

I turn to the matter of Syria as a second issue. In a
few days, a month will have passed since the adoption
of resolution 2118 (2013), on chemical weapons
programme in Syria. We note with satisfaction that,
with the collaboration of the Syrian Government, the
initial verification activities for the elimination of that
programme began almost immediately.

The Secretary-General sent along his
recommendations on the role of the United Nations in
that process - including those on putting together the
Joint Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations
and appointing a special coordinator to lead those
efforts - and they were quickly backed by the Security
Council. All of that is a good start for a process that
has involved much suffering and difficulty and should
conclude at the middle of the year ahead.

However, resolution 2118 (2013) has an additional
component that is equally, if not more, important that
the elimination of the chemical weapons programme in
Syria. Through that resolution, the Security Council
echoed the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2013/523, annex) and explicitly called for the "Geneva II"
conference to be held as soon as possible in order to
implement the communique, thus launching a transition
led by the Syrians themselves that would put an end to
the spilling of blood that has lasted more than two and
a half years.

To comply with that request, we need the same
political will and the same determination shown by all
of the relevant stakeholders when it comes to looking at
the matter of chemical weapons. We hope that both the
Government and the opposition will soon put together
credible delegations that are able to make compromises
and implement them so that the conference can start as
announced next month.

It is worth reiterating that, in accordance with
paragraph 12 of the 30 June 2012 communique, the
global and regional Powers that met in Geneva last year
and are today sitting in today's open debate reaffirmed
their opposition "to any additional militarization of the
conflict". That part of the communique seems to have
been forgotten but it must be complied with.

Resolution 2118 (2013) was undoubtedly a
meaningful accomplishment. It was a sign ofunity in the
Security Council which, except for sporadic moments,
had been paralysed with regard to the Syrian crisis. In
fact, in August we could say that unity in the Council
was perhaps accidental. We no doubt made progress
with resolution 2118 (2013), but we do not know if the
dynamics surrounding the conflict have changed.

We recall that Kofi Annan, when he left his post
as Joint Special Envoy for Syria, said something that,
as far as we can tell, remains valid to this day. He said:

"Only a united international community can
compel both sides to engage in a peaceful political
transition. But a political process is difficult, if not
impossible, while all sides - within and without
Syria - see opportunity to advance their narrow
agendas by military means."

If Geneva II is to take place, the regional and
international stakeholders that support both sides
should be fully convinced that the political solution is
the only possible solution.

Lastly, I should like to avail myself of this
opportunity to recognize the fact that the Council
has been able to adopt a presidential statement on the
humanitarian aspects of the crisis (S/2013/PRST/15).
For Argentina, it is important though not crucial that
the declaration was issued as a presidential statement
and not as a resolution. It speaks as the expression of
a united Council, not as a menu of options that the
parties can choose from. It speaks of obligations and
requirements that emanate from international law that
must be complied with by all.

