Mrs. Hrda (Czech Republic): The Czech Republic
would like to express its gratitude to the Argentinian
presidency of the Security Council for conducting this
very important open debate, and to both briefers, not
only for today's briefings, but also for their tremendous
work. As suggested in the concept paper (S/20l4/725, annex), we wish to focus on one of the possible ways
of improving Security Council's work, which is the
relationship between that main organ of the United
Nations and the International Criminal Court (ICC).

The Czech Republic is strongly committed to the
idea of international criminal justice, in particular the
ICC. Due to our country's historical experience with
the perpetration of serious crimes under international
law and serious human rights abuses during the
Second World War and the post-war era, we very
much appreciate the Court's existence. The ICC's role
in the fight against impunity is really irreplaceable,
and we stand ready to support it wherever possible.
Nevertheless, we believe that the issue of cooperation
with the Court goes far beyond its relations with the
States parties to the Rome Statute, and that it must be
addressed within a much broader spectrum of relevant
actors, involving the United Nations and in particular
the Security Council. In our view, the Security Council
has in that regard a special responsibility to close the
impunity gap by making referrals to the ICC.

In that context, we should emphasize that some
situations, chiefly internal armed conflicts where the
most serious crimes of concern to the international
community have been or continue to be committed
today, should be referred by the Security Council to
the ICC. Applying a double standard can adversely
affect the promotion of the rule of law and international
justice. However, the Court has so far not received the
support it needs from the Council to enable it to fulfil
the missions referred to it under resolutions 1593 (2005)
and 1970 (2011). We regret the absence of any effective
follow-up from the Council on its referrals and hope
that members will hear this open debate as a call to act
on the matter.

We urge the Security Council to establish a
mechanism to follow up on situations it refers to the
ICC. Specifically, such a mechanism should benefit
from the Council's power to enforce its resolutions and
ensure that States cooperate with the Court. Moreover,
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
should be given thejob of dealing with issues pertaining
to ICC referrals. We would also like to recommend that
the cost of future referrals be covered by the United
Nations, as has been done for the Ad Hoc Tribunals.
It is essential that the Security Council work with a
consistency that would then produce a preventive effect
as well.

