Mr. Sareer (Maldives): On behalf of the Republic
of Maldives, let me thank the Azerbaijani presidency
for convening this open debate on the working methods
of the Council. Let me furthermore thank Ambassador
Maria Cristina Perceval of Argentina for her briefing in
her capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and other Procedural Questions.
The Maldives also thanks the presidency for its note
of 28 August (S/2013/515) and welcomes the continued
efforts at ensuring transparency and coherence within
the Council's working methods.

The Maldives has the honour of associating
itself with the statement made by the representative
of Switzerland in its capacity as coordinator of the

Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group, a
cross-regional group made up of 22 member States.

According to Article 24 ofthe Charter of the United
Nations, the Council acts on behalfofall Member States.
That universal representation needs to be reflected in
fully transparent decisions and a process that leaves no
room for secrecy. It is only right that all Member States
have a clear understanding of the present current of the
Council - deviating from past practice. Business as
usual will leave us with the usual unsatisfying results.

There is a necessity for all Member States to be better
informed with regard to the Council's deliberations. As
is the case with the General Assembly, the Maldives
believes that draft documents of the Security Council
should be made available to all Member States in a more
timely and appropriate manner. Further in line with the
Charter, we would welcome more frequent interactive
dialogues and presentations of special reports.

While we welcome the informational briefings at
the beginning of each presidency, the Maldives calls on
Council members to reflect on the month's work in the
form of wrap-up meetings, critically and proactively.
Through honest reflection, we hope to see a more
equal distribution of work between the permanent and
non-permanent members of the Council. The prevailing
disparity remains a fundamental flaw of the Council,
which is constantly being illustrated. We have seen
it when negotiations are limited only to permanent
members and we have seen it when, similarly, briefings
have also been limited. Recently, the decision of the
Secretary-General to brief only the permanent members
with regard to the situation in Syria saw that failing
extend to the Secretariat, which is deeply disappointing.

Only a reform of the Council's structure will
truly make this body more representative, transparent,
efficient and legitimate. In the meantime, we welcome
the proposal made by France suggesting that the
permanent members themselves could voluntarily
forego their right to exercise veto in reaction to crimes
of mass atrocity. We believe that this pledge would
contribute to a more effective response to crisis and to
a stronger implementation of the Council's own agenda,
thereby promoting the establishment and maintenance
of international peace and security. We therefore call
for an open and engaging dialogue between the ACT
group and all the permanent members of the Council.
We would encourage other permanent members to
explore further the proposal made by France.

The views of Member States have to be taken into
account in the decision-making process of the Security
Council. The use of the right to veto, or the intention
to do so, should have to be explained, in particular
with regard to its consistency with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
applicable international law. That would lead to a much
greater degree of transparency in the decision-making
process and make morally ambiguous and legally
inadmissable arguments less likely.

The Maldives sincerely hopes that both permanent
and non-permanent members commit not only in
word but also in action to practices that conform to
higher standards of accountability, coherence and
transparency.

