Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Patricia O'Brien for her very
informative briefing.

Piracy is a serious scourge affecting the situation
in Somalia. It has further aggravated the grave crisis in
the country. The consequences of piracy extend far
beyond Somalia's borders and threaten the stability of
the entire region. Its material burden has reached
alarming levels and has been surpassed only by the
tragic human costs to those who face the horrors of
kidnapping and death.

The comprehensive report of Special Adviser
Jack Lang (S/2011/30, annex) was a welcome
contribution to the considerations of the international
community on the issues. We welcome the fact that
resolution 1976 (2011) incorporated many of the
recommendations of that report. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/360) being discussed today
addresses an important component of that effort as it
elaborates on the modalities for the creation of
specialized Somali anti-piracy courts.

Brazil gives particular attention to the issue of
capacity-building for training and to the provision of
adequate facilities for the tasks involved in the
prosecutorial process. We also encourage Somali
authorities to give due attention to the need for revision
in its legislation on piracy, and to establish the
necessary laws for efficient criminal and procedural
foundations for prosecutions. Regarding the issue of
extraterritorial Somali courts, the opinion of Somali
authorities must be the guide to any action by the
international community.
As we continue to deliberate on better ways to
combat piracy, it will be necessary to maintain efforts
towards the improvement of prosecution mechanisms,
while at the same time focusing on the deeper issue of
the underlying causes of piracy. We fully concur with
the assertion of Mr. Lang's report that it is necessary to

create socio-economic opportunities that can curtail the
recruitment of pirates and to encourage alternatives
that contribute constructively to the situation in
Somalia. As Brazil has previously stated, a
comprehensive strategy is required so as to combine
repressive and punitive measures with preventive ones
through initiatives on land that can help mitigate the
problems at sea.

