Mr. Chergui: On behalf of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission, I would like to thank
the Italian presidency of the Security Council for
convening this important meeting under the agenda
item "Maintenance of international peace and security:
trafficking in persons in conflict situations". I will
focus my presentation on the situation in Africa.

The African Union Peace and Security Council
is currently seized with 15 conflict situations on the
continent, including countries engaged in war or
experiencing post-conflict tensions, while a dozen face
chronic vulnerabilities. In each of those situations,
trafficking remains an issue that continues to erode
the human dignity of individuals, in particular women
and children. The stories we hear from the victims in
countries such as Libya, South Sudan, Central African
Republic and Somalia, to name a few, are harrowing.
The Government of Burundi has recorded more than
356 women and girls who have been Victims of human
trafficking since January. The tragedy is that once they
reach their destination, human rights abuse continues,
sometimes under the radar. Although the phenomenon
exists everywhere, the populations in conflict situations
are more vulnerable to sex trafficking, child sex
trafficking, forced labour, domestic servitude, forced
child labour and the unlawful recruitment and use of
child soldiers. According to the report just released by
the International Labour Organization, Africa has the
highest rate of modern slavery, with 7.6 per cent per
1,000 people.

Allow me to touch on the plight of migrants
in Libya. The African Union learned with dismay
of reports of the auctioning of African migrants
in Libya as slaves. We were lost for words when we
saw those images. The Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, has
strongly condemned such despicable acts, which are
at odds with the ideas of the founding fathers of our
Organization and the relevant African and international
instruments, including the African Charter on Human
and Peoples' Rights. In addition, the African Union is
deeply concerned about the inhuman conditions across
Libya where migrants are being held. The business of
smuggling migrants has become so lucrative that it has
led to clashes among rebel factions, who are, in essence,
rent-seekers promising partners that they can contain
the issue of migrants in Libya.

The African Union has requested the African
Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights to launch
an urgent investigation in support of the measures
announced by the Libyan authorities and to submit its
conclusions as soon as possible. The African Union also
intends to dispatch an envoy to Libya for consultation
with the Government and other stakeholders in order to
agree on practical steps to address the plight of African
migrants in Libya.

The African Union believes that ending the
trafficking in persons in conflict situations must
start with the resolution of conflict. We are working
relentlessly to prevent and mediate conflicts, and to
address their root causes. Indeed, building on the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, the
United Nations and the African Union are currently in
the process of developing and a United Nations-African
Union framework for the implementation of Agenda
2063 and the Sustainable Development Goals.

The African Union also maintains that a
multi-pronged but tailored and context-specific
approach that addresses the complexities and nuances
of the problem is the only way to make concrete and
sustainable progress. The African Union therefore
focuses on both prevention and response. The
preventive approach focuses on addressing the
conditions that lead to human trafficking. Interventions
should be tailored to address particular vulnerabilities
and provide meaningful and effective alternatives for
livelihoods and political participation. The African
Union Commission is undertaking various initiatives
aimed at addressing the structural vulnerabilities of
member States, through the Continental Structural
Conflict Prevention Framework.

The Commission is also supporting member States
in strengthening their national peace infrastructure to
enable them to respond to local realities and potential
threats. Within the framework of the African Union
Border Programme, the African Union's work with
development partners has helped some of its members
in the Sahel and East Africa to enhance Government
presence in the border region by extending public and
social services. The African Union has also adopted
several legal and normative instruments that are
designed to tackle the trafficking of human beings
and the smuggling of migrants. Those instruments
have provided the basis for member States to enact
anti-trafficking legislation, which has protected and
rescued a great number of victims.

The second component focuses on strengthening
security response measures. Significant progress has
already been made through peace support operations
and ad hoc security arrangements. However, there are
considerable gaps in the criminal justice response to
human trafficking, which include outdated legislation
and weak institutional capacities to investigate,
prosecute and adjudicate human trafficking cases. The
Nouakchott and Djibouti processes on the enhancement
of security cooperation in the Sahel and East Africa,
established under the auspices of the African Union,
have served as the catalysts for robust cooperation
between the intelligence services of the countries of
the respective regions. Those processes have allowed
different institutions to develop and share their
understanding of common security threats, and devise
collaborative response measures to address them.

The African Union Mechanism for Police
Cooperation (AFRIPOL) is now fully operational.
AFRIPOL was established to enhance cooperation and
coordination between police and other law enforcement
agencies of member States at the strategic, operational
and tactical levels to coherently and effectively
combat all forms of crime. AFRIPOL will also play
a critical role in training and building the capacity
of law enforcement agencies to confront the range
of emerging transnational threats, including human
trafficking. We are also working on a framework that
will provide comprehensive Victim-support services
for those affected by human trafficking. That includes
health services addressing the long-term needs of those
who have been physically injured, and psychological
support for the victims and their families. That is in
line with the three approaches of preventing the crime,
prosecuting traffickers and protecting the victims.

Each of our initiatives to combat human trafficking
is founded on the realization that the challenges of
human trafficking must be addressed from both
regional and global perspectives and be situated within
the context of sustainable development. Unfortunately
our efforts to prevent, protect and assist the victims
of human trafficking continue to be hindered by the
following challenges.

First, although we have a shared analysis of the mini
conflict situations on the continent, we do not always
have a common strategy. Take Libya, for example. We
all remember the pre-intervention period in the country.
The African Union wanted the mediated solution but
it was prevented. Even today, the repercussions of the
current situation in Libya or in neighbouring African
countries are not fully appreciated. We were not heard
before and we continue not to be heard, but we are
hopeful that that will change.

Secondly, we must address Government deficits
and the lack of social a economic development on the
continent, which have led our youth to risk their lives
across the Sahara and Mediterranean Sea in search
of a better tomorrow or to become involved with
terrorist groups that can provide income and a sense
of belonging. Let us make sure that this time we move
from words to action, and ensure that we meet the goal
set for 2030.
Thirdly, there is a lack of cooperation among the
various actors involved in addressing the issue of
human trafficking. It is therefore very important for our
two organizations to hold regular consultations at the
highest leadership level.

Fourthly, there is an urgency gap, related to the
low level of importance accorded to human trafficking.
More must be done to mobilize international, regional
and national actors to bring the issue to the top of
our agendas.

Finally, there is a policy-implementation gap,
where policies at the national, regional, continental and
global level are not implemented. Let me again touch
on the situation in Libya. The slavery camps must
be dismantled without delay, the criminal networks
destroyed immediately and those behind the atrocious
crimes brought to justice. It is also our expectation that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees will establish a permanent presence in
Libya to assist the victims of trafficking. We are no
longer in a situation of failing to provide assistance to
persons in danger but are condemning those young men
and women to death if we fail to act.

In conclusion, let me say that our common humanity
is at stake. The expectation that we shall address the
scourge of human trafficking is immense, and time is
not on our side. We owe it to the victims ofthis tragedy
who have suffered for far too long.

