Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): The
urgency of the situation in Ukraine calls for action.
The conflict has resulted in more than 5,000 deaths in
10 months, including the victims of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17, for which those responsible must answer
for their acts, as called for in resolution 2166 (2014).
Given a security and humanitarian situation that
remains of great concern, our collective responsibility
as members of the Security Council is to do everything
possible to silence the guns and arrive at an agreement.
That is the aim of the courageous and determined
approach that the President of France and the German
Chancellor have taken in the past two weeks.

We have always believed that the path to peace
includes diplomacy. We have always said that the
solution to the Ukrainian conflict can only be a
political one. With today's resolution 2202 (2015), the
Council is putting all its weight and all its authority
to silence the guns and chart a course towards peace.
As its title indicates, the text concluded in Minsk on
12 February consists ofa set of sequential steps intended
to implement the Minsk protocol and memorandum,
which were agreed, respectively, on 5 and 19 September
2014. They provide in particular for what was and
continues to be the absolute priority: the establishment
of a ceasefire - which entered into force at midnight
on Saturday-Sunday. Full and sustained respect for the
ceasefire is the cornerstone for an exit from the crisis.

The speech made by President Poroshenko on
Saturday night, in which he gave orders to the whole of
the Ukrainian forces to cease fire, confirms Ukraine's
commitment to seeking peace. While the ceasefire
is universally respected, fighting unfortunately
continues, especially in Debaltseve. The fighting must
stop immediately, as the Council just demanded in its
statement to the press adopted an hour ago (SC/11784).

The Minsk package also calls for the retreat of the
warring parties and of heavy weapons, which will make
it possible to establish an expanded buffer zone - from
50 to 70 kilometres, in fact larger than the area called for
by the Minsk agreements of September 2014. All heavy

weapons must be withdrawn Within two weeks. This
element is an important step towards peace, and it must
take concrete form in reality. It is up to the signatory
parties to the agreements, including Russia, to give
substance to the commitments they have undertaken by
their actions. I repeat it here on behalf of France: only
actions will count.

By the resolution we have adopted today, the
Security Council has endorsed its commitments as did
the Heads of State under the Normandy format. Those
commitments have thus become obligations undertaken
by the signatories to the Minsk agreements before the
international community. These are commitments
whose scrupulous observance the Council will follow
with the utmost diligence. Along with its Council
partners, therefore, France calls upon all the parties to
lastingly and fully assume their responsibilities to move
forward along this demanding path towards peace.
