The Crisis Group is an organization dedicated to the prevention and resolution of deadly conflicts. Of late, we have been active in warning against risks of confrontation in the Gulf region and proposing practical ideas grounded in diplomatic engagement to avert them. We believe in the necessity of talking and listening to all sides. We therefore warmly welcome the Russian Federation's timely initiative in organizing this open debate. Let me start with a statement that should be as alarming as it should be uncontentious: the region-wide conflict that now looms largest across the globe is a conflict nobody apparently wants - a conflict triggered by tensions in the Gulf region. Conditions for a war that would affect not just the Gulf but the broader Middle East are arguably riper than at any time in recent memory and could break out in any of a number of places - in the Strait of Hormuz, Iraq or Yemen. It is far from inevitable; no party wants it and, so far, all parties, for the most part, have shown the ability to calibrate their actions to avoid an escalation. But even finely tuned actions can have unintentional repercussions. Several times over the past two years, most notably during the attacks on the Saudi Aramco facilities and the killing of General Soleimani, a regional conflict has seemed possible. On each occasion, the parties stepped back. Since those days of maximum threat, tensions have somewhat subsided. But we cannot be confident that all sides will always demonstrate such restraint. A single attack by rocket, drone or limpet mine could set off a military escalation between the United States and Iran and their respective regional allies and proxies that could prove impossible to contain. It should also not be contentious that this situation serves no party's interests - not those of countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council, such as the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia or the United Arab Emirates, who have seen commercial vessels and their territory targeted by attacks they and others strongly suspect originated from Iran; not those of the Islamic Republic of Iran, which has found itself the victim of a ferocious pressure campaign that has inflicted clear harm to its economy and its citizens' well-being, and which cost them one of their most important leaders due to a United States strike; not those of the United States, none of whose stated objectives in violating the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) has been fulfilled and whose personnel in Iraq are now under threat; not those of third parties who wish for a stable Gulf region for strategic or economic reasons; and perhaps, most important, not the interests of the region's citizens, Yemenis and Libyans, who have suffered most directly from intra-Gulf tensions, but also people across the Middle East whose aspirations for decent and peaceful lives have been stymied by rivalries and lack of cooperation among their Governments. The first question I wish to address in my remarks today is, why that is the case? The second is, what might be done about it? I suspect that all sides will take issue with parts of what I have to say, which I will take as having fulfilled my purpose. Many reasons lie behind the intense polarization that has infected the Gulf region and explain why its many rifts - between the United States and Iran, Iran and Saudi Arabia, as well as among the States of the Gulf Cooperation Council - intersect in dangerous and potentially explosive ways. I will focus on one: the highly divergent perspectives on the sources of tensions, depending on whether one is sitting in Washington, D.C., Tehran, Riyadh, Abu Dhabi, Doha or elsewhere. Saudi Arabia and its allies view in Iran's policies - in Syria, Iraq, Lebanon or Yemen - the ambitions of a would-be hegemon; they see the Islamic Republic as a growing threat whose regional aspirations need curbing lest it encircle them with its partners and proxies. Tehran, for its part, sees a region dominated by United States- backed Powers with superior military capabilities intent on isolating and weakening it; it also views Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates as being in collusion with the United States to economically coerce, and ultimately replace, its leadership. With a world view formed in the traumatizing crucible of the eight-year Iran-Iraq war and faced with more heavily armed adversaries, Iranian leaders subscribe to the country's strategic doctrine, which is based on its asymmetric military capabilities and support for regional allies, including armed non-State actors. Making matters worse has been the absence of any institutional mechanism for parties to air their grievances and, at least, try to narrow gaps. Indeed, there is at present no meaningful channel between the United States and Iran, no official one between Iran and Saudi Arabia and little real diplomacy beyond rhetorical jousting between rival Gulf Cooperation Council countries. Neither is there a single regional organization that embraces all Gulf actors that could serve as a framework for confidence-building and de-escalation measures. Whatever organizations exist tend to fuel tensions. And whatever the parties do tends to reinforce their foes' pre-existing perceptions. What Tehran presents as defensive policies designed to reduce the threats it faces, Riyadh and others perceive as acts of aggression. They inevitably prompt pushback by Iran's foes and, to that extent, the Islamic Republic's current approach is a formula for enduring regional instability. But, by the same token, efforts by Washington, Riyadh and others that focus exclusively on aggressively pushing back against Iran are likely to prompt the country's leadership to double down on its current approach. In particular, the maximum pressure campaign undertaken by the United States, with the support and encouragement of most of its Gulf partners, coupled with the almost unfettered supply of conventional weapons by Western Governments to those Gulf States, inevitably leads Iran to intensify use of its own asymmetric tools. So, what is to be done? Crisis Group is a firm believer in the power of diplomacy, and we see some examples of successful attempts at regional de-escalation. One such precedent was the Iran nuclear deal, or the JCPOA. I participated in those negotiations and so, admittedly, I am biased. I am convinced that the deal helped reduce tensions and could have paved the way for more intensive and broader diplomacy. For that reason, my organization regrets the United States decision to withdraw, and applauds European efforts to keep the JCPOA alive. But I am well aware that views among those assembled today vary, and I am not here to relitigate that question. The point is, whether one supports the JCPOA or not, it offers a few lessons. The negotiations succeeded not owing to mutual trust but because they were multilateral, because they combined mutual pressure with realistic goals and because the various sides recognized one another's core interests. It is with these considerations in mind that Crisis Group published a report last April entitled "The Middle East between Collective Security and Collective Breakdown", outlining steps that should be taken to reduce risks of war. Its core premise will be familiar to many: that the Gulf region needs to initiate a collective and inclusive security dialogue encompassing the six members of the Gulf Cooperation, Iran and Iraq, and aiming at diminishing tensions. Governments in the Gulf that are least involved in hostilities but could be most harmed if fighting erupts - I am thinking of Kuwait and Oman - could jointly seek to bring their more powerful and more directly involved neighbours - Iran, the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia - into such an informal mechanism. European and other relevant Governments could facilitate the process, helping pass some messages in the initial phase of contact and offering technical advice and quiet encouragement as the process develops. The first objective would simply be to open communication channels. The United Nations, too, could play an important role. Resolution 598 (1987), which ended the Iran-Iraq war, provides a mandate for the Secretary-General to convene a regional security dialogue to lay the groundwork for a security architecture tolerable to all sides. As we just heard from the Secretary-General, he is prepared to do so. At a minimum, the Security Council ought to encourage and endorse a Gulf- led process if it begins to take hold. Discussions within a Gulf security mechanism, inspired by the Helsinki process, could start by trying to reach agreement on shared principles governing inter-State relations such as non-interference - directly or via local proxy - and respect for each State's territorial integrity, and try to identify each side's motivations, core concerns and threat perceptions. They could then evolve towards concrete confidence-building measures. Initially, these could include modest steps: reducing inflammatory rhetoric; issuing unilateral statements in support of dialogue and joint statements outlining shared principles and interests; or opening direct communication channels, such as a de-confliction hotline among Gulf States and with outside actors whose military assets are deployed in the Gulf. The various sides could also address matters of shared concern, such as the cross-border adverse effects of climate change, deteriorating water quality, disaster preparedness, the spread of the coronavirus disease, maritime security and religious tourism and pilgrimages. The United Nations, through its multitude of technical agencies, could support such initiatives. If and when initial discussions start to yield results, they could be scaled up to focus on ways to de-escalate tensions through shared security mechanisms such as prior notification of troop movements and military exercises or allowing adversaries to send military experts to observe such manoeuvres. Eventually, Gulf parties could explore ways of fostering a durable cooperative regional security framework that includes all main stakeholders. There is much more that could and should be done, notably taking steps to resolve the myriad conflicts, from Syria to Libya to Yemen, that have been fuelled both by tensions between Saudi Arabia and Iran and by those involving the United Arab Emirates, Egypt, Turkey and Qatar, which have caused unspeakable human suffering and remain potential flashpoints for a broader conflagration. The bottom line is this: the main threat that the region faces today is not so much a war of choice but an inadvertent one resulting from miscalculation, misinterpretation or lack of timely communication. Key actors in the Gulf have refined the game of brinkmanship to the point of playing it right up to the edge. The result has been the fraying of the thread dividing war from no war. To generate the political will to act, the worst of times may offer the best opportunity, and conditions in the Gulf arguably have reached that point. An inclusive, collective regional security dialogue aimed at lessening tensions may have only a small chance of materializing and an even smaller chance of success. But under current circumstances, it would be irresponsible not to give it a try. I want to take this opportunity to make one final point. We strive to be an impartial conflict-resolution organization, and I hope that was discernible in the ideas that I put forward today. That is what our staff do: they try to understand all parties' perspectives, reflect them as best they can and propose pragmatic solutions. That is what our colleague Michael Kovrig was doing in his work on China's foreign policy. This is neither the time nor place to discuss his case. But I cannot conclude without appealing to the Chinese authorities, if they are listening, to understand the mission that he was pursuing, end his now almost two-year detention and allow him at long last to be reunited with his loved ones and continue his work towards a more peaceful world.
