Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank Mr. Annabi. From the information he has
provided and from the latest report of the International
Force, East Timor (INTERFET), we note with satisfaction
that the situation in East Timor has improved markedly. We
commend the International Force and all the participating
countries for the excellent job they are doing. In particular,
I would like to mention the work being done with such
dedication and professionalism by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello. His arrival in
the territory last November gave a great boost to the
expansion of UNTAET and to the planning of a true
peacekeeping operation.

As regards security, we are glad to see that at
present there are no significant threats to peace and that
during recent weeks there have been no significant
incidents. This is essential for the return of displaced
persons, for the reduction of the forces of INTERFET and
for the success of UNTAET in general.

We think it is very positive that, in the area of
border management, the Indonesian authorities and
INTERFET are maintaining cooperative relations on the
basis of the memorandum of technical understanding
signed on 22 November.

We are grateful to the Philippines and Australia for
having provided military staff for this operation.

We are concerned by the humanitarian situation, in
particular the serious problem of refugees in West Timor
and elsewhere in Indonesia who need to return to East
Timor. Over 110,000 have already done so, but much
remains to be done. In this regard, it is essential, through
INTERFET and the military component of UNTAET that
is to replace it, to ensure the safety of humanitarian
personnel. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees should also have access to all
refugee camps.

We are concerned about the apparent ongoing
intimidation of refugees by the militia to prevent their
return. However, the meeting of Mr. Gusmao with the
militia leaders would seem to indicate that the
intimidation will cease.
Finally, we wish to express our satisfaction with the
success of the meeting of donors held in Tokyo last week.
The high level of response, exceeding $500 million, is
clear manifestation of the international community's
support for East Timor.

