Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
country, the Republic of Benin, is pleased to see the
Federal Republic of Germany presiding over the
Security Council. My delegation noted with great
satisfaction the personal contribution of the Secretary-
General and of the many representatives of the
Governments of States members of the Council to the
open debate today.

This debate clearly touches on an extremely
sensitive subject in terms of the capacity of the United
Nations to fully and effectively shoulder its
responsibilities in the promotion of the ideals
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular in the area of international peace and
security and the protection of human rights.

I should like here to state that the Government of
Benin is very pleased with the ongoing commitment
and commendable dedication shown by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, and her team in terms of carrying out
their responsibilities with respect to the monitoring and
reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict. I
should like to commend in particular her bravery in
visiting dangerous conflict areas to obtain the release
of children recruited into and used in armed conflicts.

Benin would also like to encourage the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict to work with resolve in cooperation with the
United Nations agencies and international civil society
actors that are working to protect children and young
people in armed conflict.

Benin would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Qatar for its leadership in the context of
United Nations efforts to ensure the protection of the
right to education in emergency situations.

The adoption in 2010 by the General Assembly of
resolution 64/290 represented a significant
development in fighting international human rights
violations affecting children. It offers hope for the
effective achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals, in particular in the area of education. In that
resolution, the General Assembly unequivocally
condemned attacks deliberately targeting civilians in
armed conflict, including schoolchildren, students and
teachers, as well as attacks against civilian objects, in
violation of international law. It also declared that such
acts may constitute grave breaches of the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and, for States parties, war crimes
under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. The same is true of attacks against schools and
hospitals which should, during times of conflict, be
considered as safe havens to ensure their inviolability.

The initiative taken by the Security Council to
expand the mandate of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on children and armed conflict to include
attacks against schools and hospitals and protected
persons working there demonstrates that the Council is
addressing the concerns clearly expressed by the
General Assembly in resolution 64/290 and by the
Secretary-General in his latest report on children and
armed conflict (S/2011/250). We congratulate the
Council for having responded to the call by the
Secretary-General that it make greater efforts to ensure
that such facilities remain protected, in particular by
appealing to all parties to the conflict to respect those
essential institutions and their staff and to take all
possible measures to protect them and ensure that they
can function.

Guaranteeing humanitarian access remains a
crucial question. Benin, as the main negotiator of
resolution 1612 (2005) and having set up the
monitoring and reporting mechanism, welcomes the
expansion of its remit to encompass other atrocities
affecting children. Benin urges the Security Council to
11-41151
make full use of the instruments available to it so as to
ensure the respect of the rights of children caught up in
armed conflict or in humanitarian crises.

It is important to step up international
cooperation in order to guarantee access by children
and young people to the basic services that are key to
their well-being by establishing appropriate partnership
and assistance programmes at the global, national and
local levels. That is why Benin has been actively
involved in preparing for the United Nations High-
level Meeting on Youth, set to take place here in New
York in several days to consider the situation of young
people and children.

In conclusion, Benin is proud to be a sponsor of
the new resolution on children and armed conflict. It
supports the measures authorized by the resolution and,
over and above that, all efforts undertaken at various
levels to bring added pressure to bear on those who
remorselessly trample on the rights of children caught
up in armed conflict and in political or humanitarian
crises.

Benin reiterates its urgent appeal to the
international community to work with greater
determination to put an end to all conflicts in the
world, regardless of their intensity, to promote
reconciliation and peacebuilding in the countries
affected.

