Mr. Dacie (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian, English interpretation provided by the delegation): As
the representative of the Republic of Serbia, I am
persistently trying not to bring up this subject - and
only discuss the reporting period covered in the report
(S/2016/407) - but, sadly, Ms. Citaku consistently held
forth and delivered a political speech that had nothing
to do with the report on the last three-month period. I
am therefore forced to react.

Ms. Citaku's speech, which was distributed to
Council members, uses the words "the Republic of
Kosovo" in its heading, when in fact no such name
is used in the official communications at the United
Nations. I therefore truly hope that you, Mr. President,
are going to modify this item in your agenda because
Ms. Citaku has been invited to the Council under rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure, and not as the
representative of the so-called Republic of Kosovo,
which does not exist here at the United Nations. If that
were the case, if the Republic of Kosovo existed, why
have I been invited here? What does the Republic of
Kosovo have to do with the Republic of Serbia? I would
ask that you pay due attention to this breach of the rules
of procedure, Mr. President, as it has been a constant
irritant, about which we have shown great restraint
until now.

Ms. Citaku made a reference to genocide. Where is

the verdict where the events that occurred were defined
as genocide? I would again ask the President to pay due
attention when certain words are used. I would also like
to appeal to certain members of the Security Council
to take into consideration, when they are speaking of
genocide and other terms and phrases, that it does not
matter what our positions are; rather, what matters
is what the judicial rulings have to say and whether
something was determined on a legal basis. We are
not the ones who can make a judgment as to whether a
genocide had been committed or not. What is important
is whether a court issued a ruling on this.

Five or six years after the Second World War,
France and Germany created the European Coal and
Steel Community. Since 199, a very long period of time
has passed, yet Ms. Citaku spoke of fresh memories.
Should I remind you, Mr. President, of the Battle of
Kosovo in the fourteenth century? Should I remind you
of the fact that in the fourteenth century the Serbian
population was the majority? How can she speak of
genocide when it is her majority that has committed
a genocide? Some 200,000 Serbs were expelled from
Kosovo since 1999.

The Special Representative, Mr. Tanin, is present
here. I wish that he would dare say that 200,000 people
were expelled from Kosovo, and up until now only
1.9 per cent of them have permanently returned. Should
we overlook this fact?

Ms. Citaku mentioned massacres, genocides and so
forth. I would remind Ms. Citaku that there are courts
to decide such matters - The Hague Tribunal, and
because of the crimes committed by Kosovo, there is
a going to be a specialist court with its headquarters in
the Netherlands. I would ask her to stop hearking back
to the 1990s.

As has been mentioned here, we should not turn the
Security Council into a forum where we compete for
the award for best imaginative work. Ms. Citaku spoke
of everything but the topic at hand. Why did we meet
today? We were convened to discuss the real problems.
Yet Ms. Citaku has spoken of sports achievements,
when she should speak of the day-to-day problems
such as the fact that tear gas is being used in the
Kosovo Parliament, or the fact that Kosovo has turned
the Church of Christ the Saviour into a public toilet.
During their demonstrations, the Kosovars have been
abusing cultural landmarks such as the Visoki Decani
Monastery, whose walls were covered with graffiti
saying "ISIL and the caliphate are coming".

We have nothing against Kosovo. Its people should

live their lives, but Kosovo's representatives should not
be allowed to constantly speak of the Kosovo people's
freedom and the fact that they are now allowed to play
football. Now that they are "free", should they alone
be entitled to win on the soccer pitch? Throughout
history, the Serbs were the majority demographic in
Kosovo. But due to a Turkish invasion, followed by a
five-centuries-long occupation, the Serbian majority
was turned into a minority. Those who have committed
crimes should be brought to trial. Today the Pristina
appeals court upheld the acquittal of F atmir Limaj, who
had been accused of crimes committed against Serbs.

With regard to the Union of European Football
Associations (UEFA), I would say that it breached its
statute when it admitted Kosovo as a member even
though Kosovo is not a full-fledged Member of the
United Nations. Such admission is in direct breach of
the UEFA rules.

Members of the Security Council should consider
what is going to happen in future when some of their
countries find themselves in the same situation. I ask
the representatives of these large countries to treat
us with respect. I duly respect the United States and
other countries. But what has been said here does not
demonstrate that they respect us.

In the Security Council, in the presence of Serbia,
Member States were called upon to recognize the
independence of Kosovo, and the Council is saying
that only a minority of countries have not recognized
Kosovo's independence. But I would like to remind
the United States and the United Kingdom that neither
Angola, China, Spain, the Russian Federation Ukraine,
Uruguay nor Venezuela has recognized Kosovo. The
recognition of Kosovo by Egypt was the final act of its
former President, Mr. Morsi, but Egypt has not gone
any further in the operationalization ofthat recognition.
If seven member States have not recognized Kosovo's
independence, how can it be said that only a minority of
States have not recognized Kosovo? Should we add up
the population of all those seven countries? I think the
Council is not being fair and balanced in its treatment
of Serbia, which has been a very constructive partner in
the dialogue with Pristina.

I call upon all countries that recognize Kosovo
to reverse their decision, because this situation could
arise in future in any part of the world. And when they
speak of recognition, there is no mention of the Islamic
factor or European values. This is simply a case of
upholding international law and whether one country
can, without any consultation with the country of which
it is an integral part, secede and separate from it. If
the Council believes that should be the case, it should
codify it and include it in its resolutions and decisions.
As we are observing resolution 1244 (1999), we intend
to come here and be constructive.

Ms. Citaku is of Albanian descent. I am a Serb.
Kosovo is hers as much as it is mine. It belongs to all
of us who live there, or used to live there. I was born in
Kosovo, but no longer live there. But there are hundreds
of thousands of Serbs. What are we going to do with
the 200,000 Serbs who were expelled from Kosovo?
Do the great Powers think it nice to say that 200,000
people were expelled and only 2 per cent have realized
sustainable return? Kosovo is a free and democratic
State, but what are we going to do with those 200,000
people? When will they be able to return?

We cannot agree with the fact that, when it comes
to Serbia, certain international agreements are made,
sometimes unilateral steps are taken. We are not
in favour of unilateral moves, for when you do that
sometimes you win and sometimes you lose, as in the
case of UNESCO. I think we are all fed up with the
fact that we are constantly speaking and elaborating the
same topic. Let us resolve this issue. But no, Kosovo
thinks this topic has been resolved. If Ms. Citaku thinks
this issue has been resolved, then please first consult
Spain whether or not her Stabilization and Association
Agreement is the same. Well, it is not. Spain and other
countries asked that Kosovo not sign with the European
Commission under State status, but as a territory. That
is why I think this is still a pending issue.

Ms. Citaku spoke about everything, but failed to
mention security issues and everything else that was to
be the subject of this debate. For the next time, therefore,
we will have to prepare diligently for the meeting - who
did more to whom throughout history - if she thinks
this is the way to conduct these meetings.

Ms. Citaku is not Kosovar, she is Albanian. Serbs
and other minorities - all of us - have our sore spots
in history. But we should not constantly return to
history, but instead look to the future.

I was not the only one to sign the Brussels
Agreement; Mr. Thaci signed it with me. Is Ms. Citaku
going to sabotage the Agreement and constantly try to
talk about genocide, or is she willing to talk and work
towards establishing good relations? The fact that
Serbia is being constructive should not be viewed as
our weakness, but as us being open to discussion and
flexibility. They should not use this meeting to hearken
to the past. If they think someone committed genocide,
rape and other crimes, then please take them to court.

But do not abuse this venue to promote their country's
independence. Resolution 1244 (1999) is status-neutral.
I call upon all countries to uphold the legitimate
interests of Serbia, as we are upholding other countries'
legitimate interests.

I thank the Council once again. I asked to
speak here today because, every time we speak with
representatives of Western countries - the United
States, the United Kingdom, France and so on - we
always talk about de-escalating and reducing harsh
rhetoric. We always ultimately agree to do so, but then
we come here and are forced to listen to long speeches
that have nothing to do with the state of play on the
ground. If the Council wants us to fair and correct, we
will do so. But if it wants us to do as Kosovo does, we
will prepare ourselves to elaborate at the next meeting
about what has been done throughout history.

The Serbian tragedy lies in the fact that the Serbian
Orthodox council is in Kosovo holding a meeting.
Why? Because it is the headquarters of the Serbian
Orthodox Church and Patriarchate. It is because Serbia
was established in Kosovo. Please, do not force me to
speak about this. Ms. Citaku cannot speak about this,
because at the time they were not present in Kosovo.
The battle for Kosovo was fought between Turkey and
Serbia, in Kosovo. That does not mean that each and
every Security Council meeting should be devoted
to elaborating on all these topics. We should be very
pragmatic and efficient. Whether they want to reconcile
or not, they cannot achieve their goals without previous
agreement with Serbia.

