Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - the associated
countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, and Iceland and
Liechtenstein, European Free Trade Association
countries belonging to the European Economic Area,
align themselves with this statement.

Last month, the Security Council had the
opportunity to discuss the situation in Kosovo on the
basis of reports of the Secretary-General and of the
Security Council mission to the region. The European
Union commented on developments in Kosovo on that
occasion, and I shall therefore confine myself to
stressing elements that are of greatest importance to the
Union - elements, moreover, that Mr. Guehenno
highlighted in his excellent briefing.

I would like first of all to reaffirm the support of
the European Union for the efforts of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Hans Haekkerup, in
implementing resolution 1244 (1999). The work
carried out by the men and women of UNMIK has led
to concrete and positive results which should be
underlined.

The European Union welcomes the promulgation
of the Constitutional Framework for Provisional Self-
Government and the announcement of the date of
parliamentary elections. These are crucial steps
towards a democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo. But to
attain that goal it is essential for all communities to
participate in the elections and in the provisional
Kosovo institutions that will stem from it. The
elections offer all communities the opportunity to take
their fate in hand within the context of resolution 1244
(1999).

In that connection, we welcome the support of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia for the registration of
Kosovo Serb voters. We hope that the appointment of
Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Covic to coordinate
policy on Kosovo will contribute to those efforts, and
that the Belgrade Government will also be able to
persuade the Kosovo Serb community to participate in
the 17 November elections. We welcome the fact that
several political parties have already registered for the
election. We encourage the others, and particularly the
Serb parties, to follow their example.

The European Union is aware of the problems
still remaining in Kosovo, especially with regard to
security, missing persons and the return of refugees and
displaced persons. We welcome the measures and
initiatives already taken and encourage UNMIK and
other concerned actors to continue their efforts in those
areas.

The tension in Kosovo has abated somewhat over
the past month. But the risk of the situation
deteriorating should not be underestimated. It is to be
hoped that the recent security measures will lead to a
reduction in violence. Consolidation of Pillar I, "Police
and justice", should also open the way to an
improvement in public order. The Union supports the
adoption and enforcement of firm measures against
extremists and criminal organizations, and we
emphasize the worrying situation in northern Kosovo,
in particular in Mitrovica. We support the efforts of
UNMIK and of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to ensure
security and to restore confidence in this area.

For the European Union, the handover of Mr.
Milosevic to the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, at The Hague, is an important
development. It is necessary for the process of
reconciliation that the people of Kosovo and, more
generally, those of the entire region, realize that justice
will be done and that nobody is above the law.

Despite the fragile ceasefire, the situation in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia remains a
cause of concern. We remain convinced that the only
way to achieve a lasting settlement is through political
dialogue. The European Union welcomes the political
dialogue initiated on the basis of the framework
document. All the parties must now shoulder their
responsibilities. The Union will continue to offer its
assistance with a View to finding a peaceful and lasting
solution to the conflict. And, as members know, the
High Representative, Mr. Solana, is today in Skopje
along with the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization and the Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

The European Union will continue its efforts to
promote stability, democratic development and
prosperity in the region, in close cooperation with all
parties. Next month, the electoral process in Kosovo
will have reached the significant milestone of
registering political parties and voters. We hope to be
able, at the next meeting of the Security Council, to
express satisfaction that all went smoothly.

