The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/927, which contains a letter dated
26 November 2004 from the Permanent Representative
of the Netherlands concerning the establishment of a
trust fund in connection with the security arrangements
for the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI).

Members of the Council also have before them
the draft of a letter, which I, as President of the
Security Council, propose to send to the Secretary-
General, informing him that the Council specifically
endorses the creation of the trust fund envisioned in his
letter of 26 November 2004 to the Foreign Minister of
the Netherlands, annexed to the aforementioned letter
from the Permanent Representative of the Netherlands
and requesting him to establish such a fund without
delay and no later than 3 December.

In the absence of objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees that I should send the letter as
drafted to the Secretary-General.

It is so decided.

The letter will be issued as a document of the
Council under the symbol S/2004/929.

Let me just say that it is unclear whether the
Security Council will have a meeting this afternoon. If
it does not, this will be the last meeting of the United
States presidency, and I want to thank all members of
the Council for their excellent cooperation during what
I think has been a very, very eventful month, especially
because of the unusual nature of our meeting in
Nairobi. It really took a lot of mutual effort. My View
is that it was the United Nations and the Security
Council at its very best.

I would also like to express my appreciation for
the assistance of the Secretariat during this month,
especially in planning and executing the trip to
Nairobi, but also in everything else we have done this
month. I do express my appreciation.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.
