Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
African Union has made rapid strides in a very short
time. Indeed, looking back, it is difficult to believe that
it is such a recent creation. The African Union's Peace
and Security Council is far-reaching. It even recognizes
the principle - which no one outside Africa has
done - that an intervention in a territory may be
permissible if a Government is not protecting its own
citizens, or if the situation in that country affects
neighbouring countries; and that intervention, if
necessary, can be made against the wishes of the
country concerned. That is immensely far-reaching. It
is incumbent on the Council to give every support to
that acceptance of responsibility.

In the mission that went to West Africa in June,
we saw first-hand the contribution of the Economic
Community of West African States, a regional body
through which the African Union is making its
contribution. That is the role of the African Union
itself. It is increasingly helpful in promoting
cooperation for avoiding conflict across the continent.

In Darfur, we know how important it is to have
monitors on the ground. It is actually the African
Union that is doing the job for the Council. That
demand upon the African Union, it seems, will
increase, and we have to be ready to play our part in
helping it.

Carrying out the sort of operation that the African
Union is undertaking in Darfur is actually not easy;
quite the opposite - that is a British understatement -
because they are doing so without the capabilities,
without the means of communication and, especially,
without a real planning capability to actually mount an
operation. Look at the difficulty of what we expect of
them, and yet, that is what they are doing on the
ground.

Hence the significance today of a draft
presidential statement that recognizes the need to help
the African Union develop its capabilities - including,
I would hope, a rapid-reaction capability - and that
states that the Council should do everything possible to
strengthen practical cooperation with the African
Union.

The Council should do so for a number of
reasons. Because of the value of what the African
Union does. Because it is our responsibility for
international peace and security to help those that are
sharing and shouldering the burden with the Council.
Because of the actual African Union contribution; and
because it is especially necessary to demonstrate our
support when Africans are finding their own solutions
to African problems. All that, justified by the regional
cooperative arrangements set out in the Charter,
explains why the Council should be doing as much as
possible to support the African Union.

I completed a little count when I was asked to
make this intervention. The Security Council has
adopted 53 resolutions this year, 26 of which - or
49 per cent - bear directly on African issues. That is
an example of the extent of the shared interest between
the Council and the African Union; so, our cooperation
seems natural to me. I would hope that this cooperation
would become even wider and that it would become
even more obvious what the African Union and the
United Nations can do together.

I would also like to see the European Union
helping in this respect. I would like to see other entities
prepared to join in, because it has become fairly
obvious that the problems we all confront are just
about the same. It is the optic through which we
address the problem that may be different. But the
scope for cooperation, the fact that the African Union
in Darfur is being financed by the European Union, are
part of a collective responsibility and part of taking
that responsibility seriously.

The need to do that now and next year is even
greater. We have a high-level panel report on threats,
challenges and change being issued in two weeks' time.
Above all, next year, for the Millennium Development
Goals summit of the General Assembly, we have to
pull all these issues together. The fact is that if the
Millennium Development Goals are to be missed
anywhere, they will be missed in Africa. Asia and
China will actually contribute on the positive side to
many of the Goals, but the Goals will not be achieved
in Africa because of the problems that Africa faces.

My conclusion is that United Nations
responsibility to work with the African Union to
address African issues - as the Group of Eight will do
next year as a priority - is actually very substantial.
Hence the value of the Council's draft presidential
statement. I here pay tribute to our colleague from
Benin for what he has done to place the text of the
statement directly before the Council.

