Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I had not intended
to speak today in the Chamber, but I wanted to respond
to some of the things that we have just heard. I will
therefore take this opportunity to thank Staffan de
Mistura and his team for all their work, which is not
proving as fast or as productive as all of us would like,
but I think that we are very grateful to Staffan for all
his efforts. I was also interested to hear the Chinese
account of the work of their envoy.

We all know what needs to be done. We have had
very many discussions in this Chamber and in the
Consultations Room about Syria. I think that what we
struggle with is how to get it done and how to take the
next step, so I hope that when we leave the Chamber and
go next door into closed consultations, we can actually
have a proper discussion, without polemics, about what
it will take to get the constitutional committee up and
running; what are the concrete steps that need to be
taken and how we as the Council can best facilitate and
support that; and what it takes to get Idlib protected.
Lots of speakers today have referred to Idlib; I think
that we all know its importance, scale and significance.
I would urge those Astana progenitors to do what they
can to ensure that on the ground, people in Idlib are
safe and that we avert a humanitarian catastrophe there.
But I would like to have a proper discussion next door
about how the Council can actually support that.

I wanted to turn to the issue of the Syrian
Government engaging with the United Nations.
The Russian representative referred to backsliding
from a political settlement and entrenching Syrian
unwillingness for a negotiated solution. I think that
those two statements are very damning, but they are not
damning about us; they are damning about the Syrian
regime. We really need all those with influence on
Syria, including Russia and Iran, to encourage it to set
aside a military strategy as a way to resolve the conflict
and to engage with the United Nations across the board,
so that we can get back to Geneva and to a political
settlement. It is not we in the West who are stopping
that happening. The onus is truly on Syria to follow
the will of the Security Council and its resolutions and
to allow the United Nations to do its work to help the
people of Syria. Those are the main things I wanted to
say, but I would like to touch on three more points as
well, if I may.

We support what the Special Envoy said about
bringing women in, which I think is long overdue, and
he can count on the United Kingdom's full support for
that. I would also like to refer to Iran and the strikes
on Israel from Syrian territory, on which we are in
full agreement with the United States representative's
comments and have been very vocal about in public. I
also want to comment on the Russian representative's
remarks about the air strikes. I will not rehearse why
France, the United States and the United Kingdom
took the action we did, except to say that we did it to
avert a humanitarian catastrophe, and in doing so we
helped to protect civilians on the ground, deterred and
degraded Syria's ability to use chemical weapons and
thereby upheld the global prohibition on weapons of
mass destruction.

While I think those things remain very important,
they should not be used by anyone on the Council as
a reason to let the Syrian Government off the hook
where engaging with the United Nations on the political
process is concerned. The political process has been
essential since 2012, when the Geneva talks were
started. It has been increasingly essential since then,
and it continues to be essential now. I therefore hope
that when we go next door we can have a very detailed
discussion about how we as the Council can get back
to the spirit of Sweden and actually help Staffan de
Mistura and his team do something concrete to achieve
that, and have no more mud-slinging.

