Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
wish to join the other delegations that spoke before us,
Mr. President, in welcoming your presence and that of
the other ministers in the Council today. We also thank
your delegation for having organized this meeting and
for having prepared a draft presidential statement,
which we heartily support.

This debate offers us yet another opportunity to
review progress made in efforts to achieve and
consolidate peace and stability in West Africa, to
reaffirm the various proposals aimed at ridding the
region of conflict and to encourage further action by
the Governments of the region in cooperation with the
Security Council, other United Nations entities, the
donor community and other stakeholders, in order to
ensure that West Africa remains free of conflict and
embarks on a path towards sustainable economic
progress.

As in similar cases elsewhere, there is no
shortage of ideas on how to bring peace to conflict
areas or, in this case, on maintaining and consolidating
peace in post-conflict situations in West Africa. What
is lacking, in our opinion, is the will, the resolve and
the resources to effectively implement the many
recommendations already on the table.

In his several country reports, the Secretary-
General makes some very pertinent proposals. The
Security Council, for its part, has passed several
resolutions and issued presidential statements on
situations of armed conflict in West Africa. Since the
early 1990s, the Council has deployed peacekeeping
operations and established peacebuilding support
offices in countries that were in conflict, which
resulted in a return to normalcy in Guinea-Bissau,
Sierra Leone and Liberia and hopefully, in Cote
d'Ivoire soon. Further, the Council has established
sanctions regimes ranging from arms, diamonds,
timber and oil embargoes to targeted measures such as
travel bans and assets freezes in Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia
and Sierra Leone. However, such measures will be
successful only if they are closely monitored and
adequately supervised to ensure that there are no
breaches and if, in cases of non-compliance, remedial
action is seen to have been taken.

Besides the United Nations and the Security
Council, the West African countries themselves, in
collaboration with other countries and institutions,
have made a range of recommendations on ways to
prevent, manage and resolve conflicts and achieve and
consolidate peace in the region. Factors such as lack of
good governance, competition for resources,
obstruction of democratic processes, poor leadership,
corrupt practices, weak institutions and many others
have been identified as underlying causes and major
sources of social upheaval and civil strife. Many of
these practices are in clear breach of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Supplementary Protocol on Democracy and Good
Governance, which suggests that the Protocol needs to
be respected and observed.

We welcome the cooperation in peacekeeping
between the United Nations and ECOWAS. Indeed, we
pay tribute to the efforts that saw Charles Taylor
indicted before the Special Court for Sierra Leone.
That signifies the resolve of the international
community that impunity will not be tolerated. Further
action to deal with impunity should be taken.

We also pay tribute to the work of the United
Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) on its
increased subregional cooperation, particularly in
preventing illegal cross-border activities.

To conclude, my delegation would like to
emphasize the following points.

First, at the regional level, the West African
countries must strive to strengthen their institutions of
governance and promote good governance,
transparency and accountability in the management of
28

natural resources. They must fight corruption and
impunity, observe the rule of law, reform the security
and judicial sectors, revamp their economies to
alleviate poverty and create employment and work with
civil society to educate their populations regarding
their civic and democratic rights. We encourage them
to ensure that such measures are in place.

Secondly, the African Union and its Peace and
Security Council, the New Partnership for Africa's
Development and ECOWAS must all play their part
effectively and work together to forge closer
collaboration with countries in conflict and in post-
conflict situations in West Africa.

Thirdly, the international community, particularly
development partners and the international financial
institutions, should continue to provide and should
increase financial support to those countries that are
recovering from war in West Africa, with a View to
preventing the recurrence of conflict.

Fourthly, we encourage countries to develop a
relationship based on partnership, rather than on
dependency, with their former colonies in West Africa
in the interest of achieving, maintaining and
consolidating peace and stability.

Finally, we call upon the United Nations, the
Security Council and the entire United Nations family,
including the Peacebuilding Commission, to enhance
their efforts and to work closely with the subregion to
increase the momentum in bringing peace to Cote
d'Ivoire and to ensure that the investment made in
post-conflict countries in West Africa is not lost to
chance.

