Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). I would like to start
by expressing the Movement's appreciation for the
briefing given today by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

The Non-Aligned Movement believes that the
international community needs to work collectively
and expeditiously in order to uphold its long-standing
commitment to establishing an independent and viable
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, by
comprehensively and successfully addressing the six
core final status issues.

It is regrettable that all serious and credible
efforts exerted by international and regional parties,
including the Quartet, to ensure the continuity of direct
negotiations on the Palestinian track have failed. This
is due to the fact that Israel, the occupying Power,
continues to pursue its illegal settlement activities,
along with many other policies and practices that have
undermined all efforts to resume and advance the peace
negotiations to attain the two-State solution on the
basis of the 1967 borders.

The demolition by Israeli bulldozers of the historic
Shepherd Hotel in the Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood of
occupied East Jerusalem on 9 January, carried out in
order to build a new settlement of 20 units in the heart
of the city, is yet another clear sign of Israel's
persistence in continuing its settlement policies, which
endanger the peace process.

At the same time, the international community
has continued to witness the issuing of additional
home-demolition orders in occupied East Jerusalem,
the establishment of thousands of settlement units at an
unprecedented pace since Israel failed to renew the so-
called unilateral freeze on settlement activities at the
end of September 2010, and the revocation of
residency rights of yet more Palestinian Jerusalemites,
including elected Palestinian Legislative Council
representatives. These are clear signs of Israel's
continuation of its unlawful attempts to alter the
geographic and demographic composition of the
occupied Palestinian territory, in particular East
Jerusalem, which remains and will continue to remain
rejected and unrecognized by the international
community.

It is abundantly clear that the statements of
condemnation by the international community have not
deterred Israel from its blatant defiance of international
legitimacy. The Non-Aligned Movement therefore
reiterates its call on the Security Council to be resolute
in demanding that Israel exercise the necessary
political will to achieve peace, including by respecting
all terms of reference of the peace process and abiding
by its legal obligations under the Fourth Geneva
Convention, relevant United Nations resolutions, the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Road Map. Israel must completely freeze all
settlement activities and fully respect the international
consensus on that issue, including the calls from NAM,
the United Nations, the European Union, the Quartet
and almost all international and regional bodies and
actors.

The Non-Aligned Movement also strongly
condemns the continued imprisonment of nearly
10,000 Palestinians in Israeli jails and other detention
facilities, where ill-treatment and torture are widely
used. The Movement commends international efforts to
shed light on that issue, including through the
convening by the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People of the
upcoming United Nations International Meeting on the
Question of Palestine, to be held on 7 and 8 February
in Cairo on the specific theme "The urgency of
addressing the plight of Palestinian political prisoners
in Israeli prisons and detention facilities". It is the
conviction of the members of the Movement that those
prisoners, who include children and women, should be
immediately released and that proper international
inspections of their current condition should be a
priority for the Security Council, human rights organs
and the international community at large.

The situation in the Gaza Strip also remains
among the Non-Aligned Movement's top priorities.
The Movement reiterates that the unacceptable and
unsustainable situation of Gaza has to come to an end.
This unresolved crisis continues to have serious
repercussions on the universal efforts to promote peace
and continues to inflict deep suffering on the
Palestinian civilian population in Gaza. The Non-
Aligned Movement emphasizes the need to compel
Israel to lift fully its illegal blockade, in accordance
with its obligations under international law,
international humanitarian law, human rights laws,
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009), General
Assembly resolution ES-10/18 and other relevant
United Nations resolutions.

Furthermore, the Movement emphasizes the
urgent need for the reconstruction of Gaza and calls on
Israel to alleviate the suffering of the Palestinian
people by opening all of its crossing points with Gaza,
allowing the import of essential reconstruction
materials, including those necessary for the long-
overdue reconstruction of United Nations facilities and
schools of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), and to allow the free and unconditional
movement of people and goods. We reiterate the
importance of ending the blockade of Gaza and stress
the need to empower UNRWA with all necessary
financial and human support to undertake its mission
effectively.

The Non-Aligned Movement stresses that serious
and genuine negotiations can be conducted only when
Israel completely freezes its illegal settlement activities
in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967,
including East Jerusalem. Israel's continuous
expansion of settlement activities constitutes a serious
violation of all its international obligations and
destroys the mutual trust and confidence critical to
final status negotiations. The Non-Aligned Movement
reiterates its demand that Israel immediately cease all
settlement activities and stop all actions that may
prejudge the outcome of the final status negotiations.

There is unanimous conviction that it is
imperative that Israel respect its obligations if direct
negotiations are to be resumed towards achieving the
two-State solution on the basis of resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2009) and
1850 (2008); the Madrid terms of reference, including
the principle of land for peace; the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Road Map. The international
community must exert all efforts needed in order to
stop all settlement activities immediately and start final
status negotiations to establish an independent and
viable Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its
capital.

The massive number of Non-Aligned Movement
sponsors of the draft resolution officially submitted by
Lebanon to the Security Council calling for the
immediate cessation of all settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory, as outlined in the letter
dated 18 January 2011 addressed by the Chair of the
Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement to
the President of the Security Council, is a clear
reflection of the international support for the draft
resolution and for the positive effect of its adoption by
the Security Council in advancing the cause of peace in
the Middle East. The Non-Aligned Movement therefore
hopes that the Security Council will unanimously adopt
this draft resolution soon.

Turning now to Lebanon, NAM. condemns
Israel's ongoing violations of Lebanese sovereignty
and the recurrence of serious breaches to resolution
1701 (2006). The Movement calls on the concerned
parties to fully implement resolution 1701 (2006) in
order to end the current fragility and avoid the
recurrence of hostilities.

Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken or that will be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, as
well as the Israeli measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, are null, void and have no legal
effect. The Non-Aligned Movement demands that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).

In my national capacity, let me express Egypt's
since appreciation for the expressions of support to the
countries of the Middle East and the generous call we
heard today for the provision of help to countries in our
region in their efforts to combat terrorism. Terrorism is
the correct characterization of the deplorable incidents
that recently struck our country and others in the
region.

However, I would like to stress here that such
terrorist attacks are not limited only to the Middle East
and do not distinguish between majorities and
minorities; they are directed against the entire unity
and fabric of the societies they target, including in my
country. Therefore, while we appreciate the positive
remarks made at the time about the rich cultural and
human nature of civilization in the Middle East, our
region totally rejects any characterization of these
latest incidents as attacks against minorities, as Arab
societies are, on the whole, based on the values of
unity, coexistence and tolerance, and prize the diversity
of our societies to achieve a better future for our
peoples. This is the spirit of the resolution adopted
today in the League of Arab States at the summit level.

