Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We believe firmly that the crimes of the
terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) should not go unpunished, regardless of where
they are committed. We welcome the successes of the
Iraqi armed forces in their fight against ISIL and in
restoring their country's sovereignty. We are ready to
continue supporting the efforts of the Iraqi leadership
on both the political and practical fronts.

The threat of ISIL should be eradicated wherever

its terrorists wreak havoc, and we must act as a united
front in doing so. Resolution 2379 (2017), which we just
adopted, notes the global nature of that threat and the
unity of Security Council members in combating it. But
our efforts will succeed only on a solid foundation of
international law that does not disregard the sovereignty
of States that have been victim to terrorist attacks but
rather cooperates with them. The Russian aerospace
forces' operation in Syria is based on such principles,
which is key to their effectiveness. We would like to
emphasize once again the importance of strengthening
States' coordination and cooperation in the effort to
destroy ISIL, Jabhat Al-Nusra and terrorist groups
linked to them, and without any appearance of double
standards, including in the implementation of justice.

As we understand it, today's resolution, which
provides for the creation of a team to collect, preserve
and store evidence of crimes committed by ISIL
terrorists in Iraq, was discussed in detail with the
country's authorities, and we commend that approach.
Regrettably, that has not always been the case, as when,
for example, the initiators of an illegitimate General
Assembly resolution on a similar structure in Syria did
not even consider the necessity ofconsulting Damascus.
We once again urge the Secretary-General and Member
States to refrain from supporting the so-called
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, which is a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations.

In the current circumstances, which include
putting military pressure on ISIL, developing national
criminal justice mechanisms based on universally
recognized standards is a priority. Resolution 2379
(2017) demands that we ensure that there is not the
smallest possibility that terrorists can avoid facing
justice. It is important that all of their crimes, whatever
category they fall into - including first and foremost
terrorists' own acts - be punished with no possibility
for impunity and in accordance with the seriousness
of the crime. However, the primary responsibility
for bringing terrorists to justice still belongs to the
Governments of the States that are affected by such
evil acts. In our view, today's resolution in no way
undermines that tenet and creates no new precedents.
We are considering it in a context of criminal rather
than international humanitarian law. We welcome
the Government of Iraq's intention to strengthen its
national criminal justice system and hope that the team
set up by the Council will contribute to that endeavour,
while acting impartially, transparently and fully in
keeping with international law, including the Charter
of the United Nations.

