Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): First of all, I would like
to thank today's briefers for their contributions to our
debate. I am also grateful to you, Mr. President, for
focusing our deliberations on this particular subject. The
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) is active in
various fields, and today we are discussing cooperation
between our two organizations in countering extremist
ideology, which has become a topical issue for Member
States of both our organizations.

Preventing violent extremism has become one ofthe
most pressing priorities for the international community.
This evil and its gravest form - terrorism - threaten
our core values and principles, including democracy,
human rights, the rule of law, equal opportunities and
freedom. The threat now has a global character, and
therefore requires the full consolidation of the efforts
of all international actors and the utilization of their
comparative advantages. Therefore, cooperation
between the United Nations and OIC in countering
terrorist and violent extremist ideologies advocated by
such terrorist entities as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, Al-Qaida and their affiliates has never been
more important.

Why is that so important? It is because terrorism
does not begin with guns and bombs, but words. Those
who want to plant hatred and intolerance in people's
minds should be stopped before the seeds of evil sprout
and their disciples turn into merciless tools for killing.
Our efforts should not be limited to a media-driven
campaign. What we need is a comprehensive approach
with long-term actions to address violent extremism
and its root causes, based on the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the Secretary-
General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
Such a strategy should involve not only countering
extremist ideology disseminated through the media
and the Internet, but also developing persuasive
context-specific counternarratives and messages to
neutralize terrorists' influence on persons belonging
to the target audience, while eliminating terrorist focal
points of radicalization. While addressing the need to
intensify our common work on preventing the spread
of malevolent ideologies, we should explore ways to
engage young people, who are the most vulnerable to
violent extremist narratives.

The United Nations and OIC can benefit from
developing joint projects aimed at strengthening our
collective capacity to effectively respond to the spread
of such phenomena. The focus should be placed on
several priority areas.

First, we should focus on consolidating international
political will and expertise to reveal drivers of violent
extremism, including gross human rights violations,
corrupt institutions and poor governance, as emphasized
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

Secondly, in order to reduce the appeal of and
support for terrorist groups, our joint efforts should
combine counter and prevention measures that address
shortcomings in governance and promote social
development, dialogue, respect for the rule of law and
human rights.

Thirdly, the United Nations and OIC can jointly
foster a global dialogue for the promotion of tolerance
and peace, as well as for a better understanding across
societies and cultures, including in the framework of
the Alliance of Civilizations.

F ourthly, relevant international assistance should be
provided to Members States in adopting more effective
policies and approaches to prevent and counter the spread
of violent extremist ideology, inter alia, by developing
robust national counter-narrative campaigns.

Finally, a more active role should be given to
empowering locally credible voices that can help prevent
and reverse the spread of violent extremist ideology
among the population. That is where OIC's expertise in
engaging civil society, and in particular representatives
of local communities and religious leaders, as well
as women and youth, could play crucial role. That
relates in particular to raising public awareness by
revealing the truth about would-be jihadis in order
to delegitimize their activities, thereby enhancing
resistance against them. The victims of terrorism
should also play an important role in that kind of
comprehensive preventive campaign. The achievement
of those objectives will require the consolidation of all
existing efforts and strengthening cooperation among
all stakeholders, including Governments, civil society
and the private sector. Ukraine is fully committed to
this joint endeavor and is ready to contribute its share,
including through the observer status that we hope OIC
will grant us.

