Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow me
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I also
wish to express appreciation to the Permanent
Representative of Poland for his leadership of the Council
in March.

Security Council consideration of the situation in
Afghanistan is a welcome indication of the decision by
the international community to focus further on this most
protracted and tragic conflict. This is all the more crucial
at this time because military operations and further
bloodshed are likely to intensify in the spring. The
Islamic Republic of Iran hopes that the outcome of the
deliberations of the issue in the Security Council will
send a strong message to all warring parties in
Afghanistan, stating in no uncertain terms that enough is
enough and demanding that all Afghan parties cease
immediately all armed hostilities, abandon and renounce
the use of force and take advantage of the preparedness

 

of the United Nations, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC), regional States and other interested
organizations and States to help them sort out their
differences and engage in a political dialogue aimed at
achieving national reconciliation and a durable political
settlement of the conflict and establishing a broad-based
and fully representative government.

The people of this war-ravaged country have suffered
much for nearly 18 long years now. They have been
subjected to horrors and indignities that are not fully
comprehensible to the outside world. The Afghan people
have been condemned to a life of misery, in which they are
engaged in illicit traffic in arms and narcotics, and even in
selling the bones and remains of their dead simply in order
to support their families.

Such reflection on the grim and abhorrent reality in
Afghanistan is by no means intended to be soft on or find
justification for criminals and illicit traffickers in arms and
narcotics, particularly those Afghan factions that reportedly
organize and promote such illegal activities in order to
finance their military operations. In fact, such illicit traffic
in arms, and particularly in narcotic drugs, is a source of
grave concern in Iran. It has greatly burdened the Islamic
Republic of Iran in terms of both the manpower and the
financial resources it devotes to combating drug traffic at
its borders.

My intention, in reflecting on the human tragedy in
Afghanistan, is to draw attention to the fact that in the final
analysis it is not only the legal but also the moral
responsibility of the international community to address this
tragic situation in an effective manner.

As a neighbour of Afghanistan that has been directly
and drastically affected by developments there and has
shared with the Afghan people their agonizing experience
and gone out of its way to provide humanitarian assistance
to them, we strongly believe that the international
community must use effectively both the carrot and the
stick at its disposal in Afghanistan. While the Security
Council should seek ways and means of seeing to it that its
resolutions are implemented, the provision of humanitarian
aid and preparatory work for the reconstruction of
Afghanistan, and the incentives they offer for progress
towards a political settlement, should be explored at the
same time. Under such circumstances, there certainly is a
greater chance of success for the efforts of the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan, the Organization
of the Islamic Conference, regional States and other
interested organizations and States to help bring this
conflict to an end.

Owing to the tribal character of Afghanistan and
other factors, including the socialization of poverty and
violence over a long period of time, the political
resolution of the Afghan conflict requires a
comprehensive approach whereby the views of all parties
and all segments of Afghan society are taken into
account. To cite the report of the Secretary-General,

"No one should imagine that a military victory
by one party over the others will resolve the
Afghan problem in the long term."
(5/1997/240, para. 23)

In our view, coordination and cooperation on the
part of the regional States which are the most directly
affected by the situation in Afghanistan and other
interested States with the United Nations Special Mission
to Afghanistan is crucial to the international effort to find
a lasting political settlement in that country. We welcome
the decision of the Secretary-General to hold another
meeting on Afghanistan of the interested States and
organizations in order to coordinate regional and
international efforts aimed at achieving national
reconciliation in that country.

The United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan
should be supported and should be encouraged to further
extend its contacts with all factions and groups in
Afghanistan and with its neighbours. The efforts of the
Special Mission to Afghanistan, headed by Mr. Norbert
Holl, and of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
to bring about the restoration of peace, normalcy and
national reconciliation are to be commended. These
efforts should continue with even greater vigour, resolve
and impartiality in order to persuade all Afghan political
factions and ethnic groups to denounce the logic and the
use of force and to engage in a bona fide dialogue aimed
at establishing a broad-based government of national
unity.

In this connection, as the Islamic Republic of Iran
was gravely concerned about the repercussions of the
recent escalating developments in Afghanistan on the
peace and stability of the region and on the Afghan
reconciliation process, it convened an intra-Afghan
meeting at Tehran on 25 and 26 January this year. In
addition to Afghan groups, the Head of the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan and
representatives of Pakistan, Turkey and Turkmenistan

 

participated in the meeting. The Tehran meeting adopted a
declaration that urged all Afghan parties to abandon
hostilities in favour of constructive dialogue towards a
political settlement.

In our view, a set of principles should guide all
international, regional and other efforts aimed at achieving
a just and lasting peace in Afghanistan. Such a list could
include the following elements: respect for the sovereignty,
political independence, territorial integrity and national
unity of Afghanistan; the rejection of any military solution
to the Afghan problem; the rejection of foreign intervention
in the internal affairs of Afghanistan; refrainment from
providing weapons, military personnel and advice to any
and all warring factions in Afghanistan; respect for the
fundamental rights and freedoms of all Afghan people,
particularly the rights of women and girls; the need for a
cessation of hostilities and for the beginning of national
reconciliation through a process of dialogue in which all
political and ethnic groups in Afghanistan will participate.

Bearing these principles in mind, the international
community should redouble its efforts to begin the political
process with a View to helping the Afghan people establish
a broad-based government so as to halt further violence and
bloodshed and ensure the durability and fairness of the
solution. In this context, the idea of the demilitarization of
Kabul as an important first step merits special attention.
Needless to say, this requires careful planning and the
negotiation of interim administrative measures to ensure
security and public order.

The Islamic Republic of Iran is determined, within the
framework of regional and international efforts and in
cooperation and coordination with the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan, to continue to seek to
impress upon all Afghan factions and ethnic groups the
need to halt the vicious cycle of violence and the indignities
the Afghan people have long been subjected to, and to
resolve their differences by peaceful means through a
process of political dialogue in which all Afghan factions
and ethnic groups are represented.

