Mr. Daeic' (Serbia)(spoke in Serbian; intepretation provided by the delegation): Mr. President, you have
noted the very constructive statements made here today.
Speaking with you and representatives of other Western
countries just before the meeting, I accepted your
suggestion about adopting a constructive approach to
this debate, but I failed to detected such constructiveness
in the statement made by the representative of the
Interim Administration in Pristina. On the contrary,
I noted an aggressive attitude towards Serbia, threats
and characterizations of our efforts as being of a racist
nature and belittling of the Council.

I do not know if members have noticed that the
representatives of Pristina to the Council have always
been at the ambassadorial level. I note, however, that
Ms. Citaku is not Kosovo's Ambassador or head of its
mission to the United Nations. Kosovo has no mission
to the United Nations because it is not a Member of
the United Nations. Every country is free to recognize
Kosovo and engage in bilateral relations with it, but it is
quite clear how the Organization, the Security Council
and General Assembly should decide on Kosovo's
membership.

I would like to pose a question to countries that
unilaterally recognize the independence of Kosovo. If
they recognized the secession of just one part of their
country, would they not face a challenge similar to ours?
It is their bilateral decision to make, but I would like to
ask them not to insult Serbia or its territorial integrity.
Each country has its own dignity. I have repeatedly
warned about that. Let each country do what it will, but
a decision on the independence of Kosovo has not been
reached here. The Council adopted resolution 1244
(1999). When that is changed, Serbia will reconsider
its position.

Serbia did not carry out racist policies against
Kosovo. How can it be racist if we are speaking out
against the number of monasteries and churches that
have been destroyed, such as the Decani Monastery
that was built in the fourteenth century and is under
UNESCO protection and which has been defaced with
graffiti by the Islamic State, a group we are all trying to
combat together? What kind of racist policy is that? The
entire world is calling for a fight against Islamophobia.
I am calling for a fight against Christianophobia.

We did not speak against Kosovo. We are talking
about the fact that this topic was not discussed within
the context of the Brussels dialogue. Concerning their
statement that they would not talk with Serbia about their
admission into international organizations - Ms. Citaku
does not know this because she has spent a great
deal of time in the United States - I would note that
Mr. Thaci and I signed the Brussels agreement. It was
also in Brussels that Serbia allowed Kosovo to obtain
an international dialing code. Why did they ask for
Serbia's agreement on this if they did not want to
discuss it? The International Telecommunication Union
would never have given Kosovo a special dialing code
had I not written to them and to the Austrian Minister
for Foreign Affairs to ask for it. That is the result of the
agreement reached in Brussels.

Kosovo did not want to reach agreement with us
concerning UNESCO because it was convinced that
it would be admitted and would obtain membership
therein, because it already had an idea of how many
countries would support it. Now it is making reference
to certain pressures. The Organization of Islamic
Cooperation exerted pressure on all its members to vote
in favour of or to abstain, and many international Powers
brought pressure to bear to support it in UNESCO, but
not everything can be done by force.
There should be a dialogue. Agreement should be
reached through dialogue; that is what we want. Kosovo
signed the Stabilization and Association Agreement
not as a State but as a territory. The representative of
Spain is here; let him tell us how Spain gave consent for
the European Commission to sign that agreement. All
members of the European Union here know this full
well, so they should not behave as if it were not true.
Kosovo believes that it is an independent country, but
in the United Nations it is not.

We will continue to participate in these high-
level meetings. Ms. Citaku did not say a word about
the agenda item. That is why the Brussels agreement
was suspended. How is it possible that the Brussels
agreement was suspended? Which provision made
this possible? That was not envisaged anywhere; it is
impossible to do that.

Secondly, where are the returnees in Kosovo? Of
those who left after 1999, 1.5 per cent have returned.
What is happening with them? Thirdly, why has tear gas
become the main means of winning the political fight
in Kosovo? Yes, there was tear gas in the Assembly.
Fourthly, the special court was established because
of the suspicion that there was trafficking in human
organs, those of the Serbian people in Kosovo. Please
do not tell me about the crimes committed by some
other side. We agreed that there should be peace.

On our part, we are absolutely open to dialogue.
I ask only that the process of dialogue not be abused.
We want dialogue not because of the issue of Kosovo
becoming an independent State; we want dialogue in
order to find a permanent solution to the problem. That
is why I am asking Ms. Citaku to choose her words
carefully, because if she thinks that Serbia or the
Security Council is scared by the possibility that she
will not attend Security Council meetings any more,
she lives in an entirely different world. Everyone who
loses is entitled to be angry, but please use different
kinds of arguments, if they exist.

