Mr. Lupan (Republic of Moldova): I shall read out
an abridged version of my statement in order to save
time, as you have requested, Mr. President. The full
version has been distributed.

As has been mentioned in Security Council and in
the Secretary-General's 2015 report (S/2015/682), these
are difficult times to talk about conflict prevention,
with conflicts and lawlessness persisting in various
parts of the world, including Eastern Europe.

My country is observing those trends with distress
because, on 2 March, we will commemorate 25 years
since the beginning of the armed conflict in the eastern
regions of the Republic of Moldova. There were no
early warning mechanisms in the Republic of Moldova
in 1992. The support of the international community
might have proved crucial at that time. Hence, in line
with resolution 2171 (2014), we believe that sound
early-warning mechanisms might need to receive
greater consideration in the future as actual first steps
of conflict prevention. Moreover, the role of the media
in this context merits a separate discussion in the
Security Council.

For 25 years, the Republic of Moldova, with the
support of its external partners, has been promoting
a resolution to the Transnistrian conflict, being
determined to reach a peaceful and sustainable result.
Moldovan authorities continue to strive to prevent any
escalation of the conflict. However, in 2016 we saw
for the first time military exercises conducted by the
separatists, together with the military forces ofa United
Nations State Member. Such an experience proves
that external interference is often not a stabilizing
factor. Foreign military forces cannot enter Moldovan
territory unless mandated by the United Nations or its
organizations under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

The Republic of Moldova's efforts should focus
instead on building bridges between communities
and establishing a favourable environment for a
peaceful solution, on the basis of the United Nations
principles of respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity. The same applies to other conflicts as
well. Therefore, our firm belief is that the existing
peacekeeping mechanism in our case should be
adjusted to the current realities and transformed into
a compact, multinational civilian mission. Such a step
would support two important conflict prevention and
resolution activities from a United Nations perspective:
an increased role for both regional organizations and
for confidence-building measures. In the case of the
Republic of Moldova therefore, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) could
provide the international legitimacy, impartiality and
a tailor-made mandate that, in addition to monitoring
and verification, could include activities related to
confidence-building and public order.

In that connection, and with the support of the
2016 German OSCE chairmanship, a substantive
meeting took place in Bavaria allowing for progress
in confidence-building measures that focus on the
development side of conflict resolution and are
implemented with the support of the United Nations.
We therefore take this opportunity to suggest that the
application of such confidence-building measures at the
grass-roots level has great potential in future conflict
prevention activities of the United Nations, particularly
with a focus on development.

While recalling resolution 2171 (2014), the Republic
of Moldova supports the idea that conflicts could be
prevented through the inclusion of the Sustainable
Development Goals philosophy in such processes.
What we would like to see is not only the right wording
of such resolutions, but also their implementation. We
support the new Secretary- General in his determination
to act accordingly.

Finally, the small States of the United Nations
follow the Security Council's successes and failures
with regard to international law, and many past and
current conflicts are a clear signal of the need for
Security Council reform and for respect for United
Nations principles of international law to which we all
have subscribed. That is an element that can improve
conflict prevention governance at the United Nations
and can strengthen the mediation, peacebuilding and
resolution components of the United Nations.

