Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): Allow me at the outset,
Sir, warmly to welcome you and to express my
delegation's deep appreciation for the timely manner in
which you arranged this open debate. My country has
always been very sensitive to the fate of all those who
fall victim to circumstances beyond their control and have
to rely on others' help.

Civilian populations are the main victims, and
frequently the main targets, of contemporary warfare. In
the face of the continuing deterioration of the
humanitarian situation of people suffering from the
atrocities of war and conflict, the Security Council, along
with other competent bodies and organizations, will have
to do its best to cope with the ensuing challenges. In this
connection, we believe it necessary to stress that the
Security Council, today and in future, should focus on
humanitarian emergencies that result from situations
falling within its mandate or on those humanitarian
developments that, if not dealt with appropriately, could
lead to the actual emergence of such situations.

Let me make one more observation before
addressing the issue as inscribed on the agenda. In the
opinion of my delegation, greater use should be made of
preventive diplomacy in order to reduce the need for or
to avoid more complicated and more expensive

 

undertakings with regard to humanitarian assistance. We
believe that ways of improving the preventive capability of
the international community are far from having been
sufficiently explored. We see, for instance, a greater role
for regional organizations in these endeavours. My
delegation also believes that a further refinement of the
early-warning system already operational in the Secretariat
would be helpful in this regard.

The best way to contain and eventually eliminate
humanitarian emergencies is to promote political solutions
to their underlying causes. Humanitarian assistance,
however important and indispensable, deals with the
symptoms, not the causes, of existing crises or conflicts.
With crises or conflicts that assume international
proportions, it is important to find ways and means to make
the parties concerned speak to each other, negotiate and
reach an agreement. We are in favour of the Security
Council's establishment, at a very early stage, of contacts
with the countries of a region and the regional organizations
concerned in order to discuss the situation and to look into
the possibilities of a coordinated approach to the issue at
hand. The humanitarian situation, current and prospective,
should figure prominently on the agenda of such
discussions. We think that the Security Council will need
to pay greater attention to the humanitarian aspects of
conflict situations. We would welcome, for instance,
briefings by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the Department
of Humanitarian Affairs at various phases of the Council's
deliberations, including the initial phases. The recent
briefing by United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mrs. Sadako Ogata, is an excellent example of
the usefulness of such undertakings. Apart from informing
the Council on the current situation in the area of conflict,
Mrs. Ogata significantly enhanced Council members'
knowledge of very complicated interrelations between
different conflict dimensions.

The question of whether, when and how to use force
to protect refugees and other civilian populations and to
secure the safe delivery of humanitarian assistance is of an
indisputable importance. It has been discussed quite
frequently by the Council itself, was on the agenda of a
number of previous annual sessions of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, and is under
consideration by the Informal Open-ended Working Group
of General Assembly on an Agenda for Peace. The Security
Council has recently authorized two military operations,
both undertaken by groups of interested countries, both
designed to assist in the distribution of humanitarian relief
to those in need, and both bound to operate in hostile, or at
least unfriendly, environments. The first of these
operations, in Zaire, was called off before it actually
started. Another one, in Albania, is under way. To
complete the picture one has to recall the idea of creating
the force for humanitarian intervention in Burundi
contained in a report of the Secretary-General. Whether
the action of interested countries can, as some assume, be
a panacea for all humanitarian needs remains to be seen.
We believe that the Security Council should continue the
discussion it has initiated today in order to better define
modalities for authorizing such operations. The United
Nations experience to date regarding in particular the
Organization's operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
in Somalia is highly relevant in this respect.

Despite those cases of authorizing groups of
interested countries to conduct an operation involving
Chapter VII of the Charter, the need for so-called routine
United Nations peacekeeping operations to assist in
responding to humanitarian emergencies is not going to
disappear. Consequently, the dilemma of the
contemporary United Nations peacekeeping operations -
their having to be impartial and not resort to force except
in self-defence - is bound to stay with us. In our view,
the provisions of the Charter do not preclude using force
for humanitarian reasons. It is imperative, however, that
the troops involved are properly mandated and that their
strength, equipment and rules of engagement are in line
with what is expected of them. Before deciding on taking
up any humanitarian assignment which would mean
providing military support for humanitarian operations,
the Security Council should thoroughly assess the
situation in its entirety, with a view to determining that
other means of alleviating the emergencies, including
political ones, are no longer available.

Once again, the input of UNHCR and the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs, along with
information and analysis supplied by the countries of the
region and regional organizations, would be of paramount
importance for the Council's discussions regarding this
issue.

In your very useful guidelines for today's debate,
Sir, you have specifically mentioned that sanctions are a
tool to be used to make the parties comply with the
principles of international law, as well as to make them
react properly to their people's needs by, among other
things, allowing the unimpeded access of humanitarian
organizations and of relief to those who suffer. In the
opinion of my delegation, no means of persuasion at the
disposal of the international community should be ruled

 

out, but the application of any of them should be
considered very carefully with regard to their possible
unintended consequences as well as to the chances of their
consistent implementation.

It has been pointed out on several occasions that the
civilian population and especially refugees are being
deliberately targeted by the parties to conflicts acting out of
a belief that this could advance their political and military
objectives. Human-rights violations and violations of
international humanitarian law are all too well known
features of the conflicts currently under way. It is
important, we believe, to ensure that these crimes are
investigated and the perpetrators, if found guilty,
appropriately punished.

Allow me to make two more observations with regard
to the humanitarian tasks of the United Nations operations
mandated by the Security Council. The first relates to the
problem of coordination. In our view, the increasingly
complex nature of these operations makes evident the need
for a stronger role for the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General. Secondly, humanitarian assistance is not
about politics; it is about life. We should do everything we
can to prevent politicizing humanitarian relief.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute to all members of humanitarian organizations.
Their work has saved thousands and thousands of human
lives. It is our duty to assist them in discharging their
respective mandates. Before concluding, I would like to
stress that my delegation fully subscribes to the statement
to be made by the Permanent Representative of the
Netherlands on behalf of the European Union and
associated countries.

