Mr. Cools (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of
all, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July. I would also like to thank your
predecessor, Ambassador Loj of Denmark. Finally, let
me indicate that Belgium fully aligns itself with the
statement just made by the representative of Finland on
behalf of the presidency of the European Union.

Last Friday, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo marked the forty-sixth anniversary of its
independence and launched its electoral campaign.
This campaign will culminate in elections, with the
first round of the presidential elections and the
legislative elections to be held on 30 July. Therefore,
today's Council debate, following the recent mission to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, is particularly
timely.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having provided my delegation with this opportunity to
share some thoughts on recent developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and on what we feel
may help guide the Council's future action.

First of all, I would like, on behalf of the Belgian
Government, to express our appreciation for the work
carried out by the United Nations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in recent years through the
Security Council, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
and the humanitarian and development agencies.
Belgium has provided unstinting support for United
Nations efforts to meet the real challenges of restoring
peace and stability and achieving reunification and
development in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Belgian support in the form of logistics, equipment and
training for the deployment of a Beninese battalion in
Katanga is the most recent example of such assistance.

The electoral process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo represents a major challenge, and we
must ensure that it proceeds smoothly. We must
demand that the leaders and the candidates adhere to a
code of conduct setting the standards aimed at ensuring
correct and respectful behaviour by all parties towards
other candidates and the electorate.

The bold messages that you, Mr. President,
conveyed during your visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo were very important in that respect. We
must reject restrictions on the freedom of the press,
promote equal access to the media, prohibit the
intimidation of candidates and condemn hateful and
xenophobic speech.
We welcome the establishment of a committee of
eminent personalities. We are certain that that initiative
and others will reduce tension and prevent the setbacks
that might result from inappropriate actions.

Our message must be simple: those individuals
who can demonstrate, in free and transparent elections,
that they enjoy the full support of the Congolese people
may legitimately take up their new responsibilities in a
democracy-based Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Let us not forget the essential role to be played in that
democratic regime by the future parliament, where the
representatives of the people will sit, and which will
give full expression to the notion of inclusivity for
which the Council appealed during its recent visit.

We cannot avoid the key issue of our future
involvement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
following the elections. The most recent report of the
Secretary-General on MONUC (S/2006/390) contains a
number of valuable preliminary comments in that
respect. Belgium believes that the issue of maintaining
troops within the framework of MONUC must be
carefully and fully examined. In our opinion, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should be able to
draw on MONUC support for as long as is necessary to
help it to restore State authority for the long term over
all of its national territory, in particular in the east of
the country. That is in the interests of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Great Lakes region and
Africa as a whole.

The report of the Secretary-General rightly points
out that the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains worrying and that
significant efforts are required in that respect. It also
highlights the need to begin reflection on
peacebuilding mechanisms in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We welcome those proposals. Belgium
will do everything in its power to contribute to the
debate on such proposals, as well as to their
implementation, in full cooperation with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its partners.

The messages that the Council conveyed at
Kinshasa, in particular with regard to the need to
improve governance and turn the page on a tumultuous
past in that respect, demonstrate its political resolve to
make progress. Belgium remains convinced that
structural mechanisms geared towards improving the
management of natural resources can provide a
meaningful and lasting contribution in that respect.

The Secretary-General - and you, Mr. President,
in your report - mentioned the efforts that must be
made with regard to the reform of the security sector in
general and the army in particular. Together with a
number of other partners, in particular South Africa
and Angola, as well as the European Union, Belgium is
fully engaged in that sector. We have participated, in
particular, in training and equipping nine integrated
brigades of the Armed Forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, in spite of those
efforts, there is a long road ahead. It is our duty to help
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to establish a
professional republican army, which it needs if it is to
reassert its authority throughout its territory - an army
at the service of its people. Let us not waste time
drawing up plans that, for the most part, already exist.
Let us undertake solid efforts. Let us invest in effective
and sustainable reform of the army, the police and the
justice sector. That is the essence of peacebuilding.

