Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
As the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights just stated, any massive and systematic violation
of human rights constitutes a threat to international
peace and security. Spain energetically and unreservedly
supports the idea that such matters should be taken up
by the Security Council.

As many others before me have stated, we are
devoting today's meeting to the human rights situation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea precisely
because the reports of the commission of inquiry, the
Secretary-General and the Special Rapporteur have
documented chilling testimony pertaining to massive
human rights violations in that country that, in many
cases, constitute crimes against humanity. Moreover,
the dire situation with regard to human rights in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has affected
its neighbours and endangers regional stability. The
statements to be made by the representatives of Japan
and the Republic of Korea will be particularly useful
for the work of the Security Council.

The international community and the Council
cannot ignore what is happening in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. Its Government is the first
responsible for ensuring and protecting the human
rights of its own people. Faced by the unresponsiveness
of that Government, it falls to the international
community to assume that responsibility and take the
necessary measures to protect a population that has
suffered far too long. For too long, too, the Council
has been addressing this issue mainly from the
perspective of non-proliferation. Without abandoning
that approach, which Spain fully supports, the time
has come for the Security Council to also provide a
response to the systematic violations of human rights
that the people of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea are enduring.

That does not mean politicizing the issue.
Inaction would in fact be tantamount to taking sides
and turning our back on international law. The time
has come to see what the Security Council can do to
improve the situation. Without a doubt, it is necessary
to condemn human rights violations. Many members
of the Security Council share that view. However, it
is not enough. The international community and the
Council need to demonstrate that they are ready to
work in order to overcome the situation. By the same
token, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
needs to respond by acknowledging the concerns that
have been expressed and taking action to put an end
to those violations. The statements made today by
the Supreme Leader of that country certainly do not
contribute to peace and security in the region. In that
regard, Spain considers that the Security Council
should strongly support the strategy proposed by the
Special Rapporteur, to which the Ambassador of Chile
just referred.

The strategy proposes combining various elements
that are separate but complementary. First, conveying
a strong and unequivocal message to the authorities
in Pyongyang. That involves a clear commitment to
combating impunity, including, if there are no other
options, the referral of this matter to the International
Criminal Court. The second element consists of an offer
to cooperate and engage in dialogue on the topic of
human rights. And I would like to underscore the work
that can and should be carried out by the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights that was opened
in Seoul this year. For this, it is essential for the North
Korean Government to allow access to experts, to allow
progressive exchanges with individuals from the North
Korean regime and civil society and to cooperate with
a view to easing tensions and contributing to dialogue
in the Korean peninsula - cooperation that is key to
achieving a solution in the medium and long term.
Thirdly, regional forums, such as the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations and the European Union, can
play, and indeed are playing, a very important role in
the development of this dialogue.

In conclusion, I would like to say that Spain is in
favour of a progressive approach that takes advantage
of United Nations mechanisms in order to open
channels of communication with a view to improving
the humanitarian and human rights situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We support
the efforts of the Secretary-General, and, in that regard,
would like to thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing. At
the same time, we appeal to the Pyongyang regime to
cooperate and to establish a meaningful dialogue with
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and other
mechanisms in that area.

