Mr. Merimee (France) (interpretation from French):
The delegation of France wishes to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council, and we wish warmly to thank His Excellency the
Ambassador of Indonesia for the way in which he
conducted the proceedings of the Council last month.

The Government of Zaire, in a note verbale dated 10
August 1995 addressed to the President of the Council,
proposed the establishment under the auspices of the United
Nations of an international commission of inquiry to be
charged with thoroughly investigating allegations regarding
the supply of arms to former Rwandan government forces
in the Great Lakes region of Central Africa. The Kinshasa
authorities also indicated their readiness to assist such a
commission and to provide it with all the necessary
cooperation for the discharge of its mandate.

The Government of France is gratified that the Zaire
initiative has led today to the adoption by the Security
Council of a resolution devoted to the establishment of this
Commission.

Since the adoption of resolution 918 (1994), many
allegations have circulated regarding the assistance that the
former Rwandan governmental forces continue to receive.
These allegations have largely contributed to maintaining in
Central Africa an atmosphere of distrust, which in part
explains the difficulties facing the international community
today in restoring peace and promoting national
reconciliation in Rwanda and more generally in the Great
Lakes region.

It has therefore become essential to set up a
Commission whose mandate it will be to shed light, once
and for all, on the many accusations that continue to
poison relations between the countries of the region. We
hope - and the text of the resolution gives us assurances
in this respect - that the Commission will conclude its
inquiry rapidly and with full impartiality.

We also hope that, on the basis of the facts that it
gathers, the Commission will be able to recommend
concrete measures to end illegal arms flows in the
subregion.

My Government is, of course, prepared to cooperate
fully with the work of the International Commission of

Inquiry.

