Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you
very much, Mr. President, and in honour of your
presidency this month, I will try to say this in your
language. Obrigado, senhor Presidente. I thank you
for the opportunity to speak at this debate on behalf
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, which aligns itself
with the statement just made by the observer of the
European Union.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
detailed and thorough report (S/2016/218) and Special
Representative Haysom for his briefing. I also would
like to thank my dear friend Ambassador Saikal for
his statement.

I will address three issues: first, the security
situation and the peace process; secondly, the road to
Warsaw and Brussels; and thirdly, the role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

On the security situation and the peace process,
the report of the Secretary-General states very clearly
that the security situation deteriorated even further
in 2015. It also indicates a substantial increase in
casualties among the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces (ANDSF). We commend the efforts
of the National Unity Government and the ANDSF
in providing security to the Afghan people, but we
need to address the critical shortcomings. Continued
international support, including by the Kingdom
of the Netherlands, is needed in strengthening the
security forces.

The number of civilian casualties has seen an
increase as well, as reported by UNAMA last month. We
deplore all casualties, of course. They indicate all the
more that a peaceful, stable and prosperous Afghanistan
is urgently needed. Political unity in the Afghan
Government will help create stability and a positive
perspective for the Afghan people. Durable peace can
be achieved only through Afghan-led reconciliation,
supported by a regional process. Commendable efforts
in that directionhave recentlybeen made by Afghanistan
and Pakistan, as well as within the quadrilateral talks
among Afghanistan, Pakistan, the United States and
China, which we hope will lead to direct talks with
the Taliban. The Netherlands stands ready to support
reconciliation efforts, if so desired.

My second point concerns the road to Warsaw and
Brussels. The international community, including my
country, has been engaged in Afghanistan for over a
decade now, in close collaboration with the Afghan
Government. Together we have seen some very
positive results in terms of development. For example,
the service delivery of health care and education
has improved drastically since 2001. Women and
girls are actively part of social life, and Afghanistan
has witnessed a sharp increase in girls enrolling in
schools. In addition, the Government of National Unity
recently took steps to strengthen protection services for
women. The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
emergency fund for the medical treatment of female
victims of violence that was launched on 31 January
by President Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai. We welcome
the extra funding in the State budget for additional
prosecution units to address violence against women.

The Kingdom ofthe Netherlands has been a longtime
partner of Afghanistan, having contributed significantly
in the fields of security, justice and development. We
are committed to fulfilling our part in the longer-term
development of Afghanistan. We are currently planning
our national post-2016 engagements in the fields of
defence, development and diplomacy in the run-up to
the NATO Summit in July in Warsaw and the Brussels
conference in October. For both conferences, which
are very much interlinked, it is crucial that both the
Afghan Government and the international community
demonstrate their commitment to Afghanistan's future.
This applies both to progress for the necessary reforms,
on the one hand, and the necessary international
support, on the other. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
wishes to further work together with Afghanistan and
partners within the international community. Our focus
will be on the implementations of the reforms as agreed
in the Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework for the further development of Afghanistan.

My third point is on the role of UNAMA. This
morning the Council renewed the mandate of UNAMA.
I would like to underline the commitment to and the
continued support of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
for the role played by UNAMA in Afghanistan, and we
thank UNAMA for its continued constructive role in
coordinating the international community efforts and
in fulfilling its political mandate.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
will remain committed to Afghanistan throughout
the transformation decade in the context of increased development, we will continue to support Afghanistan
Afghan ownership and leadership. In the spirit of and 115 people.

partnership, focusing on supporting peace, justice and The meeting rose at 1.25 pm.
