Ms. Barbut (spoke in French): I am grateful to
you, Ambassador Aboulatta, President of the Security
Council, and your Spanish counterpart, Ambassador
Oyarzun Marchesi, for taking the important initiative
and inviting me to participate in the discussion on the
Sahel region.

The Scottish-born inventor, Alexander Graham
Bell, said with respect to trying to crack a difficult
problem, "Sometimes we stare so long at a door that
is closing that we see too late the one that is open" .
Likewise, it is true that the opportunity for coordinated
action in the Sahel appears to be closing quickly.
The enormous and pressing challenges make future
security scenarios seem bleak. With annual population
growth rates of up to nearly 4 per cent, the population
is increasing beyond the region's capacity to handle it,
which will have massive consequences on the region's
socioeconomic development and political stability. How
will we provide enough food, energy, water, income and
economic opportunity for the ballooning populations?

The region's gross domestic product per capita is
already very low; over 40 per cent ofthe population lives
on less than $1.25 a day. For the bulk of the population,
life is tough and will get tougher. It is a breeding ground
for broken dreams, crime, radicalization and conflict.
Most of the people - up to 80 per cent - currently
rely on the natural resource base for survival. They
eke out a living on land that provides them with
everything - food, employment and medicine. Climate
change will promote increased desertification, with
potentially devastating consequences.

According to some predictions, today poor land
management coupled with climate change could reduce
agricultural production by 13 per cent in Burkina Faso
and by almost 50 per cent in the Sudan. In the Sahel,
85 per cent of the land is already degraded to a certain
extent. It is a vicious circle. Today, just when more
land is needed, less land and consequently less water
will be available.

Land is closely linked to community identity,
history and culture, of course. Today, the geopolitics
of the Sahel are influenced by tensions over land and
water shortages that can be easily manipulated in the
service of political interests and can quickly spiral out
of control. Thanks to bad governance, poverty and easy
access to firearms, situations can quickly turn violent,
as in the case of Darfur, where it is estimated that
almost 300,000 people have died since 2003. That is
clearly happening again in areas around Lake Chad and
the Niger, where migration is increasing the pressure
on transit and target regions. As has been noted, Lake
Chad is a lifeline for at least 25 million people in four
countries - Nigeria, Cameroon, Chad and the Niger.
Tensions around natural resources, especially access to
land and water, are increasing. For example, the waters
of Lake Chad, which support more than 300 ethnic
groups, have shrunk by 90 per cent since the 19605. It
is therefore no coincidence that the Lake Chad region
is the cradle of Boko Haram and the home base for
Al-Qaida in the Maghreb.

In April, I travelled to Agadez and Dirkou, two cities
in the North of the Niger. Until recently, they were major
tourist attractions and centres of commerce. They are
now the principal transit points for migrants, through
which between 150,000 and 200,000 people pass every
year. There is little infrastructure to speak of. The
illegal trafficking of migrants and migration-related
activities are the towns' only viable economic activity.
People returning from Libya tell terrible stories of their
experiences farther along the route. But there are few
alternatives. The question is, how can we all tolerate
so much misery and despair concentrated in one place?

Land desertification and degradation are pulling
the rug out from under millions of people. Those who
cannot leave have a deep feeling of despair. This is
creating conditions of desperation for a population that
is unemployed, poor and vulnerable, including as many
as 41 million young people in the Sahel region alone.
More generally, and according to a recent study by the
British Ministry of Defence, by 2035, almost 60 million
people will have migrated to North Africa and Europe
as a result of the desertification of sub-Saharan Africa.
In that regard, I should point out that according to an
International Organization for Migration census, 100 per
cent of the illegal migrants entering Europe come from
arid areas. That should make us ask ourselves some
questions. All the evidence points to the fact that in the
past few years we have crossed a watershed on the path
towards political instability, economic migration and
inter-ethnic conflict.

But to return to Alexander Graham Bell, there are
open doors if we focus on the fundamentals. Given the
major importance of agriculture and productive land for
generating jobs and income in sub-Saharan Africa, our
efforts to achieve stability and peace must focus more
on land management. Natural resources cannot be a last-
minute afterthought tacked on to our security strategy.
We know that rural migrants generally prefer to live
close to their homes. Before they get as far as leaving
their own countries, more than half of all migrants move
within their countries or to other neighbours. Migration
to other continents is often a last resort. It means a long,
hard journey under desperate conditions. Many would
stay or return home if they could. Those now being
repatriated from Mediterranean shores will have to cope
once again with various challenges - a lack of social
support networks, constant droughts and competition
for access to resources between nomadic and settled
peoples. They need better and more proactive support
if we are to avoid creating more instability.

All the dividends of a lasting peace in the region
should involve the sustainable use of land and water.
Where aid is concerned, priority should be given
to developing employment and income-producing
economic opportunities in rural areas. The
implementation of initiatives such as the Great Green
Wall and the Lake Chad Initiative is expanding, but it
should be happening more quickly. In order to scale
them up, we must help to get the young men and women
of the Sahel working again. We should invest in decent
jobs based on rehabilitation of the land in every village
and community on the front lines of desertification. We
estimate that an average of 5,000 villages per country
is needed to kick-start a new economy and a virtuous
circle. In the Sahel region, rehabilitation and sustainable
management of one hectare of land costs about $250
and requires nothing apart from labour. That comes to
less than $3,000 per job, per year, compared with, for
example, the cost associated with paying for a migrant
to stay in a camp in Italy, which is about $15,000 a year.

That land management-based approach has multiple
advantages. It would be hugely beneficial to economic
growth and income generation and would strengthen
the resilience of communities that are vulnerable to
climate change, improve food and water security and
stabilize much of the region. We are not claiming that it
is a magic bullet, but it would definitely be cheaper and
more effective than investing in walls, wars and relief. It
could at least begin to mitigate the political grievances,
poverty and marginalization that are driving frustrated
young Africans to take radical action. It should at the
very least be part of our efforts to prevent conflict and
consolidate peace. It is an open door, and it is up to us
to walk through it.

