The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letters from the
representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Thambwe
Mwamba (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
and Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda) took seats at the
Council table.

The President: I should like to welcome the
participation in our meeting today of His Excellency
Mr. Alexis Thambwe Mwamba, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
His Excellency Mr. Karel de Gucht, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Belgium.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2008/800, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Belgium, France, and
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Members of the Council also have before them
documents 8/2008/728 and Add.l, which contain the
fourth special report of the Secretary-General on the
2
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Viet
Nam


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1856 (2008).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council that wish to make statements after the vote.


