The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite The Honourable
James Wapakhabulo, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uganda and Chairman
of the Regional Peace Initiative on Burundi; Mr.
Te'rence Sinunguruza, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Burundi; Mr. Leonard She Okitundu,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
the representatives of Ethiopia and Kenya; Mr. Patrick
Mazimhaka, Special Envoy of the President of
Rwanda; The Honourable Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the United Republic of Tanzania; the
representative of Gabon; Mr. Hackman Owusu-
Agyemang, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana; the
representatives of Nigeria and South Africa; and The
Honourable Keli S. Walubita, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Zambia, to take seats at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr.
Wapakhabulo (Uganda), Mr. Sinunguruza
(Burundi), Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo), Mr. Hussein (Ethiopia),
Mr. Jalang'o (Kenya), Mr. Mazimhaka (Rwanda),
Mr. Kikwete (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr.
Dangue Rewaka (Gabon), Mr. Owusu-Agyemang
(Ghana), Mr. Apata (Nigeria), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa) and Mr. Walubita (Zambia) took seats at
the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and rule 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Berhanu Dinka, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region and Chairman of the Implementation
Monitoring Committee, to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and rule 39 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr.
Amadou Ke'be, Permanent Observer for the
Organization of African Unity, to take a seat at the side
of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I shall now give the floor to Mr. Berhanu Dinka,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region and Chairman of the
Implementation Monitoring Committee.


