Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I would like to warmly
welcome you, Mr. President, and to congratulate you on
Jordan's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January. I wish also to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing, which has
provided us with a wealth of insights into the current
situation in the Middle East.

Our intervention will focus on three aspects: peace
between Israel and Palestine; Syria; and Lebanon.
We believe, first, that the immediate attainment of
peace between Israel and Palestine is central to the
normalization of the situation in the Middle East and
also of vital importance to global peace and security.

I take this opportunity to reiterate Nigeria's
support for a two-State solution that would allow Israel
and Palestine to live together side by side in peace
and security. Peace between Israel and Palestine, we
believe, will not only have a beneficial impact on both
countries, but also constitute the key to peace in the
Middle East as a region.

On 29 July 2013, direct final-status talks between
Israel and Palestine resumed after a long hiatus. We
commend the efforts of the United States Government
and Secretary of State John Kerry's personal
commitment in restarting the talks. The international
community can lend momentum to this effort by
supporting the current peace process.

We note that a period of nine months was decided
upon within which a comprehensive settlement of all
outstanding issues would be reached. We are now in
the sixth month, and we urge all parties to make greater
strides in their efforts towards the attainment of peace.
The United State-brokered peace talks are now at
a critical stage. The recent announcement of the Israeli
Government's plan to build 1,400 housing units in
Jewish settlements in East Jerusalem and the West Bank
may not be helpful to the peace process. We urge Israel
to reconsider this plan, which is capable of derailing the
peace talks.

Nigeria is not unmindful of the need to guarantee
Israel's security and continued existence as a
sovereign State. It is for this reason that we support
the comprehensive discussion of all final-status issues
so as to leave no room for continuation of the conflict,
which has lasted far too long for any side's comfort or
interest. We encourage both sides to carefully examine
the United States plan for security arrangements, with
a View to moving forward towards the adoption of an
accord that would address those proposals.

We also note that the members of the Quartet
met at the highest level on 27 September 2013 and
reaffirmed their determination to lend effective
support to both parties. We wish to stress, however,
that efforts to strengthen the Palestinian economy
and build Palestinian institutions should be seen as
supportive of the peace process and not necessarily as
supplanting it. We believe that priority must be given
to the establishment of an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State.

We note and welcome the meeting held in Amman
between King Abdullah II and Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu last Thursday, 16 January, to discuss the
peace process and seek ways to move it forward. We
encourage such exchanges as confidence-building
measures and transparent attempts in the search for
lasting peace in the Middle East.

Concerning Syria, while we welcome the progress
recorded in the elimination of the country's chemical
weapons under the supervision of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons/United Nations
joint mission, we urge the world not to lose sight of the
ongoing civil war in the country, which has claimed over
100,000 lives and displaced millions of people, both
internally and across Syria's borders. The humanitarian
dimension of the Syrian crisis remains a matter of great
concern to Nigeria, especially considering the fact
that millions of children are reported to be among the
victims.

The gender dimension of the crisis is also of
concern to us. We are deeply disturbed by reports of
women being increasingly targeted for assault and
violence, particularly in refugee camps, where they are
supposed to feel safe and, indeed, protected. We deplore
and condemn such acts of violence against women and
would like to see the perpetrators brought to justice.
The hardship and indignities that Syrian women face in
the refugee camps deeply diminish our humanity, and
we call on all sides in the conflict to ensure, at all times,
the safety and dignity of women embroiled in the crisis.

Today the need for the return of peace to Syria is
more urgent than ever. It is our hope that the second
Geneva Conference on Syria, scheduled for this week,
will create the conditions necessary to attain that
much-desired objective. We encourage all parties to
the conflict to participate in the Conference without
preconditions. We reaffirm our stance that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian crisis. Only a political
solution attained through a transparent and inclusive
process can lead to peace in Syria. Nigeria's desire is
to see, in the very near future, a peaceful, prosperous,
united and democratic Syria taking its rightful place in
the world.

Turning to Lebanon, we are unequivocal in our
condemnation of the recent spate of terrorist attacks,
which left several Lebanese citizens dead and dozens
injured. Such attacks threaten the peace and stability
of the country and add another dimension to an already
difficult security situation. President Sleiman has
stated that immunizing Lebanon against such attacks
will require solidarity between the leaders and the
people. We urge the people of Lebanon to unite and
stand firm with their leaders against any attempt
to inject despair and disunity into the body politic.
Attacking innocent and defenceless people will not in
any way address the political differences of the parties
or, indeed, advance the unity and progress of Lebanon.
Only honest dialogue and recourse to peaceful means
can prove beneficial and long-lasting in the attainment
of any political agenda.

