Mr. Hamilton (Jamaica): On behalf of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) secretariat, I
would like to register my thanks to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), and in
particular the Permanent Mission of Spain for convening
this high-level meeting on resolution 1540 (2004), with
a focus on threats related to non-State actors and the
possible use of weapons of mass destruction.

From the inception of the CARICOM. regional
programme, which seeks to assist CARICOM. member
States to effectively assume their obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004), the 1540 Committee has stood
foursquare in support of our efforts, both in terms of
its overall engagement and its support for regional
initiatives that focus on implementing strategic trade
legislation and regulations, and on regional initiatives
to build necessary capacity within the Caribbean to
prevent proliferation.

As for the leadership of the Caribbean Community
and for entities within the region that focus on the
prevention of trade in and use of chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear weapons and related materials,
I can say with certainty that ongoing cooperation with
the 1540 Committee remains a cornerstone of our
continuing regional effort to combat proliferation, both
within the Caribbean and in the hemisphere at large.

Without question, regional progress in preventing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
is inextricably linked to the economic Viability of
CARICOM. member States. Indeed, we have borne
witness to the impact of poverty, privatization and
marginalization and its influence on promoting
radicalization, both within the region and around
the world. Fighting terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction can be successfully waged
only by fully appreciating the intersection between
such corollary realities. Those realities are not absent
from the Caribbean, as has been exemplified by the
involvement of Caribbean nationals as foreign terrorist
fighters in the conflicts in Iraq and Syria, and on the
side of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

While that may be fading in our collective

memories, we are all too cognizant of the region's

susceptibility to external shocks, including those

occasioned by acts of terrorism, as was the case with

the attacks on the United States on 11 September 2001.

Notwithstanding the fact that such events took place far

away from the Caribbean and occurred in the United

States, the economic impact on the region and the
reverberations felt in regional markets resulted in the
loss of over $900 million in revenue and thousands of
jobs, particularly in the tourism and hospitality sectors,
within the first year after the attacks

It is for that reason that terrorism and the
proliferation of chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear materials has continued to be of significant
importance to CARICOM. member States over the
past 15 years, even as regional Governments have
been grappling with the influx of small arms and
light weapons, as well as the deleterious impact of the
continuing drug trade and spiralling gun-related crime,
which has ensued from that confluence of events.

Given the increasing competition for critically
needed economic space and resources to effectively
deal with such challenges within the security realm, it
is fundamental that initiatives aimed at preventing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, reducing
trade in strategic goods and related technology and
promoting the adoption of important correlated security
measures, such as the implementation of effective
export controls, receive greater levels of support from
the international community.

CARICOM. remains grateful for the assistance
that has been provided by the United States, Canada,
Australia, the Republic of Korea and the United
Kingdom, among other countries, but it is not nearly
enough. In order to place non-proliferation firmly and
securely within the contemporary regional security
vernacular and to elevate it to actionable levels within
CARICOM. member States, engagement on the matter
cannot be piecemeal or sporadic. It requires sustained
interaction with both policy and enforcement entities
within the region and the provision of equally sustained
material support going forward. CARICOM. therefore
views today's high-level deliberations as a significant
and encouraging step forward in that regard, and is
confident that its outcome will strengthen the region's
ongoing efforts to advance its objectives within the
non-proliferation realm.

Let me also emphasize that the involvement of
industry, academia and civil society in this discourse
is commendable, as there is the need for an all-
hands-on-deck approach so as to fully achieve the
objectives of resolution 1540 (2004), effectively
combat non-State actors and simultaneously enhance
security and aid national development, particularly in
the global South. I would therefore observe that today's
debate has particular relevance to the Caribbean, given
the expansion of a regional process first initiated in
October 2013 in Freeport, Bahamas, at the symposium
entitled "Public and Private Sector Avenues to Building
Maritime and Port Security Infrastructure and
Facilitating Secure Trade in the Caribbean through the
Implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)".

That gathering of CARICOM. States, facilitated by
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
the CARICOM. resolution 1540 (2004) implementation
programme and the Stimson Center, was fundamental
in charting a way forward to encourage greater
cooperation with industry and Governments in the
region, both in implementing resolution 1540 (2004)
and in fostering an agenda for joint action on improving
port security and on aiding development. With the
initiation of the Freeport process, CARICOM. member
States agreed to deepen their cooperation aimed at
meeting their obligations under resolution 1540 (2004),
through increased public-private collaboration aimed
at addressing security vulnerabilities at ports within
the Caribbean region and at combating the transit,
transshipment, export, re-export and brokering of
strategic goods and dual-use materials.

The Freeport process has led to new and
unprecedented cooperation aimed at strengthening
port and border security and at undertaking important
mandates under paragraph 3 of resolution 1540
(2004). It has also resulted in a new partnership
among CARICOM, the World Customs Organization
and the United States National Nuclear Security
Administration, focusing on strategic trade-control
enforcement and will be expanded to other designated
CARICOM. member States through 2017.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that CARICOM
member States are cognizant of the emerging
vulnerabilities posed by chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear materials to the safety and
security of the region's maritime space and are fully
aware of those attendant risks that can jeopardize
the achievement of secure trade and commerce.
Activities within the context of the CARICOM. 1540
programme underscore the continued commitment
felt by CARICOM. members to implement resolution
1540 (2004) and signals a prevailing commitment to
non-proliferation, which will necessitate even greater
levels of support by the international community to
fully achieve such important objectives.

Once again, let me register my profound thanks
to the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). We trust that this dialogue will result
in a renewed engagement to realize even more
meaningful gains in the 1540 implementation process
and serve to enhance regional security and strengthen
non-proliferation, while also enhancing the ability of
CARICOM. and other Member States to effectively
confront threats posed by proliferators and non-State
actors alike.

