Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): I wish to thank Under-
Secretary-General Prendergast for his comprehensive
briefing, which illustrates the gravity of the situation in
Afghanistan. I would also like to commend the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, for
his impressive work. Like preceding speakers, my
delegation wishes him a speedy recovery. Mr. Brahimi's
report highlights the need for urgent action on the part of
the international community.

My delegation is equally appreciative of the presence
here today of the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan.

At this critical juncture, Brazil once again expresses its
concern over the protracted conflict in Afghanistan, and its
destabilizing potential for the entire region.

The renewal of military actions over this summer is
worse given the increasingly sombre humanitarian situation,
with thousands of innocent civilians displaced from their
homes amid mounting evidence of widespread violations of
human rights.

Moreover, the repeated reports of violations of human
rights and induction of child soldiers are cause for serious
concern. We understand that there is no military solution to
the situation; only by peaceful means can the conflict be
settled. It is undeniable that the Taliban movement is
particularly to blame for the deteriorating climate in
Afghanistan. We call upon its leadership to resume the
path of dialogue.

It is therefore regrettable that the considerable effort
made by the international community to bring about a
lasting agreement has not yielded the desired results.

Although recognizing the need for renewed
diplomatic initiatives, we continue to believe that the
general thrust of the Declaration that followed the
Tashkent meeting of the "six plus two" group last month
offers a way forward and therefore a real hope for lasting
peace.

To this end, it is equally important that all forms of
foreign interference in Afghanistan should stop. Only in
this way will the way be opened to reconciliation and the
founding of a truly multi-ethnic and democratic
government in Afghanistan, one which helps bring peace,
tolerance and hope to its war-ravaged people.

