Mr. Schulz (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
and the Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) for their briefings. I would also like to
extend a particularly warm welcome to Ambassador
Olof Skoog in his new role as Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations and thank
him for his briefing. We also thank the Secretary-
General and the Secretariat team for delivering yet
another thorough, well-evidenced and balanced report
(S/2019/934).

The turn of events since we last discussed the
implementation of resolution 2231 in June (see S/PV.8564) is very worrying. Nevertheless, our
assessment remains the same. The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) is firmly based on the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and
strengthens the global nuclear non-proliferation
architecture. The JCPOA is an important asset for
security in the region and beyond. Preserving the
JCPOA is therefore in our shared European security
interests and, as we see it, in the interests of all.
We welcome and reiterate the Secretary-General's
call for the full and effective implementation of
the JCPOA by all participants. We have upheld our
commitments under the JCPOA and will continue to do
so. We also wish to recall that paragraph 2 of resolution
2231 (2015) calls on all States Members of the United
Nations to refrain "from actions that undermine
implementation of commitments under the JCPOA".

We are deeply concerned about Iran's lack of
compliance with the JCPOA. The deliberate steps
Iran has taken since July violate core provisions and
increasingly undermine the value of the JCPOA for
nuclear non-proliferation. We urge Iran to reverse those
measures and return to full compliance without delay.
Let me note here that the issue of Iran's compliance is a
matter of concern to all remaining JCPOA participants.
That issue is being addressed intensively within
the formats of the JCPOA, in particular at the latest
meeting of the Joint Commission on 6 December, as
well as during the ministerial meeting of the JCPOA
participants that was held on the margins of the high-
level week at the General Assembly. We will continue to
work hard to find a viable solution within the framework
of the JCPOA to this compliance issue. Together with
our E3 partners, we are ready to use, in good faith, all
available instruments provided by the JCPOA. Our goal
is and remains to preserve the JCPOA.

Turning to annex B of resolution 2231 (2015), the
full and effective implementation of annex B is highly
important for regional and international stability. Again,
the findings of the Secretary-General with regard to
Iran's ballistic missile activities and arms transfers give
rise to serious concerns. Iran is continuing to advance
the scope and precision of its ballistic missile arsenal,
as we have outlined in a number of E3 letters to the
Secretary-General, most recently on 21 November.
Tests and launches of ballistic missiles designed to be
capable of delivering nuclear weapons are inconsistent
with paragraph 3 of annex B. In our view, that includes
space-launch vehicles using such missile technology.

Furthermore, we are deeply concerned about the
continued indications of illicit arms transfer activities
by Iran, in particular with regard to missiles and
missile technology, as we highlighted in the joint E3
letter of 21 November. It is extremely troubling that
the recipients of missile technology transfers seem to
be armed non-State actors. Such proliferation is highly
destabilizing and could aggravate the conflict dynamics
in the region in a serious way. Iran must cease those
transfer activities at once.
The Secretary-General's report also points
to possible violations of the travel ban and assets
freeze provisions of the resolution. Those need to be
investigated. We strongly call on Iran to comply with
all provisions of resolution 2231 (2015), including
annex B, and we encourage all States to continue taking
appropriate steps to ensure effective respect for and
compliance with the provisions contained in annex B.

As other representatives referred to this earlier,
let me say that we fully stand behind the scope and
methodology of the report. Resolution 2231 (2015)
mandates the Secretary-General to examine and report
on the implementation of the entire resolution, including
all its annexes. Therefore, we fully support the 2231
(2015) team of the Secretariat looking into cases of the
possible illicit transfer of missiles, missile technology
and conventional weapons.

With regard to the Aramco attacks, we welcome
the fact that United Nations experts are involved in
the ongoing investigations. We look forward to further
reporting to the Council, and I recall and reaffirm the
assessment announced on 23 September by the E3
Heads of State and Government.

Before concluding, let me stress that we all need to
contribute to the easing of tensions in the region. The
dynamics of the past six months are dangerous and need
to be redirected towards de-escalation, restraint and
dialogue. We strongly support such efforts, which are
crucial to ensuring security and stability in the region.

