Mr. Cohen (United States): I would like to start
by thanking our briefers today. We offer Special
Representative Ndiaye our condolences following the
loss of four Senegalese peacekeepers in the helicopter
accident last month.

I will make five brief points.

First, the United States is deeply concerned that
some armed groups continue to violate the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic with impunity. We call for all
signatory parties to commit to fully implementing the
peace agreement.

Secondly, we would like to highlight the fact that the
top priority task of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) is the protection of civilians.
There is no contradiction between protecting civilians
and using MINUSCA's good offices to support the
success of the peace agreement. In fact, we believe that

these two efforts are mutually reinforcing.

Thirdly, we must break the cycle of violence in the
Central African Republic by ensuring high standards
for vetting, disarmament, demobilization and training
for former combatants who choose to enter the
mixed brigades or participate in other disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.
Vetting should complement the work of the Special
Criminal Court, which the United States supports, to
ensure accountability for the most serious crimes and
atrocities, in keeping with the Bangui Forum.

Fourthly, during the recent trip of the Security
Council sanctions committee to Bangui, it was clear
that the Government of the Central African Republic
now has sufficient arms to supply its troops but still
needs to develop defence institutions to provide their
troops with logistical support and salaries when
deployed in the field. We hope that the Government of
the Central African Republic can make more progress
on the arms embargo benchmarks so that its military
can be counted on to defend the borders and protect
Central Africans.

Finally, the United States would like to recognize
the attention paid in the Secretary-General's report of
15 October (S/2019/822) to performance optimization,
particularly the new short-loop casualty evacuation
process and actions taken in response to violence in
Alindao. Such efforts make peacekeeping safer by
simultaneously protecting the lives ofboth peacekeepers
and civilians.
The United States will continue to press for improved
peacekeeping performance reporting in MINUSCA
and in all peacekeeping operations according to the
standards set in the Action for Peacekeeping initiative
and in resolution 2436 (2018).

The meeting rose at 10.50 am.
