Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): I welcome you, Sir, to
New York and wish to congratulate you on you
assumption of the Presidency of the Council for this
month. I also wish to take this opportunity to commend
Ambassador Motoc for the efficient and skilful way in
which he guided the Council's work last month.

I wish to thank Mr. Annabi for introducing the
Secretary-General's report (S/2004/613), as well as for
updating the Council on the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). I also wish to recognize the participation of
Mr. Zoran Loncar in this meeting and to welcome him.

Pakistan welcomes the appointment of Mr.
Jessen-Petersen as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo; we continue to support
UNMIK in its efforts to implement its mandate,
provided by this Council. We also wish to acknowledge
the contribution of Mr. Holkeri, former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

The Secretary-General's report is a sobering
assessment of the situation in Kosovo. While there has
been some progress in areas related to the rule of law
and in the development of the Kosovo Protection
Corps, other issues, such as freedom of movement,
sustainable returns, the rights of communities and
property rights, continue to suffer as a consequence of
the violence of last March. Above all, we remain
concerned that Kosovo's economy needs considerable
international donor support. Pakistan continues to call
for an early resumption of the direct dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade. We note the willingness of
Prime Minister Rexhepi to resume the dialogue, and we
urge the authorities in Belgrade to reciprocate. In the
meantime, we welcome the positive developments in
regional dialogue and cooperation with Kosovo, as
mentioned in the Secretary-General's report. We
believe that these are steps in the right direction.

The violence of last March continues to cast its
shadow and hamper the building of trust and
cooperation between the main communities of Kosovo.
This is currently the main hurdle in the implementation
of standards in accordance with the provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999). However, a deeper problem -
indeed a more fundamental problem, as we have
consistently stressed - is that the "standards before
status" approach is flawed. The longer the clarification
of Kosovo's status is delayed, the more it will feed into
frustrations and tensions in Kosovo. It will continue to
hamper the transition from war to peace and delay
investments from international financial institutions,
which are so vital for the economic recovery of
Kosovo. The longer Kosovo remains in international
political limbo, the more this perpetuates a situation
where frustrations and violence will continue to fester.

In our statement in May (see S/PV.4967), our
delegation proposed that instead of a "standards before
status" approach the Council should consider
promoting a "status with standards" approach as a two-
pronged effort, which would on the one hand hold the
Kosovars - both the people and the leadership -
accountable to implement the standards programme, to
work to end extremism and intolerance and to create
friendly and cooperative relationships with their
neighbours. This approach would also see simultaneous
progress on clarifying Kosovo's status issue,
identifying ways of promoting self-determination for
all Kosovars while seeking to uphold the rights and
interests of all its minorities. A change of course is
essential to create hope for peace and to end the legacy
of war in the entire region. We once again urge the
Council to give this option some serious thought.

