Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zarif for his briefing. I welcome the presence
of His Excellency Mr. Daeic', First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, to
attend today's meeting. China also listened carefully to
the statement made by Mr. Thaci.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and understands the legitimate
concerns of Serbia on the question of Kosovo. China
believes that the best way to solve the question of Kosovo
is to work out an appropriate solution acceptable to all
the parties concerned through dialogue and negotiation,
on the basis of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and in the framework of
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

The current situation in Kosovo by and large
continues to be stable, but still faces complex issues.
China appreciates the vigorous efforts made by the
Serbian Government to find a political solution to the
Kosovo issue, and welcomes the fact that Belgrade and
Pristina have recently continued to hold high-level talks.
China supports the efforts by both parties to continue
to pursue pragmatic and constructive dialogue in order
to implement the existing agreements and to effectively
protect the rights and interests of different ethnicities
in Kosovo. The parties must continue their efforts to
resolve their differences through dialogue and avoid
any actions that may lead to further complicating or
escalating the situation. Doing that would be conducive
to the maintenance ofpeace and security in the Balkans
and throughout Europe.

China commends the work being done by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) over the past four years under the leadership
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zarif and supports UNMIK's continuing efforts to
implement the Council's mandate under the leadership
of the new Special Representative, Ambassador Tanin.
We hope that UNMIK, the European Union Rule of
Law Mission and the Kosovo Force will carry out the
tasks assigned under their respective mandates and
strengthen their coordination and cooperation in order
to play a constructive role in finding an appropriate
settlement of the question of Kosovo.

