Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): The presence of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) in Darfur is crucial, given that its
mandate includes, among other things, contributing to
the facilitation of the Darfur peace process and the
protection of civilians. In that regard, South Africa has
contributed troops and police to UNAMID and will
2
continue to support the mission. South Africa will
further assist in the search for lasting peace in Darfur
through the African Union (AU) and bilaterally. It was
for that reason that my delegation voted in favour of
resolution 2003 (2011), extending the mandate of
UNAMID for a further 12 months.

This month has seen momentous events in the
history of the Sudan and, indeed, of the entire
continent. A new State, South Sudan, was established,
marking another milestone in the implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, through which
the people of the Sudan committed themselves to
resolving their decades-long conflict. As we celebrate
this achievement, we remain hopefully that the Doha
document for peace in Darfur will be signed by all
parties to the conflict so that the people of Darfur are
able to build on this positive momentum and move
rapidly towards peace.

Every effort must be employed to ensure that
peace and stability are advanced in Darfur. South
Africa welcomes the conclusion of the Doha peace
process. It is indeed a significant step in building peace
in Darfur.

The African Union, meeting at its highest level in
Malabo recently, endorsed the early launching of the
Darfur political process as a process which provides

"the best opportunity to consolidate gains made
so far, ensure ownership by the Sudanese in
resolving their own problems and empower the
various stakeholders, as well as achieve an
inclusive and comprehensive settlement
addressing the interrelated issues of peace, justice
and reconciliation in Darfur".

In this regard, South Africa expresses its full and
unequivocal support for the efforts of the AU High-
level Implementation Panel, with the support of
UNAMID, to launch the Darfur political process as
soon as possible.

While acknowledging that the parties should do
everything in their power to create an enabling
environment, we do not view the creation of such an
environment as a precondition to launching the Darfur
political process. To do so would essentially hand a
veto to any potential spoilers to the process. With this
in View, the AU Peace and Security Council appealed
to the Security Council to lend its support to the
launching of the Darfur political process. This was
11-43737
done so that this Council could take into consideration
and reflect the AU's position in considering the
mandate renewal of UNAMID.

We wish to remind the Council that UNAMID
was created as a hybrid operation in a partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union.
Given this important character and feature of
UNAMID, it is critically important that both
organizations value each others' contribution to the
success of the mission and to the attainment of
enduring peace and stability in Darfur. We are
therefore disappointed by the timid and qualified
support for the AU's request for the commencement of
a Darfur-based political process.

Given the proximity to and sustained involvement
of Africans in resolving the conflict in Darfur, the
international community would do well to heed
Africa's call and support the efforts of the African
Union on the Darfur political process. We reiterate the
importance and pre-eminence of Africa's leadership in
solving African problems. After all, that is in line with
the provisions of the United Nations Charter as
expressed in its Chapter VIII. Failure to implement the
Darfur peace process in a timely manner would have a
devastating effect by delaying peace further,
condemning the people of Darfur to untold suffering.

South Africa is satisfied with the commendable
efforts deployed by Joint Special Representative
Gambari and the AU High-level Implementation Panel
under the leadership of former President Mbeki, with
the support of stakeholders in the Sudan and the
international community. We are convinced that their
continued efforts will contribute significantly to
bringing peace, stability and reconciliation to the
people of Darfur. The Council should not waiver in its
support to the people of Darfur. We dare not fail them.

