Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia welcomes this
opportunity to discuss the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. At the outset, I would like to welcome the
High Representative, Mr. Valentin Inzko, and thank him
for his report (S/2018/974, annex) and briefing today.

High Representative Inzko pointed out in his report
that the Dayton Agreement guarantees the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
internal constitutional position of the entities and that
three constituent peoples are equal. That should be our
point of departure for today's debate.

As the only European Union member State
neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina, and one of
its main trade and investment partners, as well as a
signatory of the Dayton Peace Agreement, Croatia
has a special responsibility and interest in the overall
well-being and stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina are therefore
one of Croatia's foreign-policy priorities.

Croatia would like to see Bosnia and Herzegovina
as a member of the European Union and NATO and
as a country where genuine institutional and political
equality among three constituent peoples - Bosniaks,
Croats and Serbs - and all citizens is not only
guaranteed on paper but implemented in practice
as well.

At the previous Council meeting on this matter
in May, Croatia cautioned that the period ahead of us
would be of key importance for the future development
of Bosnia and Herzegovina (see S/PV.8248). On
7 October, general elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina
were held in an overall orderly manner and without
major incident. We note that the elections were assessed
as genuinely competitive by international observers.

However, we have witnessed that in those elections
the fundamental principle of the full equality of three
constituent peoples was not respected. Once again,
in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a more
numerous constituent people chose the representative
of the smaller one. Contrary to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitution and democratic standards,
Croats were deprived of the opportunity to elect their
member of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
That runs contrary to the Dayton Peace Agreement.
It will not contribute to overcoming the legacy of the
past or to the better functioning of the country, and
neither will it strengthen the democratic standards
and respect for the rights of all citizens. Quite to the
contrary, that misuse of the election process has the
potential to further burden relations among peoples
and lead to the loss of trust among ordinary citizens in
democratic institutions. Nothing could jeopardize the
future of Bosnia and Herzegovina more than creating
such misbalances among constituent peoples.

Croatia has continuously pointed out, including
through our statements in this very Chamber, the
complexity of the political and legal fabric in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which requires constant attention
and carefully designed solutions. Regrettably, it seems
that on too many occasions there has not been enough
understanding and willingness to appropriately address
the crucial problems of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As we emphasized in our statement in May, the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
confirmed that the legitimate and proportional
representation ofthree constituent peoples at all levels is
the overarching principle enshrined in the Constitution
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croatia fully respects the
constitutional framework of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a federal State in which the three constituent peoples,
along with the others and all citizens, should be equal
at all political and administrative levels.

The pending reform of the election law and all
further institutional reforms in Bosnia and Herzegovina
should respect that fact. It is of key importance to
embark on reform of the election law without delay in
order to avoid possible similar electoral engineering in
the future. By the same token, the latest election results
need to be implemented in line with the Constitutional
Court decision on legitimate and proportional
representation, whether that is done based on an ad hoc
solution or a permanent solution.

The refusal to implement the decision of the
Constitutional Court on the reform of the election law
jeopardizes the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
leaving open space for further political manipulations.
It cannot be overstated: the principle of the equality
of Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs represents the very
foundation on which Bosnia and Herzegovina is built.

We now expect that all political leaders in Bosnia
and Herzegovina will assume their responsibilities
and engage in the formation of the parliaments and
Governments at all levels, by working constructively
together, in the interests of the constituent peoples
and all citizens of their country. In that respect,
finding a domestic solution to enable the formation
of the Federation House of Peoples and other political
institutions dependent upon its formation, as required by
Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court rulings,
is of the utmost importance. Other election-related
issues, including provisions for holding local elections
in Mostar and the Bosnia and Herzegovina presidency,
should also be immediately addressed.

As the strongest supporter and advocate of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's stability, prosperity and territorial
integrity, Croatia will continue to support Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a sovereign and united country, at the
European and international levels. Its future depends
on the ability of three constituent peoples to embark
together on a progressive and modern platform that
embraces the highest democratic standards of legitimate
political representation and to work together towards
the country's institutional stability. That institutional
stability is crucial for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
meet in full its obligations arising from the European
integration process.

Croatia has always been ready to assist Bosnia
and Herzegovina in improving its institutional
and administrative capacity and fulfilling all the
requirements on the path towards integration into
the European Union. We encourage our friend and
neighbour to proceed without delay with the reforms
in many fields, including the judiciary, the fight
against corruption, economic reforms, efficient border
management, as well as the fight against political
radicalism and elements of religious extremism.
Advancement in those processes is not only the best
investment in the country's future, but also a way to
help it overcome difficult burdens of the past.

Taking into account the political and security
situation on the ground and the importance of
maintaining a safe and secure environment, Croatia
voices its support for the European Union's Operation
Althea and the mandate entrusted to it by the Council.

Croatia strongly encourages the three new members
of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina to work in
the interests of their country, with particular sensitivity
for the constituent peoples they represent, but also to
rise above entity-focused and nationalist politics and
reach out to all citizens. We expect the Presidency
and the new Governments to uphold the common
principles of the rule of law, respect for diversity and
the commitment to lasting reconciliation, in a true
European spirit.

Finally, as the strongest supporter and advocate
of Bosnia and Herzegovina's stability, prosperity and
territorial integrity, Croatia advocates, and will continue
to do so, for a strong and permanent focus on Bosnia
and Herzegovina at the European and international
levels, this Chamber included. A sovereign, peaceful,
stable and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina - a
multiethnic country of three equal constituent peoples
and all citizens - was, is and should remain our
strategic goal.

The meeting rose at noon.
