Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, to the Security Council once
again, and we thank him for his comprehensive
briefing.

We congratulate Bosnia and Herzegovina on the
upcoming twentieth anniversary of its membership in
the United Nations.
12-33985

We have seen notable progress during the
reporting period, which we hope will bode well in
resolving outstanding issues in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. South Africa is pleased that, after
16 months without a Government, the Council of
Ministers was appointed by the House of
Representatives on 10 February. We also welcome the
signing of the agreement on 9 March on defence and
State property. Those are positive developments
towards addressing two of the outstanding objectives
of the 5+2 agenda established by the Peace
Implementation Council (PIC) Steering Board. We are
hopeful that those important agreements will allow the
country to focus on fulfilling the remaining obligations
of the 5+2 agenda. In that regard, my delegation calls
on all sides to actively engage in the completion of the
process, which would result in the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina gaining full responsibility for their
country.

It is our view that peace and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is dependent upon a number of
elements. It is imperative that all parties respect the
rule of law and the legal instruments that underpin the
political structures in the country. The political
leadership and the international presence should
remain focused on recognizing the balance contained
in the Dayton Peace Agreement and the subsequent
political structures, and exert all efforts to ensure that
this balance is respected and maintained.

My delegation has noted the adoption of the 2011
budget at the end of last year and encourages all parties
to compromise and focus on adopting a budget for
2012 without delay, in order for the country to be able
to begin to respond to economic challenges, including
poor growth prospects and high unemployment.

We are reminded of the fact that the Dayton
Peace Agreement should be replaced by a permanent
constitution in Bosnia and Herzegovina. All parties
should commit to constitutional reform, the purpose of
which is to establish strong and representative State
structures.

No considerable progress can be made in
establishing lasting peace and stability without
constructive dialogue among the many ethnic groups
and entities, as well as between the various Bosnian
structures and the High Representative. It is only
through political dialogue that it will be possible to
resolve outstanding issues, such as the reform of the
12-33985
Constitution and the adoption of the country's 2012
budget. A decision should also be made on whether the
Office of the High Representative should be closed as
soon as the outstanding objectives and conditions set
by the PIC Steering Board are met.

Reconciliation should be the ultimate aim of
continued dialogue. An essential aspect for
reconciliation is a commitment by all parties to fight
impunity by bringing to justice those accused of
committing war crimes. We call on the Government to
make resources available to the bodies authorized to
carry out that task.

My delegation reiterates that reconciliation is
jeopardized by provocative, divisive and nationalistic
rhetoric and by actions aimed at undermining the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Bosnian
State and the authority of the High Representative. We
call on all parties to refrain from actions that will
further undermine State institutions and prolong the
current tensions.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to encourage
all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to recommit
themselves to the full implementation of their
obligations under the peace accords and agreements.
Political will is essential in moving forward the process
of long-term peace, stability and reconciliation. South
Africa remains dedicated to its task as a member of the
Security Council to support Bosnia and Herzegovina in
those efforts.

