Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank you, Sir, for organizing this meeting. The situation in Idlib is critical and every effort must be made to prevent it from getting out of control. While we must continue to combat terrorists, it should be done with the utmost care for the lives of civilians, as we have always stressed and as is also underlined in all the final documents of the Astana format. We stress the need for the implementation of the Sochi agreement on Idlib, the importance of which is also highlighted in the Astana format meetings. We need to ensure that the crisis will be settled through political means. Nevertheless, terrorists must not be allowed to exploit the situation, consolidate their positions, turn Idlib into their safe haven, kill more civilians or continue taking a large number of civilians hostage. We should be vigilant enough not to confuse the protection of civilians with the protection of terrorists. As one of the guarantors of the Astana format, the Islamic Republic of Iran stands ready to use its good offices to contribute to the political settlement of the current differences between Turkey and Syria regarding the situation in Idlib. The upcoming summit of the guarantors of the Astana format, which is due to take place in the near future in Tehran, will provide an essential opportunity for the comprehensive examination of the situation in Syria. We will also host Special Envoy Pedersen this coming Saturday to discuss various issues related to Syria, including the work of the Constitutional Committee. Finally, I would like to stress the following. First, the fight against terrorism must continue unabated and the terrorists must not be allowed to benefit from the existing differences. Secondly, every effort must be made by all to protect civilians. Thirdly, the current situation in Idlib can be resolved only through political means. Fourthly, the full respect of all for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence of Syria is a must. We stand ready to do whatever is in our power to contribute to the political settlement of the current situation. The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.
