Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me first of all to thank Mr. Ian Martin, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General to Timor-Leste, for his
praiseworthy efforts. We would also like to thank him
for the important briefing he gave us this morning.

I would also like to welcome my friend, Mr. Jose
Luis Guterres, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Timor-Leste, who is here with us in the
Council. I congratulate him on his appointment to his
post and wish him every success.

Certainly, the circumstances facing Timor-Leste
are extremely sensitive. The recent chaos in that
country reflects the delicate nature of that explosive
situation, given the worsened economic situation and
the precariousness of resources, as well as the
country's recently gained independence.

The deteriorating security situation and the
generalized chaos demonstrate once again that Timor-
Leste sorely needs the assistance of the international
community. The crisis in that country is complicated; it
involves political, historical, social, economic and
institutional issues. The weakness of the political and
Government institutions and the great disparity in the
performance of several of those institutions led to an
unleashing of the crisis. Moreover, the wounds of the
past have not yet been healed, while unemployment
among young people is rampant. All of this has led to a
weakened security situation and chaos.

The international response to the security crisis in
Timor-Leste was positive and swift. We therefore
extend our thanks to all those who sent forces to help
stabilize the country at the request of the Timorese
Government. The international community worked
swiftly to respond to the need to stabilize the situation,
provide economic assistance to Timor-Leste, increase
investment and create increased opportunities for youth
employment.

We must continue to focus heavily on reform of
the administrative, political and economic institutions
and to give the country a healthy and solid new
momentum. We therefore reaffirm the important role to
be played by the United Nations in the important task
of creating of a new mission to work side by side with
the Timorese Government, provide advice and
expertise in rebuilding Government institutions and
establish long-term plans for building a modern State.

In that respect, my delegation supports the
recommendations set out in the report of the Secretary-
General on the creation of a mission for a preliminary
period of 12 months, until the results of the 2007
elections are known. Reports will be submitted
periodically to the Security Council during that time to
keep it abreast of the need for reducing or expanding
the mission.

The international community has learned an
important lesson in Timor-Leste with regard to newly
independent countries. We must not abandon them in
precarious or weakened political and economic
situations. We hope that this experience will help us to
get down to the serious work of helping Timor-Leste to
overcome the crisis.

