Mr. Amorim (Brazil): I should like, first of all, to
congratulate you, Ambassador Mahugu, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. We are confident that under your wise guidance
the work of the Security Council will be conducted in a
highly effective way. Let me also take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador
Hisashi Owada, for the competence with which he presided
over the Council during the month of January.

I should also like to present the condolences of the
people and the Government of Brazil to the people and the
Government of the People's Republic of China, on the
passing away of the honourable leader, Deng Xiaoping.

Once again, we pay tribute to the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, for
his active role in bridging differences with a view to
consolidating the peace process. Likewise, the endeavours
of the troika of observer States should be recognized. I
should also like to mention here the important presence of
Mr. Higino Carneiro Vice-Minister without Portfolio of
Angola.

The original mandate of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) comes to an end
tomorrow. Since it was first devised, UNAVEM. III was
planned to have a very clear "exit policy". It was
envisaged that the tasks entrusted to it would be
completed by February 1997. The facts, however, show
that some of the tasks have yet to be fulfilled for lack of
appropriate conditions.

The Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation has not yet been formed. The status of
Jonas Savimbi has not been clearly defined. Some of the
military issues remain unresolved. In the quartering areas,
UNITA soldiers still await demobilization. The
incorporation of UNITA soldiers into the new Armed
Forces is still well behind schedule.

The United Nations has continuously striven for a
lasting solution; it cannot be faulted for these delays. The
main responsibility for the restoration of peace in Angola
lies with the Angolans themselves. In particular, it should
be noted that UNITA is required to take urgent and
decisive steps to enable the peace process to be finalized.
In his report contained in document S/1997/115, the
Secretary-General stresses that:

"The pace of implementation of the remaining
military and political tasks, owing mainly to the lack
of cooperation of UNITA, has, once again, been
painfully slow and disappointing". (S/1997/ll5, para. 51)

One is led to recall once more that the international
community has invested a great many resources in Angola
in the past two years. UNAVEM. III continues to be the
largest United Nations peacekeeping operation now in
place, and it represents a huge financial involvement for
troop contributors, such as my own country. On the one
hand, it is clear that the international community will not
be able to maintain this level of involvement in Angola
for much longer. On the other hand, the Security Council
must take care not to withdraw UNAVEM. III from the
country before the peace process has become irreversible.
The establishment of a Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation is one of the major objectives in this
regard, but other aspects such as the remaining military
issues must be borne in mind.

In examining the present situation, Brazil
understands that an expression of readiness by the
Security Council to consider the imposition of measures,
including those specifically mentioned in paragraph 26 of

 

resolution 864 (1993), would be the appropriate way to
proceed at this crucial stage.

The extension of the UNAVEM. III mandate for just
one month may not be the ideal solution, but, in view of
the present circumstances, this is a way of exerting
additional pressure, particularly on UNITA, whose lack of
cooperation has continued to cause unjustified delays in the
peace process. Let us hope that the main differences can be
sorted out and that solutions can be reached, so that the
Angolan people may finally attain a long-awaited and well
deserved peace.

