Mr. Guterres (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to express my gratitude for this opportunity
to address the Security Council.

On a personal note, Sir, allow me to congratulate
you on France's assuming the presidency of the
Council at the beginning of the year. The excellent
cooperation between France and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees is robust and proved
to be particularly fruitful during the recent French
presidency of the European Union.

(spoke in English)
Allow me to switch into English.

Allow me also to salute the presence of the five
newly elected Security Council members - Austria,
Japan, Mexico, Turkey and Uganda. The Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) enjoys a long-standing and positive
relationship with all of those countries, but I would
particularly like to express my appreciation to Uganda
2

for agreeing to host a special summit on forced
displacement in Africa. At that summit next April,
African heads of State will consider a new African
Union Convention on Protection and Assistance for
Internally Displaced Persons. If adopted, as we all
hope, the Convention will be the first legally binding
international instrument specifically related to internal
displacement. It will also signify African leadership on
a matter of truly global concern.

In January 2006, I informed the Council that the
number of refugees was at its lowest level for almost a
quarter of a century. Unfortunately, despite large-scale
repatriation movements, the following two years saw a
significant increase in refugee numbers, primarily due
to the situations in Iraq and Somalia. While we are still
compiling the latest statistics, our current estimate is
that the total number of refugees under the mandate of
my Office currently exceeds 11 million. That does not
include the 4.6 million Palestinians for whom the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has
responsibility.

The number of conflict-induced internally
displaced persons has also grown and is now more than
26 million worldwide. While States have primary
responsibility for the protection and welfare of
displaced citizens, some lack the capacity, or even the
will, to exercise it. Wherever possible, UNHCR
therefore works in collaboration with the broader
humanitarian community in the context of the so-called
cluster approach to support States in providing the
internally displaced with protection, assistance and
solutions.

Another issue high on the UNHCR agenda is
statelessness. In countries with reliable data, at least 3
million women, children and men are known to be
stateless. However, the global number may be as high
as 12 million.

In my briefing today, I will first comment on
recent trends in forced displacement. I will then outline
three important challenges encountered by my Office
for which the role of the Security Council is highly
relevant. And in conclusion, I will make a few
comments on the issue of resolving situations of forced
displacement.

Inasmuch as forced displacement arises from
persecution and serious human rights violations, it is
also often the result of threats to or breaches of
09-20310
international peace and security. At the same time,
neglected displacement scenarios can represent a threat
to peace and security. As such, situations of which the
Security Council is seized are often those where
UNHCR is deeply engaged.

In today's world, I can perceive two groups of
conflicts. The first extends from South and South-West
Asia, through the Middle East to Sudan and Chad and
into the Horn of Africa. From Peshawar to Kandahar,
from Mosul to Gaza and from El Geneina to
Mogadishu, we are confronted with a series of distinct
crises, each with its own historical roots. But even so,
those conflicts are now increasingly interrelated and
together have major implications for global peace and
security, drawing the serious attention of the
international community.

Those conflicts are at the centre of many of
today's humanitarian disasters and have generated
around two thirds of the total number of refugees
worldwide. They require a strong humanitarian
response. While it is absolutely vital that the victims of
armed conflict be provided with essential protection
and assistance, we must also acknowledge the
limitations of humanitarian action and its inability to
resolve deep-rooted conflicts within and between
States. The solution, as always, can only be political,
and the contribution of the United Nations to resolving
those conflicts in an effective and equitable manner is
crucial to the credibility of the Organization, in
particular among certain segments of international
public opinion.

Let me now go into a little more detail. In
Afghanistan, intensified conflict, coupled with the
deliberate targeting of humanitarian workers, has
limited humanitarian access to around half of the
country's territory. Even so, in 2008, 278,000 Afghans
returned to their homeland, mainly from Pakistan, with
our support.

In reality, that significant number of returns was
in not due to a meaningful improvement of the
situation in Afghanistan. On the contrary, most of those
who repatriated did so because of growing insecurity in
the neighbouring areas of Pakistan and declining living
standards for refugees in urban centres as a result of
the economic crisis. In fact, violence, weak governance
and development gaps in Afghanistan contribute to a
situation in which 3 million of the country's citizens
remain in exile in Pakistan and Iran.
09-20310

We are now witnessing a new dimension to the
crisis in the region, namely, the displacement of some
300,000 people in Pakistan's North-West Frontier
Province and Federally Administered Tribal Areas. As
in Afghanistan, UNHCR has very limited access, with
serious constraints on the delivery of humanitarian
assistance.

These developments have confirmed that the
Afghan situation cannot be understood or addressed in
isolation. Accordingly, just two months ago, the
Government of Afghanistan and UNHCR organized an
international conference in Kabul to consolidate a
comprehensive strategy for the sustainable return and
reintegration of the country's refugees and displaced
persons. This was cited as a positive expression of
regional cooperation in the recent Security Council
report on its mission to Afghanistan. However, the
success of the conference will depend on a resolute
follow-up process by all stakeholders, based on a
strengthened national and international commitment to
security, governance and economic and social
development.

In Iraq, with the improved security situation,
UNHCR is working hard to help the Government
create appropriate conditions for the voluntary return
and sustainable reintegration of refugees and internally
displaced persons. However, there is a long way to go.
Voluntary return must take place in safety and dignity.
It is therefore imperative that States preserve the
asylum space that they have made available to Iraqi
refugees throughout the past five years in the region
and beyond. More than 2 million Iraqis are still hosted
mainly by Jordan and Syria in a very generous way and
a similar number remains displaced inside Iraq.

I call on the world's more prosperous States to
offer full support to those countries and organizations
that are hearing the brunt of the Iraqi exodus, both by
means of material assistance and through the expanded
provision of resettlement opportunities to those
vulnerable Iraqis for whom voluntary repatriation will
not be a viable option.

To prepare for returns, we redeployed the
UNHCR representative in Iraq from Amman to
Baghdad in March 2008, and we have also established
an international presence in Erbil, Mosul and Basra.
We have national staff in ll of the country's
governorates and plan to further expand our presence
and activities in Iraq as the evolving security
3
environment permits. Beyond security, sustainable
return to Iraq will require effective action in the areas
of property restitution, or property compensation for
those unable to go back to their places of origin, and
full and equitable access to welfare services and public
distribution systems.

In Darfur, an appalling humanitarian and human
rights disaster persists. More than 2 million persons
remain displaced internally and, just in Chad, nearly a
quarter of a million Sudanese have sought refuge.
Without a political agreement that involves both the
Government of Khartoum and the different rebel
movements, there is a risk that the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur will be
unable to meet the security expectations of the affected
populations. This would represent a terrible blow to the
people, first of all, but also to the credibility of those
organizations and the international community as a
whole. Even if a comprehensive peace agreement can
be established, the international force strengthened and
impunity ended, a massive investment will be needed
to re-establish the social, economic and environmental
equilibrium of the area, ensuring harmony between
different ethnic groups and between farmers and
herders, and overcoming the tensions created by
dwindling water resources and high population growth
rates.

In Somalia, the hardships endured by the people
are well known to the Council. With more than a
million Somalis already dependent on food aid, any
further limitations on humanitarian access could lead to
additional population displacements of a daunting
magnitude. Preserving the capacity of the World Food
Programme to continue its food distribution
programme in southern and central Somalia is
absolutely essential with the complex political situation
that currently prevails. The burden placed on
neighbouring States, including Kenya, Yemen and
Djibouti, is already enormous. Any further
deterioration would stretch regional capacities beyond
the breaking point and could generate a catastrophe of
unprecedented proportions.

UNHCR is not present in Gaza. A sister agency,
UNRWA, was created before UNHCR existed to
address the needs of Palestinian refugees in the area.
While we may not be directly involved, it is impossible
for me not to make reference to the current political
and humanitarian crisis. In Gaza, the civilian
population is not even allowed to flee to safety
elsewhere. I want to express UNHCR's firm solidarity
with UNRWA's action and to call for a strict adherence
to humanitarian principles in and around Gaza,
including respect for the universal right to seek and
enjoy asylum.

Beyond this first group of interrelated conflicts,
others have been multiplying and deepening around the
world. But contrary to the situations I have just
examined, they generally lack international attention,
largely because their impact is local or at best regional.
They are normally not perceived as having
implications for global security. The Central African
Republic is a typical example. Although it is on the
agenda of the Security Council, few in the world are
aware that some 100,000 refugees have been forced to
flee to Chad and Cameroon and that more than 200,000
of its citizens are internally displaced, in conditions of
grave deprivation.

We might discuss many other crises around the
world, but I will focus on one particular situation
because of its importance to the work of both the
Security Council and my Office: the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The attention of the
international community has recently been
concentrated on North Kivu. To echo my earlier
remarks, there is no humanitarian solution to that
conflict. The solution must be political and involve the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, other
regional actors and the international community as a
whole. The current tragedy in North Kivu has a
complex historical heritage arising from colonial rule
and exacerbated more recently by the Rwanda
genocide and two Congolese civil wars. The solution
must also address the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda presence in the area, the
persistence of which threatens to undermine any peace
agreement. And peace will be short-lived if the
underlying problems of access to land, property,
citizenship, inter-ethnic relations and the representation
of minorities are not resolved.

But the Democratic Republic of the Congo is not
just North Kivu. We have recently witnessed some
significant population displacements in Ituri and
Orientale province. Serious human rights violations
persist in South Kivu, targeted predominantly at
women and girls, and every six months the number of
people who die unnecessarily in the country as a result
of armed conflict and material deprivation is equivalent
to the number of people killed by the 2004 Asian
tsunami. Only the Security Council has the legitimacy
to lead the efforts of the international community to
bring this wholly unacceptable situation to an end.
UNHCR is prepared to play its part, but our role and
capacities are obviously limited.

Just as patterns of conflict are becoming more
complex, so too are contemporary forms of
displacement. While the relationship between forced
displacement and armed conflict is long-standing and
well understood, the links with other phenomena, such
as climate change, extreme poverty and poor
governance, are not. As a result of climate change,
natural disasters are on the increase. They have become
more frequent, intense and devastating in their human
impact, reinforcing the potential for displacement. The
same applies to drought and the rising level of oceans.
The full impact of the current financial meltdown and
economic recession, following the recent food and
energy crises, will have a strong impact on the
developing world and it seems inevitable that more and
more people will be on the move. Conflict, climate
change and extreme deprivation will interact and
strengthen each other as causes of displacement.
UNHCR is striving to analyse and respond to these
developments - an objective that I believe we share
with the Security Council.

Refugees are people who have left their country
because of persecution or armed conflict, and they
benefit from the specific protection regime established
by international law. No such legal framework exists
for other people who have been forcibly displaced,
other than the general human rights instruments that
are applicable to all. In drawing attention to this issue,
UNHCR is not seeking any expansion of its mandate or
to broaden the established definition of a refugee. But I
believe we have a duty to promote a serious discussion
on new forms of forced displacement, the protection
gaps that are emerging and the possible forms of
collective response.

I would now like to turn to three particular
challenges for the international community in
responding to humanitarian crises. All three centre on
the work of the Security Council but also have
important implications for my Office. And all three
exemplify the complex relationship that exists today
between the imperative of maintaining peace and
security and that of ensuring the effective delivery of
protection and humanitarian assistance.
09-20310

First is the challenge of peacekeeping in
situations where there is no peace to keep, and its
relation to the protection of civilians. Security Council
resolutions 1296 (2000) and 1674 (2006) reiterate that
the deliberate targeting of civilians in situations of
armed conflict remains a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law. While the protection of
civilians is primarily a responsibility of States, the
Security Council is increasingly called upon to pursue
that goal when States are unable or unwilling to
discharge their responsibilities.

As a humanitarian agency, UNHCR has limited
capacity to provide physical security for its
beneficiaries. In some situations, ensuring the security
of camps and maintaining their civilian and
humanitarian character are possible only with the
support of peacekeepers. In eastern Chad, for example,
we anticipate that the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad will play a crucial
role in discouraging attacks on camps, preventing the
recruitment of children and reducing the threats of
banditry and sexual violence. UNHCR welcomes the
recent Council resolutions reinforcing the capacity and
the role of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in protecting
civilians in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
the opportunity they provide to give effect to resolution
1820 (2008), on combating sexual violence against
civilians, particularly women and girls.

However, in situations in which there is no peace
to keep, mandates for the protection of civilians must
be sufficiently clear and strong and must be supported
by appropriate levels of political and material support.
Many peacekeeping operations start in a situation of
relative tranquillity, only to be affected later by a
deteriorating security environment. It is not my
intention to opine on peacekeeping doctrines, but I am
glad to know that those issues will be at the centre of
the Security Council's forthcoming debates.

A second challenge in today's environment is that
posed by the concurrent needs to ensure staff security
and to deliver humanitarian protection and assistance.
Humanitarian personnel are deployed in the most
dangerous places in the world. Many risk their own
lives in the effort to help vulnerable populations to
preserve theirs. Ensuring staff safety must be a top
priority of every humanitarian organization and of the
United Nations as a whole. That is non-negotiable.
5

And yet, with the evolving nature of armed
conflict, the deliberate targeting of humanitarian
workers has increased, creating a tension between the
imperatives of staff safety and effective humanitarian
action. That issue continues to give rise to acute
dilemmas. In Somalia last year, UNHCR staff members
were bombed in Bossaso, shot at in Garowe and taken
hostage in Mogadishu. The security risks could hardly
be greater, and yet the nature of UNHCR's work
requires us to be close to those whom we seek to help.
And the way in which we are perceived by local
populations and the relevant actors is, to be frank,
usually more important to our security than the
armoured cars at our disposal or the barbed-wire fences
we may erect. We will never be able to eliminate risk
entirely, but I believe that we can collectively do better
in managing it.

The third challenge I wish to address is that of
preserving humanitarian space in the context of an
integrated United Nations presence. In UNHCR's
experience, once a peace consolidation process is under
way, an integrated presence can provide an effective
framework for collaboration between humanitarian
agencies and the political and security components of
the United Nations system. For UNHCR, such
partnerships are particularly valuable in pursuing
solutions to displacement in transitional contexts. We
currently enjoy constructive partnerships with the
United Nations Mission in Liberia, with the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi and, in southern
Sudan, with the United Nations Mission in the Sudan,
to cite just three examples.

However, where conflict is still ongoing, there
must be a balance between ensuring a coherent
approach across the United Nations system and
preserving the autonomy of humanitarian action,
rooted in the fundamental principles of neutrality,
impartiality and independence. That is particularly
crucial in situations in which humanitarian agencies are
operating in highly politicized and militarized
environments. That will not always be easy. We rely on
the wisdom of the Security Council to support the
establishment of arrangements that are pragmatic and
flexible, based on solid common sense and tailored to
the specifics of each situation.

As I have already observed, solutions to armed
conflicts must of necessity be political in nature.
However, once peace is achieved, it needs to be
supported in a variety of ways. That is a shared

responsibility, and the peacebuilding architecture
established by the United Nations provides a vital
resource in that effort, as do the peacebuilding
missions mandated by the Security Council. Those
efforts complement and facilitate the work of my
Office, most notably by supporting the voluntary return
and sustainable reintegration of refugees and displaced
persons. Indeed, the scale of return and the success of
reintegration are two of the most tangible indicators of
progress in any peacebuilding process.

Such processes have in many instances been
obstructed by a failure to resolve outstanding land and
property issues in an effective and equitable manner,
especially in situations in which refugees, displaced
persons and ex-combatants return simultaneously to
communities where land tenure has never been
formalized or where the land registration system has
broken down. A collaborative approach to addressing
those challenges is crucial. The experience of the
Peacebuilding Commission in Burundi is particularly
relevant in that regard.

The involvement of refugees and internally
displaced persons in peace processes can provide
critical perspectives on the causes of conflict and can
contribute to a sense of shared ownership in
peacemaking and peacebuilding. The engagement of
women, as envisaged in resolution 1325 (2000), is of
particular importance. UNHCR recently facilitated the
participation of Sudanese refugees in Chad in peace
discussions, and a similar approach is being explored
in the Central African Republic.

I value the impetus provided to such efforts by
the Security Council in its presidential statement of
May 2008 on post-conflict peacebuilding
(S/PRST/2008/l6), as well as by the reference in
resolution 1830 (2008) to the need to create conditions
conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable return of refugees and internally displaced
persons in Iraq.

The international community has struggled for
many years to ensure that conflict is followed by
lasting peace and effective governance and that the
destruction of livelihoods and the provision of
emergency relief are succeeded by a process of
sustainable development. There is still a long way to
go. Nonetheless, I am encouraged by the recent
attention to that issue and am confident that it will
remain among the permanent concerns of the Security
Council.

It goes without saying that the search for
solutions to which I have just referred is essentially
reactive in nature, dealing with the effects rather than
the causes of crisis. The most effective means of
addressing the issue of forced displacement is through
preventive activities that anticipate and avert the
conflicts that oblige people to abandon their homes and
seek safety elsewhere.

Prevention is, in my View, the most important
element of the responsibility to protect. While some
aspects of the concept of the responsibility to protect
remain controversial, I do not believe that prevention is
among them. Indeed, the notion of preventing and
removing threats to peace is to be found at the
beginning of the very first Article of the United
Nations Charter.

Effective prevention will require a carefully
balanced, coordinated and targeted combination of
measures in the political, diplomatic, developmental,
environmental and humanitarian domains. Effective
prevention will require that action be taken by a wide
range of stakeholders, including States, United Nations
entities, regional bodies, international financial
organizations and non-State actors. And, in our
increasingly interconnected and interdependent world,
effective prevention will require new networks and
coalitions to be formed, linking those who are working
to promote human security at the level of the local
community with those who are striving to attain the
same objective - human security - on a national,
regional and global basis.

