Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting.
We commend your able leadership of the Council this
month. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on Afghanistan (S/2012/462) and welcome the
presence and insights of Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous and Executive Director Fedotov.

A month ago, at the NATO Summit in Chicago,
Afghanistan's friends and partners came together to
express their unanimous support for the end of war
and the beginning of a new phase in our enduring
partnership, which was first envisioned in Lisbon
in 2010. Our partnership will continue into the
transformation decade, during which time Afghanistan
will take full charge of its security, governance and
development.

Just weeks ago, we inked the Enduring Strategic
Partnership Agreement with the United States of
America as the guiding framework of our bilateral
cooperation for the long haul, solidifying mutual
commitments, including on strengthened Afghan
sovereignty, stability and prosperity in the years to
come. Although the specifics of the partnership will
continue to be crystallized, the agreement has been
endorsed by both houses of the Afghan parliament,
clearly manifesting the overwhelming support from all
corners of the country.

As part of the new phase of international
engagement in support of Afghanistan, we have also
established strategic partnerships with Italy, France,
the United Kingdom, Germany and, most recently,
Australia. Furthermore, discussions are under way to
conclude similar agreements with Turkey, Norway and
the European Union. In our own region, we signed a
strategic partnership with India, a country with which
we have shared historic and traditional ties. Earlier this
month, Afghanistan took an important step forward
towards establishing a strategic and cooperative
partnership with our other great neighbour, China.

The launch of the Istanbul process, in November
2011, was a milestone in the realization of a new
regional order by which Afghanistan and other
Heart-of-Asia countries joined hands for a common
goal and future, namely, peace, stability and prosperity.
The Heart of Asia ministerial conference held in Kabul
less than two weeks ago advanced the objectives of the
Istanbul process. As part of the conference outcome,
we reaffirmed our solid commitment to implement a
wide range of confidence-building measures. I take this
opportunity to convey our gratitude to all friends and
partners for their participation and support.

Afghanistan also obtained observer status to
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization at its recent
conference in Beijing. That was an important move.
With all of those steps, Afghanistan is restoring its
historic role as a land bridge and its potential to become
a catalyst for peace and stability in the entire region.

We look forward to next month's Tokyo ministerial
conference, where we aim to effectively address the
areas of Afghanistan's economic sustainability and
development, the fiscal gap, as well as to finalize a
mutual accountability agreement between Afghanistan
and the international community. In Tokyo, Afghanistan
will present a comprehensive action plan on self-reliance
and our national priority programmes. The conference
will not be another pledging event, but an important
venue for a solid commitment of the international
community to the transition and transformation decade.
Our thanks go to the friendly Government of Japan for
its generosity in hosting the event.

The transition to Afghan ownership and leadership
is our number one strategic priority. In that regard, I
am pleased to note that we are making steady progress.
The third tranche of the security transition has
officially commenced and includes some of the most
conflict-prone provinces with the highest levels of
insecurity. Needless to say, we are on track to complete
the third phase before the end of the year, by which
75 per cent of the country's population will come under
the responsibility of Afghan security forces.

As we strive to complete the security transition by
2013, the need for sustained support for the training and
equipping of our national security forces is inevitable.
The undertakings towards such support of NATO and
other allies at the Chicago Summit will be particularly
important.

Another core priority on the way forward will
be a strong new focus on establishing a cleaner and
more competent Government, through strengthening
governance, fighting corruption and enforcing the rule
of law. The reform agenda is at the centre of our efforts.
At the same time, we are diligently addressing all
influences that may pose a threat to national interests
and to law and order. Such measures will enhance the
full trust and confidence of all Afghans for the future.

A far more challenging task will be the
implementation of the socio-economic component
of the transition, which is vital to our State-building
efforts. Central to that goal will be underscoring
support for the Afghan national priority programmes,
which emphasize - in addition to security and
governance - agricultural development, human
resources, infrastructure and the private sector, all of
which are vital for our economic growth.

Our vision is of an Afghanistan that is a self-reliant
State, standing on its own feet. Afghanistan will not
remain an aid economy; we are working to significantly
reduce aid dependency by the end of the transformation
decade.

Advancing the peace process towards a successful
outcome is a core element of our strategy to bring
lasting peace to our people and nation. Pursued on the
basis of national consensus, we are convinced that our
reconciliation efforts remain the surest path to ending
the conflict and ensuring a durable peace. Let there be
no doubt, our Afghan-led peace process will not ensue
at the expense of the hard-won democratic gains of
the past decade, including human rights, the rights of
women in particular.

In order to achieve a successful outcome to
our reconciliation efforts, I wish to underscore the
importance of resolute support from our immediate
neighbours and other partners in the region and
beyond. In that connection, I take this opportunity to
express our gratitude for the support provided by the
Council within the framework of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011).

The upcoming 2014 elections will be another
important step towards Afghanistan's political maturity
and the consolidation of democracy in our country. We
are taking a number of measures, including electoral
reforms, to ensure a smooth political transition
consistent with our Constitution.

As we proceed through transition and into the
transformation decade, international engagement will
remain crucial. In that regard, we also look forward
to advancing our close cooperation with the United
Nations towards peace and stability in Afghanistan.

One of the greatest impediments to both development
and security in Afghanistan is the illicit drug problem.
Despite our challenges, Afghanistan is sparing no
effort to rid our society of the menace of illicit drugs.
Over the past five years, we have significantly reduced
poppy cultivation. However, as the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
Mr. Fedotov, said, there are a number of varying factors
over which we have little or no control, including the
impact the increase or decrease of poppy cultivation
from one year to another.

This year alone, the eradication figures show an
important increase - a three-fold increase - since the
previous year. We are tracking down and bringing to
justice an increased number of individuals involved in
drug trafficking. As we know, drug trafficking is not an
Afghan-only issue. A long-term solution is not possible
without cooperation and coordination in addressing
the dominant factors behind the drug problem, such
as preventing the flow of chemical precursors into
Afghanistan and providing Afghan farmers with
alternative livelihoods.

As we continue our joint journey towards a
peaceful and stable Afghanistan, building on the gains
of the past, Afghanistan's enemies are still very much
intent on derailing our progress and preventing our
success. That is evident in the continued brutal acts
of violence and terror by the Taliban and those behind
them, the latest of which was the massacre at Spozhmai
Hotel, just outside Kabul, last weekend. It is a continued
psychological war, a war of perception, a psychodrama.

However, no such shameful acts of terror will deter
the will of the Afghan people from their ultimate goal of
securing peace and prosperity. Afghans have come too
far and endured far too many sacrifices to give up now.
With such brutal acts, the Taliban are not threatening
the existence of the State, they are just disrupting
people's peaceful lives. Let us remain as committed as
ever before to complete the journey we began a decade
ago.
The Afghan people and Government express their
gratitude to the international community for their
resolute support for Afghanistan.

