The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Nepal, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Acharya
(Nepal) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2008/34, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.

Members of the Council also have before them
document 5/2008/5, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for United
Nations assistance in support of its peace process. I
would like to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to copies of a letter dated 27 December 2007
from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Viet
Nam.


The President (spoke in Arabic): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1796 (2008).

I now give the floor to the representative of
Nepal.


