Ms. Bird (Australia): Conflict prevention and
sustaining peace go to the heart of the Charter of the
United Nations. They are core principles bringing
together all three pillars of the work of the United
Nations. We therefore welcome Sweden's choice of
today's topic for the first open debate under the tenure
of the new Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres.

Australia is deeply committed to that agenda.
We were pleased to co-facilitate the sustaining peace
resolutions, and strongly support the key messages
provided by the recent major reviews. We commend the
Secretariat on the progress made and look forward to
breaking new ground this year in advancing the use of
conflict prevention tools and policies.

We particularly welcome the Secretary-General's
comments that, inspired by the sustaining peace
resolutions, he will take forward comprehensive
reform. Cultural, structural and process reforms based
on the sustaining peace resolutions are all crucial. The
Secretary-General has the prerogative to make such
necessary reforms of the Organization, as they fall
within his authority, and we encourage him to continue
to do so. We are greatly encouraged by the Secretary-
General's early decisions to strengthen the Secretariat's
performance. More must be done to improve coherence,
accountability and financing for sustaining peace.

First, coherence requires strong coordination.
Fragmentation is untenable and undermines the
effectiveness of the United Nations in this area and
others. We welcome the Secretary-General's initial
decisions to address this. More must be done at all
levels to improve coordination between departments,
between agencies, between the field and Headquarters
and between policy and programmes. The quadrennial
comprehensive policy review included a welcome
emphasis on the importance of sustaining peace and
prevention as an intellectual and practical lens through
which to align Headquarters and country approaches.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
also has a vital role in implementing the sustaining peace
agenda. The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and DPKO should continue to adopt new
policies and practices for enhanced coherence and
joint programmes.

Secondly, with regard to accountability, it is
paramount to monitor progress and recognize success
and failure. Independent, frank advice to the Security
Council should be a key role for the Secretary-General
and of the Secretariat broadly. The little-used Article
99 should become a standard tool. We welcome
collaboration between the Department of Political
Affairs, the Peacebuilding Support Office and UNDP
to take forward pilot projects on sustaining peace in
Sri Lanka and Burkina Faso. The lessons learned from
those projects should shape new practices and policies
for a coherent United Nations.

Finally, new financing approaches are long overdue.
A fit-for-purpose United Nations must be financed
in a way that stimulates the highest-quality advice,
personnel and action on the ground. That will ensure
a nimble, innovative United Nations that responds to
needs rather than corporate structures to achieve action
that lives up to our rhetoric.

The Secretary-General's report to the seventy-
second session ofthe General Assembly called for in the
resolutions on sustaining peace will be key, including
its critical financing element. Investing in the existing
peacebuilding architecture is also important to ensure
that crucial peacebuilding gaps are met. Australia's
recent $10 million commitment to the Peacebuilding
Fund shows our confidence in this tool.

The sustaining peace agenda must be central to all
our efforts in 2017. Australia welcomes the Secretary-
General's leadership and urges the whole of the United
Nations to come together to advance this agenda.

