Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): It is my distinct honour to
speak on behalf of the 14 States members of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM), which means that
I am speaking for Haiti twice. We welcome this
opportunity to again assess recent developments in our
sister Caribbean member State.

At the outset, may I convey, on behalf of
CARICOM. member States, our sincere congratulations
to you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. I ask that you
convey our appreciation to Permanent Representative
Ambassador Susan Rice. May I also say how pleased
we were earlier this afternoon to listen to the
statements made by the Prime Minister of Haiti, whose
words were very touching and emotional, and President
Bill Clinton, Special Envoy for Haiti. CARICOM
naturally and easily aligns itself with the statements
made by those two leaders.

Like any closely-knit family, we in CARICOM
continue to be concerned about any situation that
negatively affects any one of us. The natural affinity
we have in common goes far beyond being neighbours
who share the same hemispheric space or common
bodies of water. Undoubtedly, we face similar
challenges, although perhaps at different magnitudes,
and so our participation in this debate here today
comes not just as a matter of duty but out of a common
desire to see Haiti return to the path of sustainable
stability and security, thereby enhancing the prospects
for the economic growth and prosperity of its citizens,
as I believe all of us around this table have already
emphasized.

CARICOM. naturally welcomes the Secretary-
General's report, as contained in document S/2009/439.
This latest report provides an overall assessment of the
current situation and, from our vantage point, there are
encouraging developments despite the serious setbacks
that we described in our presentation to this body in
April (see S/PV.6101) and those described in the
Secretary-General's report.

While the situation remains tremendously
complex, we note that, during the reporting period,
there was indeed increased political cooperation in a
number of very important areas, including the holding
of senatorial elections, the adoption of key legislation
and the pursuit of inclusive dialogue on a number of
major issues facing our sister CARICOM. country.
These achievements were made against the backdrop of
a "generally calm" security environment and hinged
largely on efforts aimed at institutional support and the
strengthening of the State, including capacity-building
and technical assistance in crucial areas of governance,
and to some extent on improving the capacity of the
National Police and on the results of an overall
reduction in community violence.

CARICOM. member States readily acknowledge
that the gains identified over the reporting period,
which to some may appear incremental, were not
achieved overnight but are the results of the fortitude,
resilience and determination of the Haitian people to
rise above and, surely, beyond their circumstances. As
an extension of their fortitude, resilience and
determination, the international community must surely
continue to extend the necessary support and assistance
in providing the platform upon which the fundamental
changes so crucial to Haiti's reconstruction and
socio-economic development can finally be
irreversibly constructed.

CARICOM. member States once again wish to
draw attention to the very pivotal role being played by
the courageous men and women of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) on the
ground in that country. That role extends practically to
all spheres, including the strengthening of national and
local institutional capacity and the area of human rights
where, during the period under review, MINUSTAH
sought to enhance its efforts to protect and promote
economic, social and cultural rights and to support
women's participation in the political process, the
enhancement of child protection capabilities, and the
promotion of HIV/AIDS health education. CARICOM
member States further welcome MINUSTAH's ongoing
collaboration with the Government of Haiti in the area
of border management - an area that continues to be
of significant concern to the region - through
maritime, air and land patrols.

It is to be candidly acknowledged that, despite
the favourable assessment, the Secretary-General's
report quite rightly also expresses a note caution,
acknowledging that the accomplishments remain
"extremely fragile, and [are] susceptible to setbacks or
reversal" (S/2009/439, para. 83).

In these circumstances, CARICOM. fully supports
the initiatives undertaken during the period under
review to consolidate the progress achieved thus far.
Earlier today, we heard the statement made by former
United States President Bill Clinton. We regard the
recent appointment of Mr. Clinton as the United
Nations Special Envoy for Haiti is a signal
development in the stabilization process and one which
we anticipate will galvanize additional support from
the international community and raise the profile of its
efforts, thereby keeping the focus on our sister
Caribbean State until such time as the long-term
stability and security of Haiti are achieved. As a
demonstration of its commitment to the process, in July
2009 Haiti appointed Ambassador Leslie Voltaire as
special envoy to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.

Indeed, the continued support of the international
community will be crucial to the ongoing consolidation
of stability. In this connection, CARICOM. member
States welcome and are indeed greatly encouraged by
the high level of commitment shown by the country's
partners at the Washington, D.C., conference held in
April and by the subsequent cancellation of the
country's debt, as has been mentioned around this table
this afternoon. These are undoubtedly strong
expressions of the profound confidence of the
international community first and foremost in the
Haitian people, the improvement of whose livelihood
and development remains vital to the success of the
stabilization process and beyond.

Of equal importance will be the continued
support of MINUSTAH and the United Nations country
team in Haiti. Certainly, it will be necessary for the
fledgling security apparatus to continue to benefit from
their expertise. Indeed, the technical assistance offered
by MINUSTAH is a vital tool in capacity-building,
particularly in the key areas of governance, the
development of structures for border management, the
rule of law, human rights and other areas. It is within
this context that CARICOM. member States strongly
urge the Security Council, at the appropriate time, to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti for the benefit of the entire Haitian
population as it continues on its quest to forge
sustainable peace and economic development and
recovery.

Finally, CARICOM. member States remain very
optimistic that the Haitian leadership - as exemplified
by the presence of the Prime Minister here this
evening- and people will undoubtedly capitalize on
the opportunity presented by the ongoing
improvements in stability, and therefore call on all
Haiti's partners to remain engaged within the country
and to persist in their efforts to bring about tangible
changes in the daily lives of the Haitian people.

