Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me first of all to say how
pleased I am, Mr. President, to see you leading the
Security Council during this month of February. I am
certain you will discharge your noble mission with
dedication and success. Allow me also to congratulate
your predecessor, the representative of France, for the
skill and competence with which he discharged his
weighty task during his presidency for the previous
month.

I am grateful to you, Mr. President, for your
excellent initiative in convening this important meeting
of the Security Council, which has allowed us to hear
two statements on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

I would also like to thank Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his important and precise briefing on
the general situation prevailing at this time on the
ground. I hope that in two weeks time, when he reports
to the Council again, we will have encouraging
information which will help the peace process in my
country make further progress.

I would also like to pay well-deserved tribute to
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, High Commissioner for
Human Rights, for his report to the Council. I thank
him and the members of the Council for having
denounced the massacres and serious atrocities and
serious and flagrant mass violations of human rights
and international law, perpetrated with complete
impunity by the troops of the Rwandan Patriotic Army
and the Ugandan army, and also those armed troops
affiliated with them, whether or not they signed the
Lusaka Agreement and other, subsequent peace
agreements.

I hope the Security Council will make it possible
for the written report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and also that of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) on the
Ituri events, will be made public and distributed as
official documents of the Council.

This new denunciation of atrocities that revolt the
human conscience and that include thousands of
murders, infanticides, rapes of women and children,
tortures, persecution of those fighting to defend human
rights comes after many reports from non-
governmental organizations, such as Human Rights
Watch, Amnesty International and the International
Rescue Committee, and also from United Nations
organs such as the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs - with which
the High Commissioner is well acquainted, since he
headed it - and also from the European Office for
Humanitarian Assistance.

Members of the Council know the figures. The
number of peaceful Congolese civilians who have been
massacred can no longer be counted. There have been
many outright acts of barbarism and savagery. I would
merely recall the particular horror of Mwenga, where
15 Congolese women were buried alive by Rwandan
troops. I would also recall Makobola, in the province
of South Kivu, where, from 30 December 1998 to 1
January 1999, more than 600 people were horribly
murdered. These massacres join a long list of
massacres committed against the peaceful people of the
Congo in Kavumu, Kasika, Lubarika, Uvira and
elsewhere.

How can we forget the protracted martyrdom of
the city of Kisangani, where Rwanda and Uganda
thrice clashed on the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, bombing populated areas,
claiming thousands of innocent victims and destroying
most of the infrastructure? How can we forget that, on
14 and 15 May 2002, a pogrom was observed by the
international community, which did not come to the
assistance of the endangered population of Kisangani?
The authors of these despicable acts, who were
mentioned in the report of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights in document S/2002/764, still enjoy
freedom of movement and some are even preferential
interlocutors with the international community.

Finally, need I recall Ituri? That much-coveted
area of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has seen
clashes between Lendus and Hemas, two large ethnic
groups that have always lived in peace, but who
massacred each other at the instigation of the
authorities and occupying troops of Uganda. Early this
year, Ituri made the headlines because of serious
events, recalling practices of earlier centuries, that
attained such a degree of gravity and horror that certain
authoritative voices did not hesitate to describe them as
genocidal.

No one can ignore the fact that the vast majority
of victims are civilians, particularly the most
vulnerable among them: women and children. These
have been attacked physically and have suffered many
humiliations, including repeated rape as a tactic of war,
with its corollary, the deliberate spread of HIV/AIDS.
We are experiencing a true tragedy, despite the
denunciations read in numerous reports published by
my Government and heard at countless meetings of the
Security Council, the principal organ responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security.

The situation of human rights and international
humanitarian law in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is a source of constant concern to my
Government. That is why, in his inaugural speech on
26 January 2001, the Head of State, Major General
Joseph Kabila, stressed the need to strengthen the rule
of law, to consolidate democracy and good governance,
to guarantee human rights and to promote legal and
judicial security.

Despite the state of war that led to the
strengthening of the emergency regime, it should be
noted that the Government has striven in all
circumstances to preserve the central, untouchable core
of human rights. On every occasion, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has stressed its devotion to
human rights and to international humanitarian law, in
accordance with its international obligations to respect,
promote and protect human rights and to support the
consolidation of the rule of law.

Moreover, the dissemination of a culture of
human rights and the popularization of the basic
concepts of international humanitarian law have greatly
contributed to the prevention of serious violations in
the part of the territory under the Government's
control. We are grateful to the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and to the Special Rapporteurs for
human rights who have recognized that fact in their
various reports on the human rights situation in my
country.

In last year's report on the work of the
Organization, Secretary-General Kofi Annan said, inter
alia, that

"the United Nations role in peace and security
remains an essential part of its global
responsibilities. Conflict prevention is of critical
importance and requires a comprehensive
understanding of the underlying causes and
dynamics of violent conflict. The Organization's
authority as a credible instrument to prevent
conflict depends on its capacity to address the
root causes of deadly conflict". (A/56/1, para. 6)

Moreover, as regards the headlong rush for my
country's wealth, the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
established a link of cause-and-effect between that
phenomenon and the pursuit of aggression. We should
also note that one of the direct causes of the
unfortunate human rights situation is the denial of
justice. My Government, here in the Security Council
and before other bodies, has tirelessly deplored the
denial of justice to the thousands of Rwandan victims
of genocide and of other serious violations of
international humanitarian law and, ultimately, to the
millions of Congolese men and women killed in the
war of aggression.

The demand for justice is an integral part of any
lasting peace. It is essential that we address the
question of impunity and that we break its vicious
circle. In this respect, the message sent by the
international community and the Security Council
lacked clarity. If the Security Council had had the
political will fully to implement its own resolutions on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we should never have had to deplore the repeated
massacres of Congolese civilians. If the Security
Council had seriously implemented its own resolutions,
certain individuals, actors and parties would not have
continued to view the multiple violations of human
rights and of international humanitarian law as benign.
This feeling of impunity was certainly not lacking in
those who committed the atrocities in Ituri, the
culmination of a nameless horror that has continued to
grow.

As stressed in the Proclamation of Teheran
adopted at the International Conference on Human
Rights in May 1968, aggression and armed conflict
constitute massive denials of human rights. The time
has come for the Council to say that the deterioration
of the human rights situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has exceeded the bounds of the
acceptable and the tolerable. The Council should
seriously address the mass violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law that have occurred
in my country since the beginning of the aggression. It
must also display unanimous and genuine will to
achieve progress in the regional peace process and to
put an end to the plundering of the country's wealth.

In order to do this, it must emphasize the need to
consolidate and conclude the peace process under way,
particularly through its unreserved support for the
comprehensive, inclusive agreement on the political
transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
signed in Pretoria last December. This framework can
establish the preconditions for national representation
confirmed by effective electoral procedures and give
the country a national consciousness that will allow it
to enjoy democracy without the anarchy that destroys
freedoms and in respect for the fundamental freedoms
of the citizenry.

The comprehensive agreement should soon be
adopted formally at the final meeting of the inter-
Congolese dialogue. It would send a strong signal to
the international community if that meeting were to be
held on the territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Far from the hotels and palaces of Sun City,
Pretoria or Kinshasa, the city of Kisangani, given its
weighty symbolism, would be the best place for that
meeting. Kisangani is in fact the crucible of all the
major calamities that have swept over our country
following its accession to national sovereignty.

That city has paid a heavy price throughout the
war years. Many Congolese in that city and in
Orientale province have been cruelly tested
emotionally, morally and physically. Many sons and
daughters of the city who were our relatives and
friends have been torn from life in the various
convulsions of violence, wars within wars of
aggression which the aggressors have inflicted on us.

Holding the final meeting of the inter-Congolese
dialogue in Kisangani would be a sign of solidarity; a
fresh tribute to the memory of the Congolese and
foreign victims of armed aggression; and testimony to
the concern of the international community when
wounds will have to be healed, misery eased and the
ruins rebuilt which the war of aggression strewed
throughout Orientale province.

What do we have the right to expect from the
international community in general and from the
Security Council in particular? Mr. Vieira de Mello
gave us some clear signs today. My Government fully
supports his conclusions, and we express the hope that
the recommendations of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights will be followed by the Council.

My Government would also like to thank the
Security Council for having continued to exert pressure
on all the parties to the conflict, whether or not they
signed the Lusaka Agreement, to respect human rights
and international humanitarian law, ensure the
protection of civilians and put an end to impunity.

My Government believes, however, that the
Security Council could take further action, for example
by encouraging all neighbouring countries to bring
their influence to bear on the armed groups that they
created so as to ensure that they respect their
obligations with regard to human rights and
international humanitarian law, including ending the
persecution of those fighting in defence of human
rights.

The Council could also call for and obtain the
full, unconditional and verified withdrawal of the
troops of aggression, in conformity with the relevant
Council resolutions; their presence on Congolese
territory is the root cause of the suffering of our people
and of the nightmare through which they have been
living. Finally, after having ensured that all the parties
are committed to a comprehensive and inclusive
agreement, the Council must support such an
agreement and the political transition arising from it.

A change in the mandate of MONUC is thus
necessary. It should shift immediately from simple
observation to peacekeeping during the transition
period - a period of fragility, rife with a potential for
danger that should not be underestimated. The new
ceiling authorized for the military personnel of
MONUC who will undertake that task should be
reached as soon as possible. Likewise, a major increase
in civilian personnel, including observers and human
rights experts, would be desirable so as to enable
MONUC effectively to carry out its support policies.

In order to put an end to the cycle of violence and
the culture of impunity that have taken up residence in
my country, my Government calls on the Security
Council to devise ways in which the protection of
civilians in the Democratic Republic of the Congo can
be effectively ensured. Such means could include
strengthening the rule of law and the administration of
justice and the creation of mechanisms by which all
those responsible for human rights violations and war
crimes could be made to answer for their actions.

The Security Council must fully assume its
responsibilities and set up an international criminal
tribunal capable of tracking down and punishing those
responsible for the massacres committed in the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
the absence of such a tribunal, the Council could opt
for a special criminal court based on the Sierra Leone
model or on that now being developed for Cambodia.
Its competence would extend to the area under
occupation - an occupation that is completely
illegitimate. Such a tribunal must avoid making a
mockery of justice, as is about to happen in Gbadolite,
in the north of my country.

With regard in particular to the acts of
cannibalism committed recently in Ituri, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has the right, as a
State party to the Statute of the International Criminal
Court, to resort first of all to the competence of its own
national tribunals, in accordance with the principle of
complementarity. Before it can do so, however, it will
have to wait for the draft law on the implementation of
the Rome Statute to be accepted by our parliament and
promulgated by the President of the Republic and for
the completion of the process currently under way to
reform the institutional system. My Government thus
reserves the right to go before the International
Criminal Court, which should not only prosecute and
bring to justice those responsible for the most serious
crimes, including the acts of cannibalism, but also to
decide on compensation for the victims of those
horrific acts.

The Congolese people demand just and equitable
reparations for the damages suffered. Paragraph 14 of
resolution 1304 (2000) provides the legal basis for the
Security Council to intervene, in that it calls on Uganda
and Rwanda to make reparations for the loss of life and
the property damage inflicted on the town of
Kisangani.

In the same vein, and to avoid the possibility of
calling into question the whole of the peace process,
the Council would benefit from applying all measures
authorized by the Charter, in particular under Articles
39 to 42, against recalcitrant parties - whether or not
they have signed the Lusaka Agreement - that are not
fully complying with the relevant provisions of the
Council's resolutions. Only thus can we hope to reach
the immediate objective of a return to lasting peace for
my country and for the entire Great Lakes region.

In conclusion, it will also be important for the
Council to be able to deal with the Congolese question
in the context of an appropriate post-conflict response.
Once again, my delegation stresses the need to convene
an international peace conference on peace and security
in the Great Lakes region as a peaceful way of
fostering peace and understanding in the region.
Through a frank and sincere dialogue, it will be
possible to restore good-neighbourly relations, re-
establish peace and create conditions favourable for the
administration of justice, as well as for economic and
social development.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
people expect a prompt and responsible reaction from
the Security Council, which cannot Shirk its
responsibilities without risk of seeing its credibility
undermined in the eyes of the Congolese people.

