Mr. Cardi (Italy): I wish to thank the President and
his delegation for convening this open debate, which
gives us an opportunity to discuss the review of the
peacebuilding architecture and United Nations efforts
to sustain peace.

Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and wishes to add
the following remarks in its national capacity.

The year 2016 is one of opportunities to strengthen
the capacity of the United Nations to deliver as one.
It is our responsibility to improve the peacebuilding
efforts of the whole United Nations system - first
and foremost by ensuring coherent action on the part
of all the relevant stakeholders. In that perspective,
it is of the utmost importance to take an integrated
approach to the three major reviews under way - the
future ofpeacekeeping, the role ofwomen in peace and
security, and the architecture of peacebuilding. In that
connection, I would like to thank Ambassador Rosenthal
for the very important report (see S/2015/490) produced
by the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacekeeping Architecture.

As a member of the Organizational Committee of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Italy is confident
that, under the leadership of the new Chair, Ambassador
Macharia Kamau of Kenya, the former Chair from

Sweden and the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations, this will be another year of significant
achievements. In addition, the ambitious outcome of
the review, which we expect to see reflected in the draft
resolution on the subject to be prepared by the end of
March, will pave the way for a strengthened PBC.

There is growing awareness of the importance
of the PBC's bridging role through its preventive and
multidimensional approach to conflict in the face of
rapidly changing security challenges. Massive migration
flows, climate change and human rights violations are
notable examples of crisis drivers, and their growing
impact on international peace and security deserves
our attention. In that framework, Italy believes that the
ongoing review of the peacebuilding architecture, under
the leadership of Australia and Angola, should reshape
the PBC to make it a more complete tool, thereby
enhancing the overall capacity of the United Nations in
the field of preventive diplomacy. Peacebuilding must
happen before a conflict erupts. The PBC can play an
important role in bringing together all the relevant
stakeholders, both inside and outside the United
Nations. We therefore support a closer relationship
between the Security Council and the PBC, which we
consider a valuable tool available to the Council to
enhance its capacity at preventive diplomacy. As a first
practical measure, we believe that closer cooperation
between the Security Council and the PBC could be
ensured by inviting the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations to participate in Council meetings,
as appropriate.

However, the United Nations should not be seen
as the sole peacebuilding actor, but rather as the main
global enabler of partnerships to sustain peace. It can
and must ensure greater cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, multilateral institutions and
non-governmental organizations, among which there
are many active in the field of preventive diplomacy. The
United Nations development system has a fundamental
role to play in that regard, as its work on the field is
based on a fruitful collaboration with all actors.

While virtually all Member States acknowledge the
importance of long-term solutions to conflict, resources
and the necessary political attention to peacebuilding
are sorely lacking. There is widespread agreement on
the need to secure more predictable funding. In that
connection, as recently announced, Italy has decided
to resume its contributions to the Peacebuilding
Fund throughout 2016, and is committed to ensuring
more predictable funds for peacebuilding as a whole.
But we also need to deploy alternative resources
for peacebuilding activities, which can include
non-monetary contributions as well as contributions
from the private sector. We should foster cooperation
within the United Nations system, with the World Bank
and with other regional and international financial
institutions in order to assist affected countries in
the mobilization and use of domestic resources for
economic and social development. That is of course
essential for preventing both the risk of conflict and
relapsing into conflict.

I will conclude by highlighting an issue that Italy
believes is at the core of building peaceful and inclusive
societies, namely, the protection and safeguarding of
cultural heritage. The preservation of cultural heritage,
in particular from terrorist acts and trafficking, and the
promotion of and respect for cultural diversity are key
elements in reconciliation and peacebuilding processes.
No society can flourish without culture; no mutual
relationship can be established without respecting
people's history and soul. For those reasons, building on
numerous previous activities, on 16 February Italy and
UNESCO signed a landmark agreement to establish a
task force to protect ancient cultural artefacts in crisis
areas. Such Blue Helmets of culture, as we have called
them, are a tangible sign of Italy's commitment to the
Unite for Heritage campaign.
