The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of the United States of America for the
kind words he addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of France.

The Security Council regularly takes up the question
of Angola. For the first time, we note that, as the
Secretary-General has stressed in his report, real progress
has been made in implementing the peace process. Peace
in Angola is becoming truly credible.

First, we should congratulate the Angolan
Government, which has made swift progress in
implementing its obligations, especially with regard to the
Amnesty Law, the release of prisoners, the quartering of
the rapid reaction police and the recent launch of the
disarmament programme for the civilian population. We
also warmly welcome the efforts made by UNITA with
regard to the quartering of its troops. The resolution that
we have just adopted takes account of these positive
developments, and that is why we voted in favour of it.

However, much remains to be done. First, it is
absolutely essential that the quartering of UNITA troops
be completed as soon as possible. Quartering will become
truly credible only when UNITA has handed over its
heavy weapons and all troops have been demobilized. At
the same time, it is clear that that quartering makes sense
only if there is a real possibility for former combatants to
be integrated into the Angolan Armed Forces or to be
rapidly and effectively reintegrated into civilian life. That
is why it is essential that integration and reintegration of
demobilized combatants be carried out promptly.
 

It is equally essential that national reconciliation be
gradually consolidated and that, in that spirit, a Government
of unity be rapidly formed. We understand that the question
of the vice-presidency which should fall to Mr. Savimbi is
the keystone of all of these negotiations. We therefore hope
that the meeting between President dos Santos and Mr.
Savimbi, which should be held in Angola in early August,
will bear fruit.

It is important that the parties understand that the
United Nations will not be present in Angola indefinitely.
It is clear that UNAVEM. III will have to begin leaving the
country as scheduled in February 1997. For that reason it
is necessary for the former warring parties to overcome
their remaining problems as soon as possible and in the
general interest, and for the international community to
support the efforts towards economic rehabilitation that are
needed in Angola to ensure stability and lasting
development in that country.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speaker's for this meeting. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its

consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 7 pm.
