Mr. Adsett (Canada): Canada appreciates the
opportunity to participate in this important debate on
small arms and light weapons. We thank the Secretary-
General for his report, which contains excellent
recommendations on ways and means by which the
Council can continue to address all aspects of the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons.

As is tragically evident, the proliferation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons represents a
major threat to human security throughout the world.
No country, no State and no community is immune.
Small arms alone are instrumental in the deaths of
approximately half a million people per year - 10,000
per week. Many, possibly millions more, fall victim to
their indirect consequences, creating an obstacle to
sustainable development.

The United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
which was adopted in 2001, was a major achievement.
Ensuring its full implementation will remain a major
challenge for many years to come. This debate affords
us an opportunity to take stock of the progress made, to
consider lessons learned and, most important, to renew
our collective commitment to our shared goals.

(spoke in French)

The General Assembly's adoption of the
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons - which provides
practical guidelines with respect to marking, record-
keeping and initiating and responding to tracing
requests - was among last year's most significant
milestones. That instrument promises to make it easier
to identify points of diversion of light weapons from
legitimate use to the illicit market.

Canada urges the Council to continue to pursue
increased cooperation with the International Criminal
Police Organization - Interpol - to better identify
points of diversion in the trade in small arms and to
continue to encourage greater international cooperation
to stem the illicit flow of small arms to conflict and
post-conflict zones. With respect to the latter, we
support the recommendation contained in the report of
the open-ended working group that the applicability of
the provisions of the instrument to United Nations
peacekeeping operations be considered. Canada
believes that committees on peacekeeping operations
and sanctions should, among other things, be mandated
to initiate small arms traces to assist States to identify
and pursue those who violate arms embargoes.

The Secretary-General's report highlights various
means to enforce the arms embargoes currently
mandated by the Security Council. Canada particularly
appreciates the monitoring work carried out by the
groups of experts and encourages the Council to
continue to make use of such mechanisms.
(spoke in English)

Canada supports the Council's decision to include
provisions for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) in the mandate of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, taking into consideration the
special needs of men, women, boys and girls. Clearly,
the full reintegration of ex-combatants is vital to
ensure sustained peace and to avoid ex-soldiers being
re-recruited into armed groups. Canada encourages the
Security Council to include DDR in the budgets of
peacekeeping operations.

In conclusion, I wish to draw attention to the
seminal opportunity provided by the first review
conference of the United Nations Programme of Action
on small arms and light weapons, which is to be held
later this year, to further address the humanitarian
impact of the misuse of small arms and light weapons.
Canada will work closely with other States,
international and regional organizations and civil
society groups dedicated to that issue to ensure that the
review conference is a productive and valuable event
that accelerates global action on that critically
important issue.

