Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Coninsx for their detailed analysis of the situation regarding the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). We express our support for the activities of the entities they head and the plans and initiatives being developed in the area of counter-terrorism. We also thank Ms. Mona Frei for her statement. We concur with the Secretary-General's assessment of the threat posed by the ISIL. The members of that terrorist organization maintain their footholds in Syria and Iraq, have transformed into an extensive underground network there and continue to build capacity in other regions, specifically in Afghanistan,West Africa and the Lake Chad basin. They are also trying to infiltrate and establish a presence in the Asia- Pacific region. ISIL-Khorasan remains a key factor in the deteriorating situation in Afghanistan. ISIL activity in that country is fuelled by, inter alia, foreign terrorist fighters with combat experience in Syria and Iraq. We see in the group's continued presence in the country the threat of terrorist activities spilling over into central Asian States. Our priority is the application of the Security Council's counter-terrorism sanctions regime to individuals and organizations that are a part of or directly linked to the Afghan branch of ISIL. ISIL terrorist activity in Libya poses a threat. The situation is further compounded by the fact fighters are being redeployed to that area from Idlib province in Syria. Absent a normalization of the situation in that country, stabilization of the security situation in the region is virtually impossible. We are already enduring the fallout of the collapse of statehood in Libya in West Africa and the Sahel-Sahara region. The Secretary-General's report (S/2020/95) flags the issue of the Al-Hol camp in Syria and the plight of those detained there. We have repeatedly stated, and are ready to reiterate, that there is and can be no order wherever Syrian sovereignty is violated. Without cooperation with the legitimate authorities, there is no way to solve counter-terrorism, humanitarian and human rights issues. We are confident that the efforts of the international community must be aimed at preventing the resurgence of ISIL and the emergence of a new driving force for the terrorist internationale. In that regard, we support the work of the United Nations and its specialized agencies, inter alia, to counter terrorist and extremist propaganda and combat the financing of terrorism. Unfortunately, however, we continue to observe attempts to pander to terrorists and to use them for geopolitical purposes. We believe that this approach is both reckless and pernicious. Such games entail disastrous consequences in specific countries and persistent violations of freedoms and human rights. For some reason, it is only after tragedy strikes and casualties climb into the thousands that people take note of and consider the situation. At yesterday's Security Council meeting (see S/PV.8715), we addressed in detail the reasons for the recent resurgence of terrorist activities by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham. We presented tried and true figures and facts, compiled by the Russian military personnel present in Syria. The threats that have arisen will indubitably be eradicated. To date, the international community faces another pressing issue, namely, what is to be done with foreign terrorist fighters and their families. We are convinced that justice for terrorists must be carried out in national jurisdictions, based on the principles of the inevitability of punishment and proportionality vis-a-vis the crime committed. International cooperation in that area must be rooted in full compliance with the relevant provisions of universal counter-terrorism conventions, including the principle of extradite or prosecute. Russia has consistently opposed granting various groups the right to protect areas where fighters are being held, and especially to decide their fate. Unfortunately, some countries prefer to distance themselves from resolving the issue of bringing to justice their own citizens who fought in the ranks of terrorists in Syria and Iraq. Patronage and connivance, against the backdrop of impunity, fuel the unacceptable increase in terrorist activity, as we are seeing today in Idlib. Family members of foreign terrorist fighters who are illegally present in Syria and Iraq and who are not suspected of involvement in terrorist activities must be expeditiously repatriated to their countries of origin and citizenship. Terrorists need to be duly punished. We believe that the report on the threat of ISIL should not fail to focus on the question of manpower, material, financial and weapon support for terrorism. The document under discussion today mentions the issue of supplying military equipment to terrorist organizations only in passing. Meanwhile, terrorist groups in the Middle East and Africa continue to receive weapons from external sponsors. We call on all responsible States to immediately stop all illegal arms transfers and to not play into the hands of radical elements under the pretext of facilitating myriad incarnations of the so-called moderate opposition.
