Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor to explain Malaysia's vote on
resolution 2231 (2015), which the Council just adopted
and which we co-sponsored and voted in favour of.
At the outset, Malaysia wishes to congratulate the
delegations responsible for reaching this historic
agreement, namely, China, France, Germany, the
Russian Federation, the United Kingdom, the United
States, the European Union and, of course, the Islamic
Republic of Iran.

We place on record our appreciation to those
delegations for their commitment and for remaining
steadfast in upholding key principles of constructive
engagement, dialogue and diplomacy in good faith
throughout the difficult negotiations. The Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, endorsed by the Council
via resolution 2231 (2015), is a positive step that augurs
well for international efforts aimed at enhancing
nuclear security. We look forward to the immediate and
constructive implementation of the Plan of Action by
all the parties concerned.

The agreement reached on 14 July is a landmark
understanding that, in our view, reaffirms the
principle of the peaceful use of nuclear technology
and, at the same time, appears to strike a balance in
terms of concerns about proliferation as provided
for under the regime established under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Malaysia remains convinced that the NPT regime
continues to occupy a role of central importance in
the efforts to halt the proliferation of nuclear weapons,
as well as forming an essential foundation for the
pursuit of general and complete nuclear disarmament.
Nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament
are two sides of the same coin. In that connection, we
reiterate the call upon all the nuclear-weapon States to
reinvigorate efforts to implement their obligations under
the disarmament pillar ofthe NPT regime, including by
taking steps to reduce their nuclear weapon stockpiles
and decrease the operational readiness of the nuclear
weapons systems, among others.

As a member of the Council and of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), Malaysia looks forward to working with
other Council members in the implementation of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action with a view to
working towards the eventual lifting of all United
Nations sanctions against the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Malaysia hopes that the successful implementation of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action will positively
contribute to peace and stability in the Middle East
region and beyond.

