Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Miyet and Ambassador
Holbrooke for their statements. I wish to join Ambassador
Holbrooke in reserving the right to intervene again later
in the debate, in conformity with the interactive format
that the British presidency has so fortunately introduced.

In yesterday's open debate on Africa, almost all
delegations spoke about the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Some delegations, such as that of South Africa,
spoke about nothing else. Clearly, the overlapping theme
of these two days of public Council debate is the

 

implementation of the Lusaka Agreement, not by its
signatories, but by the Security Council. If the Security
Council fails to pass this litmus test, so we were told, it
will once again have revealed its double standard.
Yesterday, my delegation had hoped to put up some feeble
defence against these strident words, but unfortunately there
was no time for second statements. Today we are less
pressed for time, so I may be allowed to use my turn in
this debate to say a few words about this matter.

There appear to be two very different ways of looking
at the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The first is to be
baffled by the complexity of the conflict. Here we have a
country with - even by African standards - has an
exceptionally contorted past, from being the personal
possession of Leopold II through decades of
mismanagement under President Mobutu. Given that
history, one can hardly be surprised that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is in such disarray today.
The second way of looking at the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is to see a simple line of cause and
effect between the Rwandan genocide and the present chaos
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Those
delegations in the Council that blame other delegations for
dragging their feet tend to see it that way. For them, the
situation is not complex, but simple; and for simple
situations, they have simple remedies: all the Council has
to do is to comply with the Lusaka Agreement and send in
the troops.

My delegation does not believe in the second
approach. We are unable to regard the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as simple. It is true that
many people in the eastern part of the country have no
business being there, but these intruders form an
inextricable mix of friends and enemies of the Government
of Rwanda. The drafters of the Lusaka Agreement were
aware of that: precisely because of the complexity of the
situation, the Lusaka Agreement may well be the only
viable solution. We agree with Ambassador Holbrooke that
the Lusaka Agreement is a well-drafted accord, but we have
also heard him say that just about every one of its
provisions is being ignored or violated.

This is nothing new. On the first day that the Security
Council discussed the Lusaka Agreement, we were already
put under pressure with the argument that the Agreement
would not last if we did not dispatch our peacekeepers right
away. I vividly remember that day, because I expressed my
doubt about the appropriateness of the qualification,
"significant milestone", for an agreement that none of the
rebels had yet been prepared to sign.

If the Lusaka Agreement is a litmus test, it is, first
of all, one for the people who signed it. If the parties
themselves do not fulfil their engagements, there is
nothing the Council can do. In that sense, there was
something disconcerting about yesterday's debate. What
we witnessed in this Chamber was the emergence of the
myth that it was the dilly-dallying of the Security Council
that killed the Lusaka Agreement. We are not there yet.
There is still hope, and we can proceed on the basis of a
new resolution. But the Council has been given a stern
warning. If my delegation had been given the floor a
second time yesterday, we would have begged the African
delegations not to delude themselves. Does anyone
seriously believe that the Lusaka Agreement was being
observed by all parties for the first three months of its
existence, and only then began to unravel due to the
Council's inaction?

As a representative of the Netherlands, I feel entitled
to ask such questions. The Netherlands is anxious to do
the right thing with regard to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, but it is not helpful if we are told that the
situation is simple, and that considering it to be complex
can only be a lame excuse for procrastination. That is not
the sort of approach that helps us overcome our
hesitation. Speaking for the Netherlands, I can only say
that our commitment to Africa cannot be called into
question. I do not want to waste the Council's time, but
let me briefly repeat what I said yesterday. The
Netherlands is spending large sums of money on Kosovo,
but our significant total contribution to Africa has not
been affected. Moreover, there has been no slackening in
our commitment to African projects that are of special
concern to the Security Council, such as our contributions
to the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) in Sierra
Leone and to the Arusha process in Burundi. There has
not been any diversion in the flow of Dutch funds
destined for Africa.

We feel that a country with our record should be
seriously listened to when it tries to explain why it has
certain doubts about a military involvement that is urged
upon the Security Council. We are not procrastinating
when we ask normal questions. In addition, however,
there is a second reason why the Netherlands feels
justified in being cautious, and that is its traumatic
involvement in the tragedy of Srebrenica. The Secretary-
General's report on Srebrenica of 15 November contains

 

a gruesome account of what can go wrong if military
involvement is initiated without having been thought
through, if peacekeeping operations are used as a substitute
for political consensus and peacekeepers are told that they
must use their peacekeeping tools to impose the ill-defined
wishes of the international community on one or another of
the belligerents by military means.

Let us not make that mistake twice.

