Mr. Bolton (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for allowing Member States to
express their preliminary reactions to the most recent
report of the Independent Inquiry Committee. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his comments today.
And I thank Chairman Volcker for the important work
he has done over the past year.

The United States will carefully review the report
that Mr. Volcker has delivered, with one principal
purpose in mind: to see how we can use the findings
and recommendations made in his report to reform and
improve the United Nations. Identifying those who
failed to execute their responsibilities is a necessary
part of the process; prosecuting wrongdoers is equally
necessary. But what is most important is to consider
the shortcomings of the oil-for-food programme as a
catalyst for change at the United Nations.

It appears from the preface of the report of the
Independent Inquiry Committee that, in spite of
success in the humanitarian objective of ensuring that
the Iraqi people were adequately fed, there is plenty of
blame to go around for the failings of the oil-for-food
programme. When we have had a chance to review the
report, the United States may or may not agree with all
of the findings of the Committee in that regard. What
we can all agree on is that Saddam Hussein exploited
the goodwill of the international community towards
the people of Iraq. He exploited that goodwill in order
to obtain billions of dollars for his own personal use
and for the use of his regime so as to strengthen his
authoritarian grip on his own people.

We can also agree that there was corruption both
inside and outside the United Nations system and that
that corruption allowed Saddam to achieve many of his
illicit goals. There were bribes; there were kickbacks;
there was lax oversight from the Secretariat. And some
Member States turned a blind eye to that corruption.

We look forward to our heads of State arriving in
New York next week to discuss, among other topics,
the importance of reforming the United Nations
system. We note the call by Chairman Volcker for
greater auditing and management controls, including
an independent audit board, stronger organizational
ethics and more active management of the United
Nations and its programmes by the Secretariat. Over
the past several days we have been pushing for exactly
that, only to meet with resistance from dozens of
countries that are in a state of denial - countries
which contend that business as usual at the United
Nations is fine. This report unambiguously rejects the
notion that business as usual at the United Nations is
acceptable. We need to reform the United Nations in a
manner that will prevent another oil-for-food scandal.
The credibility of the United Nations depends on it.
