Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to begin by
thanking Mr. Martin Kobler for his briefing and
his commendable and tireless efforts, which we
greatly appreciate.

The briefing we just heard from him provides a
sobering assessment of the situation in Libya. Despite
the efforts to reinvigorate the political process, the
security situation continues to worsen across the
country. We are particularly concerned about the
recent military escalation in southern Libya, as well as
the recurring violent clashes in the capital, including
attempts to take over Government infrastructure, and
the fighting in the oil crescent. It is imperative that we
not allow such developments to run the risk of returning
the country to full-scale conflict. The consequences
would be disastrous both for the people of Libya and
the security of the entire region.

As documented in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/283), the civilian population of Libya is
clearly paying a staggeringly high price as a result of
this conflict. Millions of people have been affected,
with 300,000 currently displaced by insecurity and
violence. Illegal flows of arms into the country prolong
the conflict and increase civilian suffering. We would
like to remind all United Nations members of their
responsibility to fully implement the Libya sanctions,
including the arms embargo. A breakdown in the rule of
law has resulted in all parties to the conflict committing
widespread human rights abuses and unacceptable
violations of international humanitarian law, including
against children. Those responsible should be held to
account. The decision of the International Criminal
Court to intensify its work on Libya is more relevant
than ever.

The security vacuum has also had dire consequences
for Libya's many refugees and migrants, as has been
mentioned here this morning. We are alarmed by the
reports of arbitrary detention and unsafe conditions
in migrant detention centres. We welcome the efforts
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
to investigate the allegations of sexual abuse and
exploitation of women in those centres, and urge the
parties to enable increased humanitarian access for
international organizations such as the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the International Organization for Migration. As one of
the 10 largest bilateral donors to Libya, Sweden stresses
that all international assistance must be implemented in
line with international law, including refugee law.

There is clearly no military solution to the conflict.
The only Viable way forward is through Libyan-led,
United Nations-supported political negotiations based
on the Libyan Political Agreement. The Security
Council and the international community as a whole
have a responsibility to come together in support of
the Libyan Presidency Council and the Government
of National Accord as the sole legitimate Government,
in accordance with resolution 2259 (2015) and
subsequent resolutions.

At the same time, we should be receptive to parties'
calls for amendments to the Political Agreement that
can ensure inclusivity. The Political Agreement's
implementation should reflect the interests of all
Libyans, women and men, and the whole of the country,
including the South. It goes without saying that the
details of any possible amendments are for the Libyan
people to decide. We are encouraged by the parties'
signs ofincreased willingness to engage in dialogue, as
well as by the constructive support from neighbouring
States and regional organizations. In that regard, we
are happy to see the valuable inclusion of the European
Union, Libya's neighbour and partner, in the quartet.

In order to respond to what we hope is an emerging
readiness to move the process forward, the United
Nations must now urgently pursue a reinvigorated,
broad and long-term approach to Libya. We are therefore
encouraged by the Secretary-General's commitment to
making Libya a priority for 2017. While reviewing its
long-term approach, it is crucial that the United Nations
remain fully engaged in the short term as well. It must
be equipped to play a leading role, as Mr. Kobler said,
in moving from containment to reinvigorating the
political process in support of negotiations between the
parties and coordinating international efforts. Time is
of the essence.

