Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to speak on behalf
of the countries members of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), which held two
extraordinary summit sessions on Somalia in the
course of past month alone, specifically on 3 and
24 May. Before getting into the substance of what those
two sessions dealt with, let me take this opportunity to
thank you, Mr. President and dear Minister, for coming
to New York to preside over this important meeting. We
are very grateful to your country for having taken up the
situation in Somalia very seriously - and with a lot of
care, I might add. The latest meeting, of7 May, that the
United Kingdom co-hosted with Somalia at Lancaster
House was a further affirmation of the readiness by the
United Kingdom to make a significant difference in
Somalia and in the broader IGAD region.

Let me also take this opportunity to welcome
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Somalia, Her Excellency Ms. Fowsiyo Yusuf
Haji Adan, who has been instrumental in the further
consolidation of peace in Somalia and in strengthening
and expanding the ties of friendship among IGAD
member States. Her wisdom and pragmatic approach
to difficult issues have been a source of strength for
IGAD.

I also wish to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for being here and for his contribution in this domain
and other areas, which he makes with very welcome
passion. We are very grateful to him.

There is absolutely no doubt that Somalia is on a
very encouraging and promising trajectory. In a number
of ways, the issues that are of concern today in Somalia
bear no resemblance to the challenges the country faced
not long ago. Not that complacency is justified, for some
of the security challenges still exist - Al-Shabaab
has not been totally defeated - which is why IGAD
countries continue to call for the situation in Kismayo
not be allowed to distract attention from the urgent task
of maintaining the momentum in the fight against that
extremist group. That was underlined by IGAD Heads
of State and Government at their meetings on 3 and
24 May.

Strategically speaking, Al-Shabaab is on the way
out, not because it has lost the military wherewithal
but because it has absolutely no popular support. The
fact that the people of Somalia have decided to embrace
their new Government is very obvious. That is where
more work is needed on the part of both the Federal
Government and the international community. That
is also where the London Conference on Somalia
of 7 May was extremely significant. The Lancaster
House Conference has given further impetus to more
coordinated international support to Somalia. The
Conference also outlined the critical areas where
further input is necessary to ensure that the momentum
is maintained in Somalia.

We have always emphasized how critical it is
for the Federal Government to continue to build its
credibility, and therefore its legitimacy, among the
people of Somalia. That is a major undertaking that can
be fulfilled only when the Government is in a position
to deliver services to the people. We believe that the
call in the London Conference communique with
respect to the development of a longer-term sustainable
financing architecture for Somalia, including a World
Bank multi-donor trust fund, is an initiative that
should be pursued in earnest. As has been suggested,
that could serve as a vehicle for the normalization of
Somalia's financial relationship with the international
financial institutions. In the meantime, it is IGAD's
hope that partners will make serious effort to make
use of the special financing facility and the rule-of-law
fund as mechanisms to channel funding to enhance the
Government's capacity to deliver basic services to the
people in a variety of areas.

For IGAD countries, there are few priorities
as critical and as vital as the security, stability and
regeneration of Somalia. That explains why, in the
course of May, as I mentioned a while ago, our leaders
held two extraordinary sessions. They did so because of
their conviction that there was a need for more speeded-
up efforts at national reconciliation in Somalia. At
their meeting on 3 May, they agreed to establish five
principles, namely, the leadership of the Government in
the process of reconciliation; respect for the provisional
Constitution; an all-inclusive consultative process;
a supporting role for IGAD based on the priorities of
the Somali Government; and fighting Al-Shabaab as
the primary focus of the Somali Federal Government,
AMISOM. and regional and international partners.

The logic behind the emphasis given to the fight
against Al-Shabaab has to do with fact that a loss of
momentum in that fight, let alone a reversal of the
gains so far made, would easily herald an unravelling
of the entire situation, which has been the source of so
much hope and confidence. That is why IGAD Heads
of State and Government have underlined the fight
against Al-Shabaab as the primary focus of cooperation
among the Somali Federal Government, AMISOM. and
regional and international partners.

At this point, let me express how pleased we are
to welcome the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Kay, in whom we have
great confidence and with whom we look forward to
working very closely, as in fact we did with Ambassador
Mahiga, to whom we remain indebted. It was during
Ambassador Mahiga's tenure that we came up with a
very innovative mechanism of tripartite consultation
among the United Nations Political Office for Somalia,
AMISOM. and IGAD. It was quite an achievement. We
are hopeful that Mr. Kay might wish to look at that
experience closely, because it might be useful. All the
same, IGAD countries look forward to working with
him closely, and we are pleased that the United Nations
Assistance to Mission to Somalia (UNSOM) was
launched a few days ago.

Let me conclude by reiterating the commitment
of IGAD countries to working closely with UNSOM.
We remain hopeful that the international community
will help to ensure that the planned conference on the
repatriation of Somali refugees will be a success. Of
course, we are very grateful to all those who called
for this meeting for enhanced support to AMISOM,
which is long overdue. I also wish to acknowledge the
sacrifices made by AMISOM. and Ethiopian troops.

