Mr. Salim (Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity): I wish at the outset to express my
appreciation to you, Madam President, and to the members
of the Security Council, for the timely initiative to convene
this ministerial meeting of the Council devoted to African
issues. In meeting today in quite special circumstances, the
Security Council acknowledges the concerns that have been
raised on the need for the international community to be
more engaged in and to pay more attention to the problems
confronting Africa.

Over the last years, our Continent and its peoples have
been confronted with a multitude of serious problems, and
in the process we have learned a lot. Today, Africa is
deeply engaged in very difficult reforms, both political and
socio-economic. The democratization process is taking root,
and the issues of good governance, accountability, respect
for human rights and the rule of law are now at the centre
of preoccupations in the continent.

We strongly believe that the issues of peace, security
and stability and the problems of economic development
should be addressed simultaneously, as they are mutually
reinforcing. We recognize that, while socio-economic
development is our fundamental objective, there cannot be
meaningful progress in an environment devoid of peace,
security and stability. It is in that spirit that Africa is now
involved in the implementation process of the Abuja Treaty
on the establishment of the African Economic Community,
the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution, and other collective undertakings relating to
human and social development endeavours.

There is no doubt that conflicts which continue to rage
in some parts of our continent constitute for us a major
preoccupation. Although most African States are not
experiencing such an outbreak of conflicts, the fact remains
that the existing conflicts have far-reaching implications for
the peace, security and stability of the continent as a whole.
The conflicts in Sierra Leone, the Horn of Africa, Congo
(Brazzaville) and now the Comoros, as well as the tragedies
in Rwanda and Liberia, stand in sad testimony to this fact.

These conflicts have caused irreparable loss, damage
and destruction to our continent and peoples. They have
also caused acute humanitarian tragedies. They have forced
millions of our peoples into a life of exile as refugees.
Furthermore, as a result of the unbearable burden created
by the massive influx of refugees to countries of asylum,
the environmental degradation generated and the
frustrations and resentment raised among local
populations, there has been a decline in the traditional
African compassion and hospitality towards the refugees.
This has been exacerbated by the eruption of the
phenomenon of armed refugees. It is imperative to bear
these factors in mind as the international community
addresses refugee problems and recurring humanitarian
crises. We must affirm the need for compassion and
respect for humanitarian principles, including the
principles of asylum and non-refoulement. But as we do
so, we must not only strive towards the elimination of the
root causes of these humanitarian crises, but also address
the legitimate problems and concerns of the countries of
asylum.

We should, therefore, recommit ourselves to pooling
our resources and energy and working closely together in
order to address the scourge of conflicts afflicting the
African continent and to promote a climate of peace,
security, stability and understanding. In that endeavour,
we should, as President Mugabe, the current Chairman of
the OAU, has just stated, also aim at finding lasting and
peaceful solutions to disputes, such as the dispute between
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the United States and
Great Britain over the Lockerbie issue. The Organization
of African Unity has consistently expressed its concern
over the continued sanctions imposed on that country,
with their humanitarian consequences on the ordinary
people, and has called for a fair trial of the suspects
according to acceptable requirements of justice and
international law. The Security Council may wish to give
serious consideration to the proposals jointly presented by
the OAU and the League of Arab States aimed at seeking
a just and equitable solution to the crisis.

As the Security Council is holding this special
session, we should draw lessons from our experiences.
We should learn from the failure to anticipate and
effectively to prevent the crime of genocide in Rwanda,
which resulted in the decimation of hundreds of thousands
of our fellow human beings. We should learn from the
inability of the Security Council to respond appropriately
to the call by African leaders to deal with the crisis in the
eastern part of former Zaire. We should aim at forging a
new and true partnership that can enable us together to
address, in a sustained manner, the acute problems facing
our continent. While Africa, like any other region, has the
responsibility to address its own problems as a matter of
priority - and African States have clearly demonstrated
their determination to do this - the United Nations

 

cannot exonerate itself from its Charter responsibilities
towards the continent.

As we meet here, I also believe that we should
recommit ourselves to enhanced cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and our
continent's institutions. In this respect, I suggest that due
consideration should be given by the United Nations, and
especially by the Security Council, to the positions of the
continent as articulated by its continental Organization -
the OAU - and its leaders, in View of the regional
advantage they enjoy. For example, many people in Africa
fail to understand why, despite the request made by the
Chairman of the International Mediation Committee on the
situation in the Congo, His Excellency El Hadj Omar
Bongo, President of Gabon, for the deployment of a
peacekeeping force, the Security Council has not to date
been able to take decisive action.

With respect to the cooperation between the United
Nations and the OAU, we should aim at building a new
partnership, in keeping with the provisions of Chapter VIII
of the United Nations Charter and the "Agenda for Peace",
on the role of the regional organizations in the maintenance
of peace and international security.

I wish to seize this opportunity to reiterate our
disposition, in the OAU, to continue working very closely
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations towards
that end. In this endeavour, we should be guided by the
need to ensure complementarity and rational division of
work based on comparative advantage. Such cooperation
should, as a matter of urgency, focus on addressing the
current outbreaks of violence and conflicts in the continent.
But it should increasingly pay more attention to preventive
diplomacy, preventive action and preventive deployment.
We should also aim at re-orienting our cooperation towards
building a joint capacity for post-conflict reconstruction and
peace-building.

Finally, I wish to emphasize the importance of
providing the OAU with the necessary logistic and technical
assistance to enhance its capacity to respond to conflict
situations. We have already initiated consultations with the
United Nations in this respect, and we look forward to
establishing concrete modalities for improved cooperation.
However, beyond the necessary enhancement of the OAU
capacity, there is also the need to support the capacity of
our individual Member States and their subregional
mechanisms to enable them to meet their responsibilities in
conflict prevention, management and resolution. I wish, in
this regard, to welcome the recent initiatives taken by some
of our external partners to support Africa's capacity in
peacekeeping. We see these initiatives as a demonstration
of good disposition to enhance Africa's efforts at conflict
prevention, management and resolution.

It is our sincere hope and expectation that the
symbolic and political manifestation of interest and
concern inherent in the holding of this special ministerial
session of the Security Council will be followed up by a
more active and committed involvement of the Security
Council and the United Nations as a whole in dealing
with African problems - especially those relating to
peace, security, stability and development.

