Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): I am pleased to welcome you, Sir, as the
representative of the country that occupies the presidency
of the Security Council this month, and I am pleased to
wish you, as well as the Permanent Representative and the
delegation of Botswana, every success in the important
undertaking at hand.

We are grateful to the Permanent Representative of
Argentina for the large amount of work he did as
President of the Security Council last month. I am also
happy to welcome here the ministerial delegation of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), which includes
Ministers for Foreign Affairs, in particular, the Minister
of External Affairs of the Republic of Angola, Mr.
Venancio de Moura. The participation in this Security
Council meeting of such a representative delegation from
the African regional organization underlines the
importance, not only for Angola but for Africa as a
whole, of the issue before us today.

As one of the troika of observer States, Russia
supports the immediate transition from the second United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. II) to
the third (UNAVEM. III), which will have a broader
mandate for implementing the measures set out in the
Lusaka Protocol. The further consolidation of the still
very fragile peace in Angola requires the Security
Council's immediate approval of the mandate of
UNAVEM. III with a phased and effective deployment of
the peace-keeping operation. This should be done, of
course, as economically as possible with regard to
financial, material, human and other resources. This
decision by the Security Council will make it possible to
reinforce the cease-fire and the atmosphere of trust in
Angola and will give a new and powerful impetus to the
settlement process within Angola that should completely
transform it for the better.

The draft resolution agreed on in prior consultations
is realistic, balanced and fully in keeping with the goals
of strengthening peace and stability in Angola, and also
meets with the criteria for launching a new peace-keeping
operation. It is significant that the draft resolution has
been drawn up strictly in accordance with the timetable
agreed on by the Government of Angola and UNITA
within the framework of the Lusaka Protocol, that it
contains no preconditions and that it creates the necessary
basis for the most rapid possible phased deployment of
UNAVEM. III's basic force. Accordingly, the Russian
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

The success of the peace-keeping operation in
Angola will be critically dependent not only on the timely
deployment of adequate United Nations forces in Angola,
but also and especially on the Angolan parties' taking
consistent and constructive positions and on their resolve
to follow the timetable for implementation to the letter.
The Angolan parties, especially UNITA, must
demonstrate the necessary political will to fulfil the

 

obligations they have entered into in the interests of
strengthening the peace and achieving national
reconciliation so sorely needed by the Angolan people, who
have experienced the horrors and suffering of two decades
of fratricidal war. In this connection, we place our hopes in
the personal meeting between the President of Angola,
Mr. dos Santos, and the leader of UNITA, Mr. Savimbi;
that meeting, as the draft resolution notes, could build the
necessary political momentum for the successful
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.

For its part, the Russian Federation, which has already
seconded military observers to the United Nations Mission
in Angola, will continue to do all it can, both bilaterally
and multilaterally, to promote the process of restoring peace
and stability in Angola, a country with which Russia has
strong ties of friendship and cooperation.

