Mr. Wali (Nigeria): I should like, on behalf of
the Nigerian delegation, to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I should also like to express
our appreciation to the delegation of the United States
of America for the very effective way in which it
conducted the affairs of the Council last month.

The timing of this debate could not have been
more apt, given the recent commencement of the trial
of Mr. Charles Taylor and the dire need to strengthen
the capacity of the Special Court for Sierra Leone and
to provide it with the resources that it needs to deal
with the situation.

Nigeria continues to believe in the rule of law
and in the provisions of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. That is why we believe that the
establishment of the Special Court for Sierra Leone
will bring justice to the victims of human rights abuses.
We are satisfied that the Court has sent a clear message
that no one is above the law. Furthermore, it indicates
the collective rejection of impunity by the international
community.

Nigeria appreciates the important decisions so far
reached by the Special Court. The Court has
demonstrated that it is an important part of the peace
process in Sierra Leone, that the political immunity of
a head of State should not shield him or her from
prosecution for human rights violations and crimes
against humanity and that it is averse to the crime of
the recruitment of child soldiers. The Court further
declared forced marriage to be a crime against
humanity and a violation of customary law, inter alia.
We are happy to note that a judgement on heinous
crimes committed in Sierra Leone will be delivered
shortly.

Nigeria welcomes the efforts of States Members
of the United Nations that are supporting the work of
the Special Court through voluntary contributions.
Equally, we encourage those that have not yet done so
to get involved. The fact is that voluntary contributions
have proved to be inadequate to meet the needs of the
Court. Nigeria therefore calls on the international
community to urgently explore other measures to
enhance the funding of the Special Court. That would
ensure reliable resource flows to deal with Court
processes and other attendant requirements, such as
victims' participation in Court proceedings, and would
stem likely delays and suspensions of the activities of
the Court.

That would further strengthen the position of the
Court in effectively handling other issues that are
bound to arise from the final judgements, such as
monitoring detainees, the relocation and protection of
prime witnesses and the enforcement of sentences.

We are of the view that the fight against impunity
and against the tyranny perpetrated in Sierra Leone
needs to be carried to its logical conclusion through the
instrumentality of the Special Court. In order to
achieve that and to ensure that justice is not delayed,
the international community must respond effectively
to the all-encompassing funding requirements of the
Court.

