The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

I commend today's briefers for their insightful
remarks and for their strong commitment to the
protection of cultural heritage, which has increasingly
become one of the main targets of systematic and
deliberate attacks by terrorist groups and in situations
of conflict, and is also used, as we were reminded, to
finance terrorism and organized crime. Those attacks
affect people's historical identity and undermine
important values, such as tolerance, respect for
diversity and inclusiveness, thereby hampering post-
conflict reconciliation and the long-term stability of the
countries affected.

The international community has recognized the
link between the destruction of cultural heritage and
violence against local populations, including through
a landmark statement of the International Criminal
Court in the case of Prosecutor v. Ahmad Al Faqi Al
Mahdi, and the resolutions adopted by the Security
Council and the UNESCO General Conference and its
Executive Board.

It is critical to elaborate and implement
coordinated measures at the legal and operational
levels aimed at preventing and countering all forms
of trafficking in cultural property. We have made the
protection of cultural heritage and the fight against
the illicit trafficking in cultural artefacts one of our
main priorities, including during our mandate on the
Security Council, during which we have focused on the
Mediterranean, where Italy's cultural identity is rooted
in thousands of years of exchanges and where today
instability threatens our common heritage.

In Paris, at UNESCO, we launched the idea of
the Blue Helmets for Culture. We have supported the
Unite4Heritage campaign by creating a national task
force, and promoted a specific resolution devoted to
intervention in areas of crisis. Together with Saudi
Arabia and the United States ofAmerica, we co-chaired
the Counter-ISIS Finance Working Group of the
Global Coalition agasint Da'esh, and we co-chair the
sub-working group on the fight against the smuggling
of archaeological artefacts.

In New York since 2015, we have been working
with many organizations, such as United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, UNESCO and INTERPOL,
whose heads briefed the Council today, and with
many countries, including France and Jordan, to
address different aspects of the protection of cultural
heritage, with special attention to the fight against
illicit trafficking in cultural artefacts. In particular,
that initiative concluded with the presentation of a
list of proposed key actions to be undertaken by all
the main stakeholders in response to attacks against
cultural heritage.

In September, at the high-level event on protecting
cultural heritage from terrorism and mass atrocities,
held on the margins of the general debate of the General
Assembly, the Italian Minister of Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation, Mr. Angelino Alfano,
stressed once again the fact that acts of intentional
destruction of cultural heritage are a huge obstacle to
peace since they hinder dialogue and reconciliation
by fomenting hatred among communities and
between generations.

To address the rise in destructive attacks and
serious crimes perpetrated by terrorists, France
and Italy together - and we share the same vision,
as Ambassador Delattre said earlier - we jointly
promoted resolution 2347 (2017), as many speakers
recalled today, as an advanced legal framework for the
protection of cultural heritage and property in armed
conflicts. The resolution foresees, inter alia, promoting
the ratification and implementation of relevant
international instruments; strengthening international
cooperation; introducing operational measures to
safeguard and preserve endangered cultural heritage;
promoting cultural pluralism; introducing operational
measures to prevent and counter the trafficking of
cultural property illegally appropriated and exported
in the context of armed conflicts, notably by terrorist
groups for financing their operations; and affirming
that the mandate of United Nations peacekeeping
operations may encompass the protection of cultural
heritage from destruction.

As has already been underlined this morning, the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/969) offers the
first overview of the implementation of resolution 2347
(2017), and contains specific proposals dedicated to
future actions based on the provisions of the resolution.
The report expresses the strong commitment of the
United Nations system to acting in a more harmonious
way and to enhancing its cooperation among Member
States, which hold primary responsibility for the
protection of their community and culture.

We will continue to actively work on that
issue through the expertise of our Carabinieri and
dedicated experts like Mr. Bianchi, because Italy
believes that the preservation of cultural heritage
and the promotion and respect of cultural diversity
are key elements of reconciliation and peacebuilding
processes and in establishing a sustainable, inclusive
human development. No society can flourish without
culture. No mutual relations can be established without
respecting peoples' history and its soul.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

As this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council
for the month of November, I would like to express
the sincere appreciation of the delegation of Italy
to Council members, especially my colleagues the
Permanent Representatives, the respective staff and the
secretariat of the Council for all the support they have
given to us. It has been a busy month, one in which we
have addressed, I think always constructively, together
with the Council members many important issues.

We could not have done so without the hard work, As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
support and positive contribution of every delegation, Of the Council, in wishing EOOd IUCk "3 the delegation
the representatives of the secretariat and all relevant Of Japan in the month Of December.

conference service officers and interpreters. The meeting rose at 12. l5p.m.
