Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would like
to say at the outset, Mr. President, that my delegation
fully associates itself with the very apt words you
expressed prior to the beginning of this meeting in
paying well-deserved tribute to Ambassador Samantha
Power as she prepares to leave the Chamber and her
work as Permanent Representative of the United States.
Ambassador Power has served her country with
dedication and on every occasion found the energy
necessary to advance the Council's work, including on
issues related to Africa. We wish her good luck.

I should like to thank Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman; Ambassador De
Almeida, Head of the Delegation ofthe European Union
to the United Nations; and Ambassador Sebastiano
Cardi, Permanent Representative of Italy and facilitator
of the implementation of resolution 2231(2015), for
their briefings.

By endorsing the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) in resolution 2231 (2015) on 20 July
2015, the Security Council confirmed the agreement
on the Iranian nuclear issue, which enshrines the
completion of 12 years of diplomatic efforts on the
part of the United States of America, Russia, Germany,
France, the United Kingdom, China,the European
Union and the Islamic Republic of Iran.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation ofresolution 2231 (2015) (S/2016/1136),
which we are discussing today and which is the second
of its kind established in accordance with the provisions
set out in annex B to that resolution, comprehensively
describes the provisions relating to nuclear issues and
ballistic missiles, travel bans, the freezing of assets
and measures taken to promote the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).

With regard to nuclear-related provisions, the
report clearly indicates that the Islamic Republic of Iran
continues to fulfil its obligations, as outlined in the last
two quarterly reports published by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in September and
November on its verification and monitoring activities
in that country, as well as the monitoring of Iran's
implementation of its nuclear-related commitments
under the JCPOA.

In addition, we welcome the five new nuclear
proposals submitted under the procurement channel,
three of which have already been approved by
the Security Council. This clearly confirms the
effectiveness of the cooperation between our Council
and the Joint Commission set up under the JCPOA.
The interface thus constituted between the members
of the Security Council and the Joint Commission
is functioning well, thereby ensuring visibility,
inclusiveness and transparency. Similarly, no activity or
transfer of ballistic missiles by Iran has been reported
in the report, thereby reinforcing compliance with the
provisions of the resolution by that country.

However, mention is made once again of a transfer
of arms from the Islamic Republic of Iran, in violation
of the provisions of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015).
We are awaiting more information from the Secretariat
concerning the origin of these weapons. Moreover, the
Senegalese delegation is concerned about indications
that Iran is supplying weapons to Hizbullah.

With regard to the freezing of assets and travel
bans, we urge the parties to respect these provisions
while the Council continues to work on delisting the
remaining 36 entities and persons.

With regard to the efforts of the Secretariat and
the facilitator in the implementation of resolution
2231, including the practical information provided on
the procurement channel, we can say that they deserve
all our support and cooperation. Indeed, thanks to an
informative website and awareness-raising activities,
Member States have access to the information necessary
to fulfil their obligations properly, in particular the
follow-up of actions deemed not to comply with
resolution 2231 (2015), the procurement channel,
confidentiality, notifications and exemptions, not to
mention issues of transparency and popularization.

I should like to conclude by noting that the
Senegalese delegation is of the opinion that the annual
review of the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
is generally positive and encourages the facilitator, all
stakeholders in the JCPOA and the States Members of
the United Nations to persevere in this direction.

