Ms. Sison (United States of America): Today, as a
reflection of the significant progress towards restoring
peace and security in Cote d'Ivoire, the Security
Council has taken the important decision to terminate
the United Nations sanctions regime and to lay out a
timeline for the full withdrawal of the United Nations
Operation in C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI). Resolutions
2283 (2016) and 2284 (2016) are notable examples of
how multilateral tools that are thoughtfully conceived
and managed can serve our shared peace and security
interests.

In 2004, cote d'Ivoire was plagued by political
turmoil and violence, which threatened its own stability
as well as that of the region. The Council responded by
establishing an arms embargo designed to prevent an
influx of weapons from worsening the conflict. Over
time, the Council added targeted financial sanctions
and travel bans, including against those individuals
who threatened the peace and national reconciliation
process in cote d'Ivoire, as well as an embargo on Cote
d'Ivoire's diamond trade, one of the principal sources
of funding for those fuelling the violence. Those
measures were carefully designed to deter those who
were undermining cote d'Ivoire's peace and stability,
prevent their access to financial resources and weapons
and promote cote d'Ivoire's return to the path of peace,
stability and greater prosperity for its people.

Indeed, after the electoral crisis in late 2010, we
saw the important effect of international diplomatic
pressure and the arms embargo in preventing greater
violence and arriving at a peaceful resolution by April
2011. In Cote d'Ivoire sanctions worked because of the
effective collaboration of international partners and
mechanisms, including the sanctions committee and
the Group of Experts, UNOCI and, significantly, the
Ivorian Government. Today's decision to terminate
the sanctions on C6te d'Ivoire is testament to what
can be achieved when sanctions are targeted, deployed
with purpose and grounded within a clear strategy for
promoting international peace and security.

We also welcome the steps taken today towards
the transition and closure of UNOCI. The transition
must be done in a responsible manner that allows for
proper planning and coordination with the United
Nations country team. As we move towards the
30 June 2017 for UNOCI's closure, we encourage the
Government of C6te d'Ivoire to complete and enforce
its security sector reform plan, which is critical to the
sustainability of the nation's progress, and to redouble
its efforts to achieve deeper national reconciliation and
ensure fair and equitable justice. We also encourage the
Government to continue its work on improving natural
resource governance, particularly in the diamond and
gold sectors, to ensure that potential local conflicts
over land use and mining do not become flash points.
We also encourage the Government to continue to
fulfil requirements under the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme.

The United States will continue to work closely
with Cote d'Ivoire as it consolidates its progress towards
peace and stability. Today we celebrate this transition
and the role the Council has played in helping to restore
peace to Cote d'Ivoire.

