Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Envoy De Mistura for his update.

The humanitarian situation in Syria remains dire.
We echo the United Nations call on all parties to
facilitate a ceasefire and unconditional, unimpeded and
sustained access to all people in need throughout the
country, pursuant to resolution 2401 (2018). It is also
vital to take the measures necessary to protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure, including schools and
medical facilities, as required under international law
and human rights standards.

As members of the Security Council are aware, the
guarantor States of the agreement on the cessation of
hostilities adopted a joint statement on the settlement
of the conflict and its future direction at the meeting of
Foreign Ministers on 16 March in Astana. Kazakhstan
remains committed to bringing peace to Syria. The
situation is not simple, but nevertheless we cannot give
up. Kazakhstan has taken the following positions.

First, we do not believe in a military solution,
for that would only aggravate an already difficult
situation. We need serious compromises from every
side. Any conflict - even the most serious - ends
with negotiations, and we must strive to achieve the
goal of bringing peace to Syria. We know of many
fine examples in which conflicting parties in many
other countries have come together despite difficult
negotiations so as to find common prosperity for
their peoples.

Secondly, Kazakhstan calls on the Syrian
Government and opposition parties to immediately
begin substantive talks on the entire spectrum of issues.
Astana does not anticipate any political or international
miracles, yet sees great promise in a collective and
pragmatic approach. Kazakhstan, for its part, is deeply
committed to ending the intense suffering, which has
lasted for eight long years.

We all know that today Syria is undergoing a
significant challenge that must not lead to a deadlock,
but offer new opportunities to pave the way to a peaceful
and lasting political settlement to the crisis. We hope
that the forthcoming ninth round of talks, to be held in
Astana in May, will offer an opportunity to end the war.
In that regard, we will urge the guarantors and Syrian
parties to overcome their differences through dialogue
and reach a final agreement covering every aspect of
the issue.

