Mr. Strommen (Norway): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Oshima for his informative
briefing this morning. Let me also welcome to this
meeting the Vice-Minister for External Relations of
Angola.

Norway recognizes the positive steps taken by the
Government in connection with the joint strategy for
humanitarian assistance. Particularly important is the
adoption of a rights-based strategy in the 2002 United
Nations Consolidated Appeal. This is to ensure that
assistance is provided in accordance with core
principles of the Angolan Constitution and on the basis
of international standards. We would like to encourage
the Government to continue its positive efforts.

It is now essential that the Government elaborate
an agreed monitoring mechanism for the
implementation of priority actions set out by the
Government. These priorities include preparation for
access to places with internally displaced populations
by opening roads and airstrips, improving and
increasing humanitarian assistance in areas not
accessible to international humanitarian partners,
extending State administration to areas controlled by
the Angolan Armed Forces, preparing return and
resettlement plans for displaced populations,
establishing reception and registration centres in areas
with large influxes of internally displaced persons, in
accordance with Government regulations issued on
15 January this year, and improving health assistance
and the supply of essential medicines, personnel and
drug kits in provincial capitals and rural municipalities
to address the critical health and nutritional situation of
newly arrived internally displaced persons.

Having stressed those points, it is important for
me to emphasize that Norway stands ready to respond
quickly to help meet the great humanitarian needs in
Angola. We urge the rest of the international
community to do the same.

Let me conclude by saying that humanitarian
emergencies in Angola have reached an unacceptable
level. We are deeply concerned about the humanitarian
consequences of the ongoing military activities.
Humanitarian problems emerge faster than it is
possible to solve them. There is no military solution to
the conflict in Angola. Everyone concerned must
realize this and act accordingly. In this regard, it is
important to point out that the main responsibility for
ending human suffering in the country rests with
UNITA and Jonas Savimbi. UNITA must stop its
violent activity, hurting so many innocent civilians, and
it must seize the existing opportunity for dialogue.
Dialogue is the tool for finding a lasting political
solution. Let me, in this regard, also express my
Government's support for the efforts made by the
United Nations, and especially the Special Adviser for
Special Assignments in Africa, Mr. Ibrahim Gambari.

