I would like to thank the South African presidency for having convened this high-level debate. I am very pleased to address the Council today with Mr. Zouev and African Union Commissioner Chergui on the topic of security-sector governance and reform. I will outline the strides that we have made and the challenges that we face in supporting Member States that embark on security-sector reform in contexts of fragility and post-conflict recovery. For societies recovering from conflict and instability, security-sector reform (SSR) holds great promise: democratically governed, effective and accountable security and justice sectors - which reflect the social fabric of the nation - create a safe and secure environment in which the rule of law and economic and social development can take root for the benefit of States and their peoples. There is indeed broad recognition that security-sector governance is a key element of United Nations support for national efforts to sustain peace and prevent the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence of conflict across the entire peace continuum. This applies from prevention to peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development settings. As one example, the Peacebuilding Fund invested $21 million during 2017 through 2019 in support of those efforts in countries such as Burkina Faso, Cote d'Ivoire, the Gambia, Guinea and Liberia. The joint United Nations-World Bank study, Pathways for Peace, illustrated the importance of security-sector governance, including the fact that security-sector reforms play a critical role in prevention. We can see this in Indonesia, Kenya, Timor- Leste and Tunisia, to name but a few countries. Security-sector reforms should be part of larger political strategies and priorities, as, for example, in Afghanistan, Liberia and Sierra Leone; also, security-sector-reform processes are more sustainable when based on inclusive citizen involvement, including of women and youth. Expectations, however, need to be realistic. Security-sector governance and reform is a complex and long-term endeavour, sometimes spanning a generation. It requires a deep understanding of the root causes of a conflict, sustained political will to overcome resistance and the space to implement difficult political decisions. It also requires the balancing of all stakeholders' security needs. With that in mind, let me reflect on three strategic points, based on lessons learned from our experience in implementing security-sector reform mandates. First, SSR can succeed only when it is part of a wider political process; also, political considerations must result in the design of reasonable plans and realistic expectations. In that regard, we welcome the Security Council's linking of SSR- mandated tasks to the strategic priorities of peace operations such as support for peace processes, stabilization, the extension of State authority and the protection of civilians. Let me list some of the SSR tasks that peace operations perform. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) uses good offices and mediation efforts to advance the implementation of SSR provisions in the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, signed at Algiers; the Peacebuilding Fund was also the first partner to support the compliance framework for the Group of Five for the Sahel Force, which the United Nations is mandated to support, with approximately $600,000 in seed funding, quickly followed by European Union funding of €10 million. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) provides technical and logistical support to the recruitment, integration and deployment of security services. The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) is facilitating dialogue with national authorities and partners to create space for sustainable SSR while also supporting the efforts of the military justice system to hold security elements accountable. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan is employing good offices and providing technical expertise to support the articulation of a national reform model. In all of those contexts, peace operations are working to enhance the coordination of international partners in support of national SSR priorities and are injecting critical capacity into security-sector institutions and personnel. Yet despite the significant progress made, too often SSR support is narrowly focused on enhancing the capacity and capability of security providers and often at junctures when such an investment is unlikely to be sustainable. In many settings, the social contract remains fragile, there is deep mistrust towards security services, and there is no dialogue on security and defence matters between authorities, political actors and the population at large. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example, lack of a national consensus and the multiplicity of partners and competing visions have led to a narrow focus on the reinforcement of military capacities at the expense of a wider approach to the protection of civilians. The current MONUSCO transition provides a fresh opportunity for a structured dialogue and forging a consensus that should not be missed. Secondly, coordination and close cooperation among partners on the ground is essential. The United Nations is rarely alone in assisting security-sector reform. Given the complexity of the task, partnerships are a welcome necessity. The African Union - supported by its regional economic communities and regional mechanisms - has been at the forefront of advancing security-sector reform at the policy and operational levels in Africa. We built a strategic partnership with the African Union Commission, focused on advancing the African Union's (AU) leading role in SSR on the continent and in Silencing the Guns. That included support for the elaboration of the AU Policy Framework on SSR, the development of a tailored capacity-building programme and, more recently, bolstering strategic coordination between the African Union and partners in the framework of an SSR steering committee. The European Union is also a key and longstanding SSR partner in many settings. Bilateral SSR support and assistance programmes are almost always in place and are often most influential. In all settings, we strive to ensure coordination among partners and the compatibility of their approaches, for the benefit of the host country and local communities. I must be frank: sometimes this can be a rather challenging task. We need to redouble our efforts to work together on the ground through joint analysis, assessment and joint implementation whenever possible. An inclusive and consensual national SRR vision, backed by coordinated international partners, is the most efficient way forward. Thirdly, lasting security will remain elusive as long as the underpinning analysis, assessment and implementation of security governance reform excludes women's and minorities' perspectives and security needs. Security sectors in many countries continue to be largely dominated by men and systematically discriminate against women. SSR is a key opportunity to raise awareness and generate a national commitment to addressing inequalities by building security institutions that are more gender-neutral and representative of minorities. Inclusive and gender-responsive SSR requires strong political leadership to transform long-held stereotypes and patriarchal norms about women in uniform, such as establishing gender-parity quotas, assessing barriers to women's inclusion, delivering advanced career opportunities and ensuring women's promotion to leadership roles. It takes time for security institutions to evolve. But whenever security services discriminate against or fail to protect individuals or communities based on gender, race or ethnic affiliation, accountability must be swift and impartial. Finding that balance is a challenge that societies around the world grapple with daily. In the Central African Republic, MINUSCA supported the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic in building facilities for women soldiers in Camp Kassai, east of Bangui. In Mali, MINUSMA successfully supported the establishment of a vetting mechanism that will prevent perpetrators of sexual violence from joining the Malian army. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO has supported efforts by Congolese military justice to prosecute, among others, cases of sexual violence. However, despite the progress made, there is an enormous gap between the expectations for gender-responsive SSR processes and the availability of the resources - political, technical and financial - necessary to foster inclusivity and representativity within security institutions at all levels. To conclude, I would like to put forth three recommendations to the Security Council and Member States to optimally position the United Nations in advancing nationally owned and led security-sector governance and reform efforts by, first, recognizing security-sector governance and reform primarily as political processes and ensuring that peace operation mandates on SSR are linked to broader political objectives; secondly, systematically recognizing the coordination role of the United Nations and the necessity of partnerships as means to align international assistance with national SSR priorities; and, thirdly, supporting inclusive SSR processes and prioritizing efforts aiming at increasing women's participation in national security services by identifying and addressing systemic barriers to their recruitment, retention and promotion.
