Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting once again to consider the
sad and tragic situation prevailing in the Holy Land
and in the context of the relationship between the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples.

My delegation would like to address this question
by touching on a number of points.

First, Egypt wishes to reiterate its opposition to
the use of armed force to attempt to break the will of
the Palestinians who are resisting the Israeli occupation
and the colonization of their land by settlers from Israel
and other parts of the world. This will never achieve
the objectives of Israel nor provide lasting security for
its citizens.

Secondly, the core of the current conflict between
Israel and Palestine is the continued Israeli occupation
of the territory of Palestine and of all the other
territories occupied since 5 June 1967. The
achievement of a just and final settlement of this
conflict requires as a sine qua non that Israel withdraw
from those territories. The mutual acts of violence that
are currently being perpetrated will not come to an end
so long as this occupation lasts, because this
occupation represents an inhuman and immoral act of
violence.
Third, all attempts to circumvent or stall a
peaceful settlement through manoeuvres and various
ploys will be to no avail. The international community
will continue to call for an end to the occupation and to
settlement activity, as well as for Israel to deal with the
occupied territories and their inhabitants in accordance
with the terms of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. It is
pointless for Israel to cast doubt on the settlement
principles that have been unanimously agreed by the
international community since the Security Council
adopted resolution 242 (1967), on 22 November 1967.
We are all aware of the persistent Israeli attempts to
cast doubt on that resolution, attempts that are not
worthy of a reply.

The resolution establishes the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of the territories of others by war. As
such it calls upon Israel to withdraw from the
territories it occupied in 1967. This was the concept
that served as the basis for the convening of the Madrid
Conference, in October 1991, at which all agreed to the
principle of land for peace as a frame of reference. In
this context, it came as no surprise that some in Israel
tried to claim that the occupied territories were
disputed territories. Resolution 242 (1967) did not refer
in any way to such perverse and misleading logic. The
Security Council has adopted more than one resolution,
in the course of recent years and decades, that reaffirm
the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention to
the occupied Palestinian territories.

Fourth, the settlement to be achieved for the
Israeli and Palestinian parties must contain their
conviction that security cannot be achieved through
occupation or attempts at humiliation, repression or
other such practices. Security cannot be achieved
through the colonization and settlement of Palestinian
territories to satisfy certain tendencies or groups in
Israel, whether under the pretext of security, religious
rights, geography or anything else. Genuine lasting
security can only be achieved through the
establishment of confidence and the building of
bridges, communication, good-neighbourliness,
equality andjustice.

Fifth, the Palestinian people are the only party
entitled to choose Palestinian representatives.
Therefore, the legitimacy of the Palestinian leadership
emanates from the free choice of the Palestinian
people, and not from any other quarters or with the
backing of anyone else.

Sixth, Egypt believes that the objective of
achieving peace in the Middle East is at a critical
crossroads that calls for all parties and the international
community, in particular the more influential members
of the international community, to make every effort to
establish the necessary climate for rebuilding
confidence between the Palestinian and Israeli sides
and to return once again to genuine political
negotiations aimed at reaching a final and
comprehensive settlement. We are fully convinced that
doing this requires the following.

It requires an attempt to rebuild the confidence
that has been lost between the two parties through a
number of measures and steps. Those include, for
example, Israel's ending its blockade of the Palestinian
people and their cities and stopping its incursions into
Palestinian cities; the withdrawal of all Israeli forces to
the positions they held prior to 28 September 2000; and
an end to Israeli assassination, settlement and other
subversive activities. There is also a need to end all the
acts of violence that currently mar the Palestinian-
Israeli relationship.

It also requires the warring parties - with the
support of all interested international Powers interested
in seeing the establishment of stability and peace in the
region - to recognize that the objectives of a final and
just settlement will be achieved by ensuring the right of
Palestinians to establish a viable Palestinian State, with
its capital in East Jerusalem, on the Palestinian
territories occupied since 5 June 1967; as well as an
agreement to provide equal security for both the State
of Palestine and the State of Israel, which must live in
good-neighbourliness, within secure and recognized
borders and in the framework of legal and security
arrangements to be agreed upon.

It further requires that, once the parties are
convinced of its integrated and final objectives, the
necessary settlement must be reached in accordance
with the agreed frames of reference, foremost among
which are the principles contained in resolution 242
(1967), the principles of the Madrid Conference and
the Arab initiative adopted at the Beirut Summit. In
that regard, there is also a need to reaffirm the vital
importance that my country attaches to the question of
the timeframe for the achievement of a comprehensive
settlement and the need for the necessary guarantees
not to impede the implementation of such a settlement.
We also wish to reaffirm the need to overcome the
tendencies aimed at maintaining the status quo and
working under an interim settlement for a long period
of time. The latter would basically mean leaving the
conflict unresolved and continuing the violence,
without hope of seeing an end to it.
Finally, it requires reaching a stable settlement
would require providing the largest possible amount of
economic support to Palestinians so that they may
rebuild their institutions and the infrastructure of their
society. We are confident that the international
community will seriously take this fact into account.

Seventh, Egypt is committed to the achievement
of a comprehensive and lasting peace, to ending the
suffering of the Palestinian people and to the provision
of security to all without allowing any party to carry
out acts of aggression. As President Mubarak said at
Camp David on 8 June,

"We must always keep in mind that there are
forces that lack a conviction in this vision. Those
forces will continue to attempt to obstruct our
efforts to move towards the comprehensive final
settlement."

President Mubarak continued on to say that

"The way to stand up to the enemies of peace is
to move forward boldly and with determination in
the peace process in order to give new hope to the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples of achieving a
future of prosperity and stability, away from the
specter of violence and confrontation."

My country will continue on that path. We hope
and expect that all Powers with influence will shoulder
their share of responsibility. Undoubtedly, the Security
Council and all its members - and in particular the
permanent members - bear special responsibility in
this regard.

