Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank
Mr. Stephen O'Brien and Ms.Elizabeth Hoff for their
briefings. I commend them and their staff for their
courage and determination in persevering in such
difficult and dispiriting conditions.

Mr. O'Brien asked the question as to why the
Council is holding this meeting. We could have asked
the same question during each of the past 12 months.
The Council has been powerless in dealing with the
essential problem in Syria. Important work has been
done in addressing the particular menace of chemical
weapons, and, as Mr. O'Brien has reminded us,
important humanitarian assistance has been able to get
through under the cross-border arrangements called
for by the Council. But, as we have heard today, cross-
front-line access, also called for by the Council, has
been systematically denied, blocked, obstructed and
obfuscated by the Syrian Government or forces allied
with it. And our resolution 2286 (2016) on attacks on
health-care workers or hospitals has been blatantly
ignored, as we have been told today.

Most fundamentally, the Council has been powerless
in dealing with the most serious threat facing the Syrian
people, namely, the besiegement and bombardment
of civilians, most notably in Aleppo, and, as we have
been reminded again today, throughout other parts of
Syria, as well. I am not going to revisit the horrors that
flow from our inaction. They have been described more
than adequately by Mr. O'Brien, Ms. Hoff and others.
Looking around the Chamber today, I felt I can see in
the faces of my colleagues some of the shame that I
feel myself. Instead of responding to the clear breaches
of international peace and security, the Council has
been largely just a witness to the horrors that have been
described to us again today.

The situation in Syria is horrible and complex,
and many players, external and internal, are playing
roles there. A particularly unhelpful role is being
played by the terrorist groups. However, leaving
aside the area occupied and controlled by the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant, no amount of diplomatic
diversion can hide the fact that we are witness to the
destruction of a country and its people, led by its own
Government and supported by a permanent member of
the Security Council.

As is well-known, after last month's vetos (see S/PV.7785), New Zealand tried to advance a draft
resolution that would have demanded an end to all
attacks that risked death or injury to civilians in Syria,
especially in Aleppo. It was deeply frustrating that
the Council could not unite around a proposition as
simple and basic as that. Nonetheless, New Zealand,
together with Egypt and Spain, is again putting forward
a draft resolution that is similarly modest in ambition.
Indeed, we consider it to be the bare minimum that
the Council can do. It approaches the conflict through
a humanitarian lens, establishes a 10-day pause in
Aleppo to allow the United Nations and its partners to
get aid in and sick people out, and re-establishes the
cessation of hostilities in the remainder of the country.
It also begins to deal with some very difficult issues,
namely, separation and the political process, but it does
not try to provide all the answers. We are aware that
there are conversations going on elsewhere. The draft
resolution is intended to be complementary to those
conversations. We are committed to taking this draft
resolution forward, and we urge all Council members
to support us in words and in action.

