The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the Permanent
Representative of Mexico.

We, too, are grateful to Staffan de Mistura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for his introduction of the Secretary-
General's report (S/2010/318) and for his resolve in
carrying out his responsibilities. We also express our
gratitude for the statement delivered by Ambassador
Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, as
well as for the hospitality and cooperation of his
Government during our recent stay in his country. We
also wish to commend the leadership of Ambassador
Apakan, Permanent Representative of Turkey, which
made possible the success of the recent visit of the
Security Council to Afghanistan.

This debate and the recent trip of the Security
Council to Afghanistan reflect the fact that peace and
stability in that country are and must remain among the
main priorities on our agenda. During our trip, we were
able to take note of the political and military
dimensions of the conflict in Afghanistan and of the
prospects for its eventual resolution, bearing in mind
the regional context.

We agree with the report of the Secretary-General
in that, during the current transition towards greater
Afghan responsibility for the peace process, it is
important that the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) focus its efforts on a host of
priority tasks to which it can bring the greatest added
value and on which it can work effectively. In that
regard, my delegation attaches the greatest importance
to the following aspects of UNAMA's mandate.

The first is the strengthening of cooperation with
the civilian command of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) and NATO with a View to
improving civilian-military coordination. The second is
support for legislative elections by providing technical
assistance and promoting the participation of society in
the elections with a view to strengthening democratic
practices and conferring legitimacy on Government
institutions. The third is the Mission's use of its good
offices to support the implementation of reconciliation
programmes under the leadership of the Afghan
Government itself and in line with its national
priorities.

With regard to security, we regret that ongoing
incidents of violence remain the crucial factor affecting
progress in Afghanistan. The development of the
country and its people is seriously affected by the
absence of a secure environment, especially for the
most vulnerable, including women and children. In that
regard, we believe it essential that, given the recent
change in its command, ISAF operations should
continue to make the protection of the Afghan
population a high priority. We emphatically condemn
violence against UNAMA personnel and regret the loss
of life among its staff.

In addition, we are also concerned by the high
number of children who have been injured or killed in
acts of violence associated with the conflict. We
support the executive order issued by the Ministry of
Interior on 25 April to prevent the recruitment of
children to police forces.

Against that backdrop, it is a matter of priority
for the Afghan Government to gradually assume its
responsibilities in the area of security and that Afghan
forces responsible for ensuring justice have at their
disposal the human, political and financial resources
necessary to fully assume their responsibilities. To that
end, UNAMA and the Security Council will need to
continue to provide the necessary support.

On the issue of the fight against organized crime,
we reiterate the importance of addressing illicit drug
production and trafficking by adopting an approach
based on shared responsibility, taking into account that
this will contribute to generating mutual trust and will
promote common strategies to combat that
phenomenon in the region.

We also believe that to contribute to restoring the
confidence of the population in Afghan public
institutions, justice and accountability processes must
be implemented, focusing on vulnerable groups such as
children and ethnic and religious minorities, in order to
consolidate sustainable peace.

We welcome the holding of the Peace Jirga,
which had a high percentage of women among its
participants, and we support the peace and
reintegration programme of the Afghan Government to
promote the reintegration into society of anti-
Govemment elements who want to lay down their
arms, bearing in mind that, given the country's current
circumstances, military actions must be complemented
with measures for dialogue and confidence-building in
order to counter the current cycle of violence.
Lastly, we trust that, during the upcoming
international conference to be held in Kabul, the
Afghan Government will adopt specific measures to
strengthen institutions and the rule of law in that
country, especially through the fight against corruption
and impunity.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Canada.

