Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): I should
like to take this opportunity to welcome Foreign Minister
Simao to the Security Council today. I should like to
commend him for his excellent statement this afternoon and
for the stress he placed on political pluralism, national
reconciliation and multi-party democracy in Mozambique.

This is an auspicious occasion. We mark the closing
of one chapter in the history of Mozambique and the
opening of another. The long-running conflict, and the
United Nations peace-keeping operation it spawned, have
drawn to a close. A new, democratic, cooperative future
opens up before the Mozambicans, who have shown
courage and fortitude in pursuing this new path.

The peace-keeping operation in Mozambique was one
of the largest and most successful in United Nations
history. Its success was due to the combined efforts of the
Mozambican people, the member States of the
international community, and the men and women of the
United Nations. Each of these - from the most powerful
to the least, from the leaders of Mozambique's political
parties to the poorest citizen walking to a ballot box in
the countryside, from senior officials in this grand
building to the youngest private in a blue helmet who
guarded a lonely road-crossing in the bush - all can be
proud of what their work together has accomplished.

Of course, no operation runs perfectly and there are
important lessons to be learned from the United Nations
experience in Mozambique. But the final result, ending
years of bloodshed in a peaceful election, refutes the
arguments of those who claim that United Nations peace-
keeping is a needless expenditure of money and blood
with nothing to show for it. The United Nations Operation
in Mozambique (ONUMOZ) demonstrates that, with
commitment and determination, peace-keeping can work,
assisting the transition from the horrors of war to the
blessing of peace. After ONUMOZ has fulfilled its
mandate and completed its withdrawal, the United Nations
still has a role to play in Mozambique. The war-damaged
infrastructure and economy of that country will require
international assistance. Other residual effects of the war
must be dealt with, including the thousands upon
thousands of anti-personnel land-mines that still pose a
threat to the civilian population and will hold back
economic recovery for years to come. Also, the amount
of arms and weapons which the United Nations has
collected from demobilizing soldiers or found in hidden
arms caches concerns us. We hope that the United
Nations and the newly elected Government of
Mozambique will collaborate in the destruction or
disabling of these weapons, so that they do not find their
way into the black market, and from there into
neighbouring countries which themselves are trying to
keep their fledgling democracies intact. We urge the
Government of Mozambique to attend to this item
urgently.

The reconstruction and rehabilitation of Mozambique
can now go forward. My country will be there to help.
We must bear in mind, however, that hopes for national
unity and recovery can be realized only if Mozambique
remains committed to democracy, economic reform and
national reconciliation.

The critical work of reconciliation in Mozambique
is far from over. Soldiers laying down their arms and
citizens voting in an election are merely steps along the

 

path: big steps - important steps - yes; but not the end
of the journey. The Government and the people of
Mozambique must continue this journey, including the
process of political dialogue and reconciliation between the
Government and the opposition. The people of Mozambique
and the international community have invested too much to
leave the work unfinished.

The United Nations has limited financial and human
resources. But when the people of Mozambique asked for
assistance it was willingly given. Now the international
community will watch carefully to see how the people of
Mozambique build on this investment. We all have a stake
in continued peaceful progress in Mozambique. The people
and the Government owe it not only to themselves but to
all of us to forge ahead along the path we have helped
them lay out. We believe they can do it. We look forward
to following their progress and celebrating further
milestones along the way.

It has been a gratifying personal experience for me to
watch this important United Nations operation come to a
successful conclusion. I visited Mozambique myself as part
of the Security Council Mission last August, and I know
the tremendous commitment to overcoming difficult
circumstances which all the personnel of ONUMOZ
displayed, led by the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Aldo Ajello. It is my fervent hope that
in the coming months and years, the Council will be able
to see other operations brought similarly to triumphant
conclusions.

