Mr. Cheng Jingye (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First, I thank Under-Secretary-General Mr. Jan Egeland
for his detailed briefing and welcome the revised aide-
memoire that he has submitted.

A notable characteristic of conflicts in all regions
of the world is that innocent civilians, especially
women and children and other vulnerable groups, are
the most serious victims. In the past decade, several
million civilians have died in armed conflicts, and
millions more have been driven by war to flee their
homes to become refugees or internally displaced
persons.

In recent years, the United Nations, including the
Security Council, has been carrying out the work of
protecting civilians as an important task and has made
much progress in this area. We note with satisfaction
that the relevant resolutions and presidential statements
of the Council have set out the fundamental principles
for the protection of civilians. The Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has
developed a relevant aide-memoire and road map,
which have provided the Council with an important
document of reference in this area. Various agencies of
the United Nations have provided timely humanitarian
resistance to conflict regions to alleviate the
humanitarian situation in the field, thus playing a much
needed role. As well, United Nations peacekeeping
missions have paid great attention to the protection of
civilians. We highly commend the various agencies of
the United Nations, including the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, OCHA and other
humanitarian agencies of the United Nations for the
great amount of work that they have done.

At present, many serious challenges remain in the
field of the protection of civilians. In some conflict
regions, the humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate. Civilians continue to be deliberately
attacked and wounded. Refugees and internally
displaced persons are suffering a tragic plight. Of great
concern to us is the great increase in violent terrorist
activities against humanitarian relief personnel and
agencies, which have greatly hindered those agencies
in their work to protect civilians. Therefore, much
remains to be done by the international community.

I wish to stress the following. First, the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians lies with the
Governments of the countries concerned and with the
parties to a conflict. The Governments of the countries
concerned and the parties to a conflict should strictly
comply with international humanitarian laws and
effectively implement their obligations to protect
civilians and relevant humanitarian relief personnel.
All actions violating international humanitarian law
should be punished.

Secondly, preventing and ending conflict is the
most effective way to protect civilians. As the organ
bearing the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council
should continue to take effective measures to
strengthen preventive diplomacy and to actively
promote the settlement of current conflicts. That is the
best way to help protect civilians from the devastation
of war.

Thirdly, protecting civilians is a multidisciplinary
task requiring a comprehensive strategy. Various
agencies of the United Nations, in implementing their
mandate, should strengthen their coordination and
cooperation in order most effectively to fulfil the role
ofthe United Nations as a whole.

