The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Croatia, Egypt, El Salvador, Germany,
Guatemala, Jamaica, Japan, Nigeria, the Republic of
Korea, Senegal and Uruguay, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached among Council
members, I am pleased to invite the following
participants under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council: His Excellency
Mr. Dalius Cekuolis, President of the Economic and
Social Council; His Excellency Mr. Ismael Abraao
Gaspar Martins, Chairman of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission;
Ms. Carolyn McAskie, Assistant Secretary-General in
the Peacebuilding Support Office; Mr. Oscar Avalle,
Special Representative of the World Bank to the United
Nations; and Mr. Reinhard Munzberg, Special
Representative of the International Monetary Fund to
the United Nations.

Also in accordance with the understanding
reached among Council members, I am pleased to
invite the following participants under rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council:
the Permanent Representative of Burundi, His
Excellency Mr. Joseph Ntakirutimana; the Permanent
Representative of the Netherlands, His Excellency
2

Mr. Frank Majoor; the Permanent Representative of
Norway, His Excellency Mr. Johan Lovald; and the
Deputy Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone, His
Excellency Mr. Sylvester Ekundayo Rowe.

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Ntakirutimana (Burundi), Mr. Majoor (the Netherlands), Mr. Lavald (Norway) and Mr. Rowe
(Sierra Leone) took the seats reservedfor them at
the side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

This morning's meeting of the Security Council
deals with one of the most significant challenges on the
agenda of the United Nations - that is, how to help
countries emerging from crisis to overcome the
consequences of conflict, to prevent the renewal of
those conflicts and to put those countries on the path to
sustainable development.

It was for this very reason that it was decided at
the United Nations summit in 2005 to create the
Peacebuilding Commission. The beginning of the
Commission's work was one of the most important and
tangible achievements reached by Member States in the
reform of the Organization.

We hope that the discussion in the Security
Council and the forthcoming discussion in the General
Assembly will give additional impetus to a mutually
supportive partnership between these two organs and
among all those who are contributing to the
peacebuilding process, and that it will facilitate the
constructive work of the Peacebuilding Commission.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I should like to remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than five
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously. Speakers with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate their texts in the
Chamber and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking.

I shall now give the floor to the President of the
Economic and Social Council, His Excellency
Mr. Dalius Cekuolis.


