The President: I will now speak in my national
capacity as representative of Portugal.
Once again, I welcome the High Representative,
Ambassador Inzko, and convey to him Portugal's
appreciation and support for his important and
demanding work, and that of his Office, in the interests
of peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
also thank him for his very comprehensive recent
report (see S/2011/682) and for today's presentation,
both of which deserve our full support. I would also
like to recall the appointment of the new European
Union Special Representative and Head of Delegation,
Peter Sorensen, and wish him all success in his
challenging tasks.

Portugal naturally shares the views expressed in
the statement to be made later by the observer of the
European Union, but I would also like to emphasize
some issues of particular concern to my country.

For the past 13 months, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has been facing a serious political impasse that has
affected the development of national policies as well as
the country's progress towards integration into the
European Union. For instance, the State budget for
2011 has not yet been adopted, and there is no global
fiscal framework for 2011-2013. This worrying
situation creates a deadlock on much-needed internal
and external action, which is detrimental to Bosnia's
social and economic development.

But, of course, the most important issue is that of
the new Government. Efforts must be enhanced to
reach an agreement so that a new Council of Ministers
can be formed without delay. Portugal calls on Bosnian
political leaders to fully address their responsibilities
and to meet the legitimate expectations and needs of
their people. That requires effective political will,
inclusive dialogue and capacity for compromise.

However, Portugal believes that the challenges
that Bosnia and Herzegovina faces are not
insurmountable. The solutions naturally lie within
Bosnia and Herzegovina. But, on the other hand, the
international community must stay fully engaged with
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This requires our steadfast
commitment to ensure the operational capacity of
existing structures within the framework of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, but also the ability to
reflect on and respond to the specific needs of the
country in an adequate, constructive and open-minded
manner.

Portugal supports the renewal of the mandate of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR)
Operation Althea by the Security Council. We support
the orientation of EUFOR's focus on capacity-building
and training, while at the same time preserving the
conditions for it to maintain a safe and secure
environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Before concluding, a sincere word of deep
appreciation goes to our colleague, Ambassador Ivan
Barbalie, and his team for their permanently
constructive spirit and their excellent contribution to
the work of the Council. We wish them well in the
future.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting.

