Mr. Guillermet (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you on
organizing this open debate. We would also like to
thank Mr. Pascoe for having presented the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/ 189). The report of the
Secretary-General on enhancing mediation and its
support activities is an open invitation to a joint
discussion that will bear fruit and strengthen the work
of the United Nations. We would also like to thank the
leadership of Burkina Faso in this area.

Costa Rica has always been a major ally of
peaceful dispute settlement processes. Our history has
led us to value this dynamic as a factor for peace and
stability. We have been witnesses to and actors in
peacemaking in our region. In this Organization and in
other international and regional forums, we have
defended and supported mediation processes and
dispute settlement not only as effective mechanisms to
resolve conflicts, but also as a preventive way of
avoiding them. The importance and value that the
international community places on mediation will
reflect its commitment to peace and its attachment to
stability.

Costa Rica welcomes and fully endorses the
report of the Secretary-General. It is a report of very
high quality, with robust and specific recommendations
that indicate the path to follow. It not only
encompasses the lessons learned, but also raises the
challenges that we must overcome in order to
strengthen the Organization's mediation capacities.
Furthermore, it accurately points to important strategic
actions for moving forward in strengthening mediation
as a valuable dispute settlement instrument in this
Organization.

My delegation agrees that no peace agreement
endorsed by the Organization can promise amnesty for
8

crimes of genocide, crimes of war, crimes against
humanity or serious human rights violations. Neither
the United Nations nor the international community
can shirk their collective responsibilities. Some people
say that when it comes to serious crimes, the
intervention of international justice could be
considered an obstacle to the mediation process and, to
a certain extent, could compromise its results. But can
we ignore justice in the name of peace? Would we not
be promoting a culture of impunity if we ignored
international justice?

My country believes that there is no room for
these questions because there can be no sustainable
peace in such circumstances. Mediation, the instrument
that we are promoting here, complements international
justice and does not oppose it.

Local and national capacities are not only
directed towards mediation in the conflict, but are also
agents that ensure sustainability and contribute
significantly to strengthening democratic institutions
and the rule of law in post-conflict situations. They are
agents of change that become agents of stability. In that
respect, cooperation with regional organizations is
crucial to having a greater impact and greater
effectiveness, and also to taking advantage of the
successful experiences at the regional level.

Strengthening the mediation efforts of this
Organization is a reliable investment. In that respect,
the Organization has made important progress, which
Mr. Pascoe has explained in detail. It has developed its
structure in response to the request of its Members that
it play a more active role in the area of mediation. It
has strengthened the Department of Political Affairs by
establishing the Mediation Support Unit. But let us
look at this situation clearly: devoting sufficient
resources to preventive action, early warning and
mediation will certainly mean a reduction in the overall
financial costs of the Organization.

More important than that, however, is to move
away from the simple equation by which we determine
that mediation is a more efficient choice in terms of
costs. Rather, we should support the human dimension
of a timely intervention whereby human lives are
saved, human rights are protected, the displacement of
populations is avoided and institutions are preserved.
The premise must be that we strengthen mediation
processes in order to invest more in populations and in
their general well-being and not to promote mediation
09-30825
because it is less expensive than any peacekeeping
operation. Without a doubt, we must take those
elements into account in the strategic review of
peacekeeping activities that this Council will soon
undertake.

We endorse and support the measures taken by
the Secretary-General in favour of gender equality in
mediation teams, in accordance with resolution 1325
(2000), and we believe that it is important to continue
to make major efforts in that regard.

Lastly, the basis of mediation is the political will
of the parties to reach an agreement. That political will
must be reflected in absolute respect for the United
Nations Charter and a legitimate and verifiable
commitment to the promotion and protection of human
rights. Those two elements are the axes on which any
mediation process must be based, along with the
confidence of the parties, and on which to build a
sustainable and lasting peace.

