Mrs. Blokar Drobic (Slovenia): Slovenia welcomes
the initiative of the presidency of the United Kingdom
to convene today's open debate.

I align myself with the statements delivered earlier
today on behalf of the European Union and the Group
of Friends of Mediation, of which Slovenia is a member.

I would like to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.

First, let me reiterate our support to the Secretary-
General in his determination to bring mediation to the
forefront of United Nations peace-related activities. We
trust that the establishment of the High-level Advisory
Board on Mediation will further strengthen the
mediation capacities of the United Nations, and hope
that countries will use them.

As we previously stated in another debate here in
the Security Council, when it comes to the peaceful
settlement of disputes, Chapter VI of the Charter of
the United Nations offers good guidance and should
be used more often. We also wish to encourage the
Council to explore ways of identifying crises and risks
to international peace and security as early as possible
and to address them accordingly. Preventive diplomacy,
including mediation, pays for itself many times over.
Preventing disputes from escalating to armed conflict
will save enormous financial and other resources that
could be used elsewhere, but, most of all, it will save
human lives. Mediation is a powerful tool and can
encourage parties to prioritize negotiations, provide
alternatives to violence and end mass atrocity crimes.

Advocating a culture ofpeace and dialogue, together
with respect for human rights and international law, is at
the core of Slovenian foreign policy activities. In recent
years, we have focused on promoting mediation in the
Mediterranean region, through the Med-Med Initiative
and the Mediterranean Women Mediators Network,
by highlighting the indispensable role that women
and young people play in peace and reconciliation
processes. As agents of change on the ground, women
are well aware of what their community needs.
Therefore, they must be an integral part of processes
that will lead to viable long-term solutions. Awareness
campaigns on the advantages of women's participation
in peace-related activities should be undertaken.

Promoting dialogue, in particular among young
people, is an important way of building lasting and
sustained peace through education, including about
peaceful conflict resolution and mediation. One good
example we wish to share is a project on school and
peer mediation that Slovenia launched in August last
year in Bosnia and Herzegovina. With the aim of
raising awareness about the positive effects of peaceful
and constructive conflict resolution in schools,
teachers and students in the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Republika Srpska and the Brcko
district are trained in various mediation techniques.
By establishing mediation capacities among teachers
and students, schools become promoters of tolerance,
human rights, diversity and reconciliation. The project,
which currently runs in nine primary schools, has been
very well received in local communities and is already
showing positive results. With its potential, we plan to
expand it to other countries in the region.
Mediation is a valuable tool for conflict prevention
and the peaceful settlement of disputes. It nurtures
reconciliation and can help build and develop
democratic and resilient societies. Although every
mediation situation is unique, its basic principles can
be the foundation of solving crises before they escalate
anywhere in the world. That is why we must invest in
raising awareness about it, educating not only future
mediators, but the entire society.

