Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Allow me to begin by
thanking Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; Mr. David Lillie, Executive Director of the
Syrian American Medical Society; and Major General
Bakin, of the Russian Reconciliation Centre, for their
briefings on the situation in Syria. I am also looking
forward to hearing from our colleague, the Permanent
Representative of Syria.

At the outset, South Africa would like to pay
tribute to the humanitarian workers who have lost their
lives in this devastating war. These men and women
put the lives of those they chose to help before their
own and paid the ultimate price. We thank them and
honour their sacrifice. In that regard, we must do all
we can to end the conflict in Syria so as to ensure that
these courageous men and women did not lose their
lives in vain.

South Africa believes that the only sustainable
solution to the Syrian question remains the achievement
of a political solution through an inclusive Syrian-
owned and Syrian-led dialogue. The efforts of all
stakeholders in that regard are undermined by the
continued escalation of violence in some parts of
Syria. In that connection, we call on all parties to fully
implement all relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 2254 (2015), on the political road
map, and 2449 (2018), on cross-border humanitarian
access. We also call for the full implementation of the
September 2018 ceasefire memorandum and the recent
ceasefire brokered between Russia and Turkey. South
Africa calls on all parties to adhere to the provisions
contained in the ceasefire agreements.

As stated in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/508), the humanitarian situation remains dire,
particularly in the light of the increasing violence
in north-western Syria, which has led thousands of
civilians to flee the area. The situation in various camps
throughout Syria is also of concern. The upcoming
summer season is expected to lead to additional
challenges to the already strained humanitarian
assistance response. We therefore call on all parties
to ensure that the required humanitarian assistance is
being provided to all those who require it, wherever
they may be.

In that regard, while we welcome the efforts of the
United Nations and the Syrian Government in assisting
those who are able to leave Rukban camp; many more
are unable to do so at this time due to various challenges,
including lack of resources. While people remain at
Rukban, it is essential that they be provided with the
assistance they require. We call on the relevant parties
to ensure that the required permissions for additional
aid convoys are granted.

With regard to the Syrian Golan, South Africa would
like to reiterate its position that this territory remains
illegally occupied, and calls on Israel to adhere to the
Council's various resolutions and to withdraw from all
occupied territories. The annexation of territory seized
through the use of force is in violation of international
law and must be condemned. In order to ensure long-
term peace and security in the Middle East, it is vital
that international law be respected and upheld.

In conclusion, South Africa remains committed
to protecting the fundamental interests of all Syrian
people, maintaining peace and stability in the Middle
East, upholding the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, and preserving the basic
norms governing international relations.

