Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
France welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
1747 (2007). As was unequivocally demonstrated in
the last report of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Iran has
failed to suspend its enrichment and reprocessing
activities, nor has it suspended its heavy water
activities, including the construction of a heavy water
reactor at Arak. Nor has Iran resumed its cooperation
with the IAEA under the optional protocol. Thus, Iran
has ignored the resolutions of the IAEA Board of
Governors and the demands and decisions contained in
Security Council resolutions 1696 (2006) and 1737
(2006). As is affirmed in resolution 1737 (2006),
however, these measures are essential to build
confidence.

The international community is concerned about
the proliferation questions raised by the Iranian nuclear
programme. It is worrying that after several years of
investigation the International Atomic Energy Agency
is still unable to provide the international community
with the assurances it requires with respect to the
strictly peaceful nature of this programme. Essential
questions, including questions that may have possible
military nuclear implications in the very words of the
reports submitted by the Director General of the IAEA,
remain unanswered.

Nobody in this Council wishes to deny Iran its
rights or to prevent the Iranian people from benefiting
from nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. All States
parties to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) have the right to the peaceful
use of nuclear energy as long as they meet the
non-proliferation obligations derived from articles I, II
and III of the NPT. What the international community
asks of Iran is that it fulfil these non-proliferation
obligations. It is unacceptable that the Iranian
authorities find pretexts to shirk their commitments
made under the NPT.

By adopting resolution 1737 (2006), the Security
Council clearly indicated that it would suspend the
sanctions put in place if Iran reverted to the complete
suspension of all its enrichment and reprocessing
activities. It also warned Iran, however, that it would
take further measures, should Iran persist in its refusal
to meet the demands of the international community.

The last report of the Director General of the
IAEA clearly showed that the Iranian leaders did not
make the choice that the international community had
hoped for. In the circumstances, the Security Council
had no choice but to act.

The measures that the Security Council has
adopted today are proportionate to Iran's actions. They
are reversible. They are in line with the approach of
progressively increasing the pressure applied by the
Council for more than a year, in order to persuade the
Iranian leaders to return to the conditions for
negotiation and to restrict the development of the
sensitive programmes undertaken.
The additional measures that the Council has just
adopted target a series of entities and individuals

involved in Iran's proliferation programmes. They also
target individuals and entities linked to the Iranian
Revolutionary Guard, which plays a disturbing role in
Iran's ongoing development of sensitive nuclear and
ballistic activities. They also address the Bank Sepah,
which was involved in the funding activities linked to
Iran's ballistic programme. The resolution also
provides for an embargo on arms sales and transfers
from Iran. It calls on all States to exercise vigilance
and restraint in their transfers of conventional weapons
to this country and not to enter into any new financial
assistance to the Iranian Government in the form of
subsidized loans or commitments for grants, in
particular. This appeal also applies to international
financial organizations.

These measures have been established in order to
exert effective pressure on the Iranian authorities,
while seeking to penalize the Iranian people as little as
possible. The new resolution does not introduce - and
on this point, I am also expressing the position held by
the Federal Republic of Germany - any change in the
provisions contained in paragraph 15 of resolution
1737 (2006). The asset freeze, therefore, does not
prevent a person or an entity designated in the annexes
to Security Council resolution 1737 (2006) and to this
resolution from making payments due under a contract
that entered into force before that person or entity was
listed in cases covered by paragraph 15 of resolution
1737 (2006).

As I said to this Council on 23 December last,
and as was affirmed by the President of the French
Republic, Iran has a choice between meeting the
demands of the international community and facing
growing isolation.

There is another path available to the Iranian
leaders that is different from the one on which they
have embarked: the path of negotiation, in good faith,
in the context of a discussion on the basis of the
proposals submitted to Iran by the group of six
countries last June. Those proposals are substantial and
highly advantageous for Iran. They recognize Iran's
inalienable right to benefit from nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. They offer cooperation to develop
peaceful nuclear energy in Iran and to shape a new
relationship with that country.
That offer remains on the table. France and its
partners in the group of six countries are sincere in
their desire to reach a negotiated solution with Iran.

That readiness was recalled, on behalf of the ministers
of our six countries, by the Ambassador of the United
Kingdom immediately following the adoption of the
resolution. We hope that the Iranian leaders will heed
the call and that we will be able to return as soon as
possible to a path leading to a settlement that respects
the interests and concerns of all. That would be
beneficial for the Iranian people and would help to
preserve the integrity of the international non-
proliferation regime, which is a fundamental element
of our multilateral security framework.

