Mr. Schumacher (Germany): I take this
opportunity to express my appreciation for the, as
always, comprehensive and succinct briefing we have
just received from Mr. Petritsch. Germany took note
with satisfaction of the Council's decision to organize
this meeting in a manner that would allow non-
members to express their opinion. We hope that this
has set, once and for all, a good precedent. We are
convinced that this open-minded approach to this issue
reflects the forward-looking manner in which the
Council is about to implement the respective decisions
ofthe Brahimi Panel which are addressed to it directly.

After the democratic change of power in Zagreb,
the recent developments in Belgrade have finally
opened the doors wide for reaching regional stability,
adding a new and hopefully decisive momentum to the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Accord. This-
and we have heard it already from Mr. Petritsch - has
finally put the onus on the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Governments of both entities to
deliver. The country is a decade behind, we have just
learned from Mr. Petritsch, and the political leaders
who have desperately failed in their responsibilities - I
point only to the deplorable and appalling record of the
Council of Ministers and the Parliament of Bosnia and
Herzegovina - should be strongly reminded of their
responsibilities to the international community and,
most important, their people.

As the Ambassador of Bosnia and Herzegovina
has just mentioned the "misdeed" of the international
community on the adoption of the passport law, I
would like to remind him that on 17 December 1997,
after two years of Dayton implementation, the passport
law was the only law, and remained for a very long
time the only law, of Bosnia and Herzegovina which
was properly adopted in the Bosnian Parliament.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is facing a crucial election on
11 November and the people really now have a choice.

We call on President Kostunica to take the step of
establishing diplomatic relations - without
preconditions, as has been underlined on numerous
occasions in the Peace Implementation Council - with
Bosnia and Herzegovina as soon as possible, without
further delay. Both neighbouring countries - Croatia
and Yugoslavia - are entitled to form a special
relationship with their respective ethnic communities, a
relationship that we call upon the High Representative
to actively assist in formulating, thus adding an
important element of stability to the region.

Dayton is an irreversible process; it cannot be
reiterated often enough to those political forces in the
country who still tend to look backwards. In addition,
Dayton is an irreversible process in all its aspects and
phases, including all measures taken by the High
Representative after Sintra and Bonn to implement the
Accord with the powers given to him by the Peace
Implementation Council. We can only strongly
encourage the High Representative - albeit with
political sensitivity and a watchful eye, which goes
without saying - to continue his energetic approach
by taking full advantage of the powers vested in him to
ensure that implementation stays on track. As we have
just heard from our British colleague, five years of
Dayton implementation have gone by. I think we have
wasted enough time and, I should add, enough funds.

Clearly, Mr. Petritsch must be congratulated on
progress achieved over the last month, in particular in
the four key areas he mentioned: first, in establishment
of a new Council of Ministers, which I hope will
finally resume responsibility as the Government of the
country; secondly, the ruling of the Constitutional
Court that all three constituent peoples, and others, are
considered to be equal in both entities - and we would
appreciate perhaps receiving more information about
the strategy envisaged to implement this most
important ruling; thirdly, the increased number of
minority returns - although one should remember that
against the backdrop of the overall number of refugees,
those returns still remain a trickle and not a broad
current; and, fourthly, the progress achieved to foster
the independence of local media and to continue
judicial reform. It goes without saying that, as in the
past, Germany is fully committed to render its support
to the Dayton peace process in all its aspects, and to
the work of the High Representative. We are of the
opinion that Wolfgang Petritsch is doing an excellent
job in Sarajevo.

However, in concluding, I would not like to
forget to mention the most crucial issues yet to be
solved as an indispensable condition of bringing peace
to the region: the overall security situation, the
existence of two - if not, de facto, three - armies,
and the completion of the disarmament process under
annex 1.B ofthe Dayton Peace Accord. We would very
much appreciate it if the High Representative could
cast some light on these items and issues in his next
report to the Council.

