Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to take the floor on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) at this quarterly open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, a topic to which the 120 member
States that comprise our Movement attach particular
importance, especially today as we celebrate the sixty-
second anniversary of the Afro-Asian Conference, held
in Bandung, Indonesia, which laid the foundations for
the creation of the NAM.

First of all, we would like to convey our gratitude
to Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, Personal Representative of
the Secretary-General and Special Coordinator for the
United Nations for the Middle East Peace Process, for
his valuable briefing.

During the seventeenth Summit of the Non-Aligned
Movement, which took place in September 2016 on
Margarita Island, Venezuela, the Heads of State and
Government reaffirmed their abiding solidarity with the
Palestinian people, as well as their unswerving support
for theirjust cause, while calling on the member States
of the Movement to renew their commitment and further
strengthen and coordinate their efforts to promote the

realization of justice and the rights of the Palestinian
people in the light of the prevailing critical situation
and diminishing prospects for a peaceful solution.
In this regard, we stress that a just and lasting
solution to the question of Palestine in all its aspects
remains a priority on the NAM. agenda. In addition, we
reaffirm that the ongoing Israeli occupation and the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict as a whole continue to pose
a serious threat to international peace and security. It
requires urgent attention and remedy, in accordance with
international law, relevant United Nations resolutions
and, of course, the Charter of the United Nations itself.
In this regard, NAM. stands ready to contribute to the
achievement of a just, lasting and peaceful solution,
and we call for the intensification of international
and regional efforts in support of this objective, while
recalling the responsibilities ofthe Security Council and
the General Assembly in this regard, including as most
recently reaffirmed in resolution 2334 (2016), which
set forth the essential requirements and parameters for
achieving such a solution.

Resolution 2334 (2016) was strongly welcomed
and endorsed by NAM. in its communique dated
27 December 2016. The Non-Aligned Movement
continues to call for the resolution to be respected
and implemented, stressing that it remains central to
redressing the situation on the ground, de-escalating
tensions and fostering an appropriate environment for
the pursuit ofpeace. In this regard, we welcome the first
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016), as orally delivered to the
Security Council by Mr. Nikolay Mladenov (see S/PV.7908). However, we reiterate the need for a
substantive written report to be presented in fulfilment
of the Council's responsibilities and in support of its
duties to advance the resolution's objectives, especially
in the light of Israel's continued indifference towards
the Security Council and its resolutions.

Our Movement expresses its grave concern at
recent developments in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, in particular the
continuation and escalation of illegal policies and
measures by Israel, the occupying Power, aimed at
expanding its illegal settlement campaign and further
entrenching its half-century occupation since its
invasion of Palestinian lands and its violation of the
rights of the Palestinian people. Rather than cease its
violations, reverse the negative trends on the ground
and prove its commitment to the two-State solution on
the basis of the 1967 lines, as demanded by the Security
Council and the international community as a whole,
Israel continues to act with contempt of the Council and
in breach of its legal obligations.

In this regard, the States members of the Movement
strongly condemn the recent provocative decisions
of Israel, the occupying Power, to proceed with its
settlement activities in grave breach of international
law and in direct and deliberate violation of relevant
United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016). Moreover, we are alarmed by and deeply
deplore the flagrant contempt of Israel, the occupying
Power, for the unequivocal decision of the Security
Council in that regard, which clearly reaffirmed that
Israel's settlement activities have no legal validity
and constitute flagrant violations under international
law and which called on Israel to immediately and
completely cease all settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and to
fully respect all of its legal obligations, including under
the Fourth Geneva Convention. The Movement further
recalls the call by the Security Council for an end to
all acts of violence against civilians, including acts of
terror, as well as all acts of provocation, incitement
and destruction.

Regarding Gaza, the situation remains of great
concern to the Movement. The continuing obstruction
of the reconstruction and the extremely slow pace
of the recovery of Gaza, due to the ongoing illegal
Israeli blockade, has forced thousands of families
to remain displaced and homeless and prevented the
rebuilding of vital infrastructure, gravely impacting
humanitarian, socioeconomic, psychological and
environmental conditions. We reiterate our call for the
complete lifting of the Israeli blockade of the Gaza
Strip, while also stressing that the crisis in Gaza must
be comprehensively addressed, in accordance with
international law, including humanitarian and human
rights law, and relevant United Nations resolutions, in
the context of the overall situation of the continuation
of the illegitimate and belligerent Israeli foreign
occupation of the Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, since 1967, and of the unequivocal calls for
an end to this half-century occupation.

In addition, the Non-Aligned Movement reiterates
that it condemns in the strongest terms Israel's systematic
human rights violations against the Palestinian people,
including, inter alia, the wilful killing and injury of
civilians, including peaceful protesters; violent military
raids, including, in particular, in refugee camps,
terrorizing the civilian population; the imprisonment
and detention of thousands of Palestinian civilians,
including children and women; the confiscation of land
and property and the demolition of Palestinian homes;
the forced displacement of Palestinians, particularly
Bedouin communities; and settler terrorism and
violence against Palestinian civilians. We remind the
Council of its duties in this regard.

The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its calls for
strengthening international efforts aimed at achieving
without delay an end to the Israeli occupation that began
in 1967 and ajust, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful
solution, and reiterates its readiness to cooperate and
support all relevant efforts, in line with the decisions
taken during the seventeenth Summit on the Island of
Margarita, which declared 2017 as the International
Year to end the Israeli occupation of Palestine.

The States members of the Movement also
condemn in the strongest possible terms the acts of
aggression committed by Israel against the Syrian
Arab Republic on 17 March and considers such acts a
grave violation of Syrian sovereignty and a breach of
international law, of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, and of the Agreement
on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces
of 1974. In this regard, we request the Security Council
to shoulder its responsibility by clearly condemning
those acts of aggression and taking the necessary
measures to prevent its recurrence, and holding Israel
accountable for threatening regional and international
peace and security.

In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement
reiterates its condemnation of all measures taken by
Israel, the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical
and demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan.
In this regard and in line with our principled position,
we demand once again that Israel abide by resolution
497 (1981) and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, in accordance with
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

