Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, for presiding over this
meeting and to thank you and your delegation for
organizing it. We thank the Secretary-General for his
intervention, and we join other in welcoming His
Excellency Mr. Raymond Tshibanda, Minister for
International and Regional Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We further
welcome the participation of the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Bank.

In 1960, during the celebration of the Congo's
independence, the first democratically elected Prime
Minister, Patrice Lumumba, declared, "We are going to
rule not by the peace of guns and bayonets, but by the
peace of heart and will." Later this year, more than 50
years after this vision was expressed, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will hold its third democratic
elections, still in pursuance of that lofty goal.

Significant progress has been made in the past
decade in improving the overall stability and security
of the country. There has also been progress in
improving the political climate, which has allowed for
the extension of State authority throughout most of the
country.

In spite of that progress, there remain challenges
that require a concerted effort to address, especially the
security situation in the east of the country and
challenges relating to stabilization, peacebuilding and
development. National ownership is crucial and should
characterize efforts for peace consolidation, with the
partnership and sustained support of the international
community.

I shall turn to three issues that we identify as key
for the consolidation of peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo: security and stability,
governance and democratization, and socio-economic
development.

The country's uneven stability, whereby the
eastern part continues to experience instability, is a
cause for concern. For the Democratic Republic to
maintain its sovereignty, it is important that State
authority be extended and exercised throughout the
country.
It is our view that the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Stablilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
should continue to focus on establishing stability and
security in the eastern part of the country, working
together with Government forces. We welcome the fact
that relations between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and neighbouring countries of the Great Lakes
region continue to improve. It is also important that
countries of the region have committed to working
together to comprehensively address the sources of
threats to regional stability, including those posed by
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA).

Some progress has been made with regard to
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and
reintegration and to security sector reform. However,
the process will have to be accelerated. Further, it is
our view that the mandate of MONUSCO should be
able to focus on a comprehensive programme to help
develop capable and effective national security forces
that will ultimately be responsible for peace and
security in the country. MONUSCO's future role
should complement the endeavour of the Democratic
Republic to extend its State authority. It is important
that MONUSCO's role adjust to new challenges of
threats on the ground and the needs of the Congolese
people.

Secondly, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has come a long way since the outbreak of the civil war
a decade ago, a war that turned into a conflict that
threatened regional peace and stability. It has now been
more than five years since the people of the country
chose ballots over guns and bullets, as envisaged by
Patrice Lumumba. They have not looked back on their
journey to democracy, peace and stability, justice and
freedom.

South Africa is pleased that relative peace and
security exist in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
despite the challenges in the eastern part. The last
parliamentary and presidential elections were a major
breakthrough in the Congolese efforts towards
democracy, good governance and nation-building. We
are pleased that the Congolese will be returning to the
polls again this year, in November, for the third time
since independence. We are aware that the success of
the last elections was in large part due to the
commitment, resolve and focus of the international
community and the United Nations. South Africa
would therefore call on the international community
not to forsake the people of the Congo as they
approach their next important elections after a decade-
long conflict.
South Africa would like to acknowledge to
Government's commitment to commit significant
resources to cover the total cost of the elections in
November. We call on the international community to
match that commitment and provide the financial
assistance required to bridge the gap in the budget for
the elections. MONUSCO's role in this regard will be
critical. It should of necessity extend to working
closely with the National Independent Electoral
Commission.

It is the view of my delegation that the coming
elections will be a watershed moment in the history of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and will go a
long way in determining the country's future insofar as
peace and stability and economic and social
development is concerned. While elections are not an
end but are rather a means toward an end, the
Government of the Democratic Republic is encouraged
to do everything within its modest means to ensure that
the elections are a resounding success.

As we look to the issues of sustained socio-
economic development - the third issue I wish to
address - we are again encouraged to turn to the
vision set out by Patrice Lumumba in 1960: "I call on
all Congolese citizens to set themselves resolutely to
the task of creating a prosperous national economy,
which will address our economic independence."

In that regard, we are encouraged by the report of
the International Monetary Fund that commended the
strong micro-economic performance in 2010, including
a growth rate of 7.2 per cent and annual inflation of
9.8 per cent. If sustained, that growth will translate into
important social dividends for the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Regional cooperation among the countries of the
Great Lakes region is vital to stability and economic
development. The newly created United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa can also play a
facilitating role in regional cooperation. We welcome
the Lusaka Declaration to fight illegal exploitation of
natural resources in the Great Lakes Region, adopted at
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region in December 2010. That effort will assist in
improving regional cooperation among the countries of
the Great Lakes region and is crucial to stability and
economic development.

As part of the drive for sustainable socio-
economic development in the country, the development
of strategies to manage natural resources will be
critical. The lifting of the ban on mining activities in
the Kivu and Maniema provinces this year should pave
the way for job creation and a better life for all
Congolese. In this regard, specific focus on youth
unemployment remains a pressing concern.

In conclusion, we cannot but refer yet again to
the words of that great African patriot and
revolutionary Patrice Lumumba, who said that the
independence of the Congo marks a decisive step
towards the liberation of the entire African continent.
His words remain true today and still reverberate on
the continent. The resolution of the challenges facing
the Democratic Republic of the Congo would be a
significant step towards the comprehensive resolution
of all the challenges facing the continent. South Africa,
for our part, remains committed to assisting the people
and Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to consolidate peace, reconciliation, democracy
and socio-economic development.

