Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving all countries the opportunity
to address the Security Council in this open debate.

On behalf of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, I wish to express our firmest condemnation
of the genocide that the State of Israel is carrying out
in Gaza and to affirm our unconditional solidarity with
the Palestinian people. We are witnessing one of the
darkest facets of modern war: the punishment of a
civilian population in order to demolish its morale,
destroy its spirit of resistance, to crush all will to
struggle and to make people believe that benign
slavery is preferable to resistance in the quest for
freedom. In that context, the destruction of Hamas -
which, of course, is among the objectives here -
would be a collateral effect.

The State of Israel continues to sow the wind, and
it will reap the whirlwind. No tyrant has ever been able
to drain a people's last drop of blood: before that
happens, peoples have risen up and have triumphed.
That is what took place with the resistance against Nazi
fascism during the Second World War - which, it
appears, has been forgotten.

Every cluster bomb of depleted uranium or white
phosphorus - whose use is a war crime - sows not
only death, but also a hatred that will become part of
people's genetic code, generation after generation.
Israel is creating millions of suicidal human beings,
who will proliferate throughout the world. Then,
neither Israelis nor anyone else will have peace. That is
not the path we are seeking. The Israelis lost the war in
Lebanon in 2006; they are not invincible. A Nuremberg
tribunal will be awaiting them in the future in order to
judge them as war criminals.

With the permission of the Council, I shall read
out a communique issued yesterday afternoon by the
Government of Venezuela:

"The Government of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, along with the peoples of
the world, is once again witnessing the horror of
the death of innocent children and women
resulting from the invasion of the Gaza Strip by
Israeli troops, and the merciless bombing by air
and land systematically carried out by the State of
Israel on Palestinian territory.

"In this tragic hour of outrage, the people of
Venezuela express their unreserved solidarity
with the heroic Palestinian people, share in the
grief of thousands of families at the loss of their
loved ones and extends their hand to them,
affirming that the Government of Venezuela will
work tirelessly to see those responsible for these
atrocious crimes severely punished.

"The Government of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela categorically condemns
the flagrant violations of international law carried
out by the State of Israel and denounces its
planned use of State terrorism, by which that
country has placed itself at the margins of the
community of nations.

"For these reasons, the Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has decided to
expel the Ambassador of Israel and some of the
personnel of the Embassy of Israel in Venezuela,
reaffirming its vocation for peace and its demand
that international law be respected. The
Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela has instructed its Mission to the United
Nations, along with the majority of Governments
calling for the same thing, to pressure the
Security Council to apply urgent and necessary
measures to stop the invasion by the State of
Israel against Palestinian territory.

"President Hugo Chavez, who has met with
senior representatives of the World Jewish
Congress and has always been opposed to anti-
Semitism and to any type of discrimination and
racism, has made a fraternal appeal to the Jewish
people around the world to oppose these criminal
policies of the State of Israel, which recall the
worst chapters of the twentieth century. With the
genocide of the Palestinian people, the State of
Israel can never offer its people the prospect of a
necessary and lasting peace."

