Mr. Zivalj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): It is indeed
an honour and a great pleasure for me, Sir, to address
the Security Council under your presidency. I would
like to thank you for arranging this meeting and for
giving me the opportunity to speak on behalf of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Allow me also to thank Mr. Jacques Paul Klein
for his comprehensive briefing, presented in a way that
is typical of Mr. Klein: eloquent, straight to the point
and very realistic. I would also like to express our
sincere appreciation to Mr. Klein and to the members
of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH), which he heads, for their
excellent work in implementing the mandate entrusted
to them by the Security Council.

A lot has been achieved in Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the assistance extended to us by
UNMIBH, and in particular by the International Police
Task Force (IPTF). Let me mention a few of those
accomplishments.

In the area of police reform, it is encouraging that
training programmes are almost complete. With the
enhanced monitoring capacity of UNMIBH, we believe
that the performance of local police will be improved.
That is especially important in the light of the recent
failure of local police to maintain public order during
the ground-breaking ceremonies for the rebuilding of
destroyed mosques in Trebinje and Banja Luka. We all
should do everything in our power to prevent such
incidents from happening. But we should also take note
of the positive effects of the active role played by the
local police in implementing the decision on the inter-
entity boundary line in Dobrinja. Also, through police
reform it will be possible to establish good foundations
and criteria for the repossession of real property.

The recruitment and participation of minorities in
local police, both in the Federation and in the
Republika Srpska, is behind schedule. Since minority
representation in local police is of the utmost
importance for the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons to their homes of origin, we would
like to appeal to donors for additional assistance to
resolve financial problems that impede the recruitment
process.

The establishment of the State Border Service is
well under way, enhancing the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
contributing to the reduction of illegal immigration and
trafficking in human beings and to the collection of
revenue. A very significant and encouraging step in the
direction of combating illegal migration and organized
crime has been the trilateral agreement among Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. We welcome that step, and we would like
to congratulate Mr. Klein and UNMIBH on that major
achievement. We would hope that, with generous
contributions from the international community, the
State Border Service will be established on the
remaining 35 per cent of the State border in the near
future.

The key issue for the successful implementation
of peace and respect for human rights in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is full implementation of annex VII of the
Peace Agreement, which relates to the return of all
refugees and internally displaced persons to their pre-
war homes. Although significant progress has been
made in that area, more than 1.135 million people are
still waiting to return. One of the biggest impediments
to their return is the presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina of indicted war criminals. Therefore, we
cannot stress strongly enough how important it is to
arrest those war criminals, who are a consistent and
unnecessary source of instability and fear and who
threaten the fragile stability of the country. Full
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia must be a conditio sine qua
non.

Until such time as the conditions are created for
the safe and secure return of refugees, resulting
ultimately in the reestablishment of a democratic,
stable and sustainable Bosnia and Herzegovina, we
consider that the international presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina- especially the United States
presence - is indispensable. It is for that reason that
we fully and strongly support the adoption of a draft
resolution by which the Security Council would decide
to extend the mandates of UNMIBH and of SFOR.

I would like to finish this statement on a positive
note. As members know, since April 2000, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, once a recipient and a host country to
United Nations peacekeepers, is now a troop-
contributing country. For that, Mr. Klein is also very
much responsible; that is one of many
accomplishments because of which we would like to
express our deepest appreciation and gratitude to all the
women and men of UNMIBH for their tireless efforts
in implementing their difficult mandate. In particular
we would like to congratulate Mr. Klein and to thank
him for his wise, energetic and impartial leadership.

