Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
too would like to begin by thanking the Polish presidency
for having convened this meeting on a priority issue
for the international community and also to welcome
Foreign Minister Czaputowicz's, presence among us
once again. We would also like to acknowledge the
important briefings made by the Assistant Secretary-
General for Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal
Counsel, Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares; the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, Peter
Maurer, whose organization plays a central role in this
issue; and Ms. Annyssa Bellal, of the Geneva Academy
of International Humanitarian Law and Human Rights.

We believe that in a world of growing
interdependence, the maintenance, development and
defence ofa rules-based international order is essential
and the only way for the international community
to effectively address the serious underlying global
challenges and threats, on the basis of the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. Peru is therefore a country committed to the
rule of law, multilateralism and the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes. Within that framework,
it prioritizes full respect for and compliance with
international humanitarian law, which represents the
minimum standard of dignity in the context of an
armed conflict, which must be strictly observed by the
parties for the protection of both civilians and those
who can no longer continue in the conflict because they
are wounded or detained.

The Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Protocols
Additional, the seventieth anniversary of whose
adoption we celebrate and recall today, constitute the
cornerstones of such protection. The importance and
relevance of the Conventions have been emphasized
by the International Court of Justice, recognizing
them as part of jus cogens. The Conventions, in
particular, and international humanitarian law, in
general, represent a fundamental tool in the work of
the Security Council, having been highlighted in many
resolutions and presidential statements as key elements
for the promotion and building of international peace
and security. However, it is a matter of concern that the
discourse often contrasts with reality, as has been the
case in the conflicts in Syria, Yemen and Libya, among
others. Particular attention should also be paid to the
need to guarantee the delivery of humanitarian aid on
the basis of free and unrestricted access to the field for
humanitarian agencies and aid and relief organizations,
while at the same time ensuring due protection.

We also believe that the proper implementation
of international humanitarian law transcends the
application of its protection measures to counter the
need to strengthen justice and the rule of law and
the fight against impunity. That means promoting
greater trust in jurisdictional institutions and effective
deterrence, particularly against atrocious crimes, while
ensuring full compliance with their decisions.

From our perspective as a troop-contributing
country, we attach central importance to the knowledge
and application of these norms in the training of our
officers. Peru has therefore established a National
Commission for the Study and Application of
International Humanitarian Law, with a view to
training Peruvian officials in this branch of law and
highlighting its importance.

We conclude by stressing the urgent need for
the Security Council to remain united on the need to
defend and promote international humanitarian law and
the protection of civilians in conflict, particularly in
the various cases that are part of our agenda and where,
at present, joint and decisive action is needed. This is
the only way to meet the indispensable requirement
of humanizing conflict, which is also part of its
primary responsibility to maintain international peace
and security.
The meeting rose at 12.10p.rn.
