Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, as your assumption of
the presidency of the Council this month and also the
new members of the Council: Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Gabon, Lebanon and Nigeria.

The New Year coincides with a new beginning for
Afghanistan. The past year has seen many successes
but also challenges. We also note with great sadness
the continued violence all over Afghanistan, including
in Kabul, as insurgents have attempted to strike at the
heart of Afghan and international efforts to rebuild the
country. My delegation offers our deep condolences to
the families of all Afghans, as well as to those of the
civilians and soldiers from many Member States
represented here today who have lost their lives or
been injured in the violence in Afghanistan.

As the Secretary-General notes in his very useful
report (S/2009/674), while the election process
revealed that substantial work remains to be done, we
must not ignore the successes that have been achieved
to date, including the fact that significant numbers of
Afghans turned out to vote despite violence and
intimidation. While there was widespread fraud, it was
detected and addressed, and now a new Government is
being formed with a set of clear priorities for the road
ahead.

President Karzai has made important
commitments to building a stable, democratic

Afghanistan, but major challenges lie ahead.
Immediate action must be taken to address corruption
at all levels and to continue to reform the judicial
system. Continued progress on security, strong
accountable national institutions, basic services and
economic development for the Afghan people must be
delivered. It is also clear that significant reforms to the
electoral system are required so that future elections
can be more transparent and accountable. Canada
remains ready to assist, while noting that it is the
responsibility of the new Afghan Government to
demonstrate leadership on those priorities.

In that context, Canada recognizes the democratic
process that is taking place in the nomination and
confirmation of the new cabinet, a process that is
enshrined in the Afghan Constitution. We encourage all
parties to work towards a quick resolution in order for
the Government of Afghanistan to move forward on the
significant challenges facing Afghans.

Looking ahead, strengthening Afghan ownership
will be the key to success. Canada recognizes that all
our collective efforts must enhance the capacity of
Afghans to take increasing responsibility in managing
the affairs of their country, from security and
governance to basic services. Over the coming months
President Karzai and his Government must establish a
contract with the Afghan people aimed at building a
relationship of trust. Canada looks forward to seeing
the building blocks of that contract articulated during
the upcoming conferences in London and Kabul,
clearly outlining its plans for the way ahead.

The variety of international meetings and
conferences on Afghanistan planned over the coming
months is indicative of the urgency and seriousness
with which the international community, including my
country, wants to support progress in Afghanistan.
Those conferences are a chance for the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community to work
together with renewed vigour to address the many
challenges faced by Afghanistan. We trust that the
28 January conference in London, followed by a spring
conference in Kabul, will give the international
community the opportunity to direct its efforts to a
well-defined set of realistic and prioritized objectives
set by the Afghan Government and to develop a new
international architecture for engagement in
Afghanistan.
The international effort in Afghanistan has been
boosted by the recent announcement by the United
States of important measures to reinforce its
engagement, including the deployment of additional
military and civilian resources. Canada welcomes those
additional resources, particularly to the south of
Afghanistan, where they will help provide a more
secure environment for the Afghan people.

Coordination of international engagement in
Afghanistan to achieve our shared goal presents many
challenges, not least of which are the sheer number of
actors and the complexity of the issues. It is thus all the
more crucial, as we strengthen coordination structures,
that consistency be ensured in the international
community's approach to helping the Afghan
Government to rebuild Afghanistan.

(spoke in French)

In that context, Canada firmly believes that the
United Nations role as coordinator of civilian efforts in
Afghanistan should be maintained and strengthened. In
that regard, we support the efforts to strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations Mission of Assistance
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to implement its mandate
and to maintain a continuous leadership presence on
the ground. Canada is also supportive of a strengthened
NATO senior civilian representative to coordinate the
civilian contribution to counter insurgency, noting that
UNAMA and NATO must work hand in glove to help
ensure the synergy of international efforts.

A more focused and better coordinated
international effort, within the framework of a
transition strategy, is paramount to success. This
coordinated effort will bear fruit, however, only if the
focus is on advancing Afghan capacity to lead on the
key priorities moving forward. Canada shares the view
of the United Nations and our allies that we must not
lose sight of the necessity to leave the governing of
Afghanistan in the hands of a capable and effective
Afghan Government.

Finally, I would like to express the Government
of Canada's appreciation for the work of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kai Eide,
whose term is ending soon. Since his appointment two
years ago, Kai Eide has worked tirelessly to advance
the international community's objectives in
Afghanistan, and Canada appreciates the energy and
commitment he has brought to the task.

We note with deep appreciation the fact that he
has worked hard to strengthen UNAMA by greatly
expanding its resources and its presence in the
provinces; to build UNAMA's coordination capacity as
well as to strengthen and reform the Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board; to prepare the ground for much
closer cooperation between the International Security
Assistance Force and the United Nations; and to play a
key political role in shaping international conferences
in Afghanistan and elsewhere at key times, such as the
recent elections. While much remains to be done in
Afghanistan, Mr. Eide deserves our heartfelt thanks for
his accomplishments and dedication.

