Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I too
am grateful to the Secretary-General for his briefing
and his guidance, and to those others who have already
participated in the discussion.

The United Kingdom condemns the attacks that
have taken place - attacks by the forces of the
Government of the Sudan in Darfur, and attacks by
bandits and rebel movements. We condemn both sides
equally.

The fact is, as the Secretary-General has argued,
Darfur faces a humanitarian catastrophe. It should be
quite clear that the primary responsibility of
Governments is to protect their own citizens. It follows
that the primary responsibility for the security of the
people in Darfur rests with the Government of National
Unity, and that security needs to be delivered for the
ordinary people.

The interest of the Security Council is
straightforward - to avert a humanitarian crisis, to
actually preserve and work with the Government of the
Sudan so that its territorial integrity is maintained, and
to make sure that Darfur does not become a threat to
the unity of the State or to the stability of the region. It
is a legitimate interest, an interest that, over the years,
some members of the Council have disputed. But by
today, we all understand what that interest is and why
we should follow it. And it is an interest that the
Government of the Sudan consistently failed to
recognize.

Darfur is not amenable to a military solution, so
the suggestion this morning that insufficient attention
was paid to the peace plan of the Government of the
Sudan is to turn history on its head. We have discussed
it. What is clear is that it does not provide the answer.
Nor does it provide forces on the ground who would
enjoy the confidence of the people of Darfur. We had
discussions. We were open to discussions with
representatives of the Government of the Sudan, and
those were not forthcoming. The net result was that we
moved on to adopt Security Council resolution 1706
(2006). We did that so that two simple goals could be
achieved: first, that the African Mission in Sudan
(AMIS) could be reinforced - and we provided for
that - and secondly, that the United Nations Mission
in Sudan (UNMIS) could be deployed into Darfur to
provide the security that the Darfur Peace Agreement
envisages.

The protestations that this infringes national
sovereignty, when UNMIS has been in the south
working to consolidate the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, ring very hollow. The involvement of the
United Nations is recognized by the African Union and
by most Member States of the United Nations as being
the logical step forward, so that the United Nations can
help the Government of the Sudan to fulfil its
responsibility to protect its people. It is as simple as
that, and resolution 1706 (2006) provides for that
clarity.

As for lack of consultations, well, I wonder how
many consultations one has to have. Security Council
sitting in Khartoum, in Juba and in El Fasher had lots
of consultations. There have been countless discussions
since then. But what has been consistent is the
unwillingness of the President of the Sudan to actually
agree that this force should be deployed into Darfur.
The stark reality is that if this force is not
deployed - just a year since we adopted the

responsibility to protect in the General Assembly - we
will face a real crisis, and we will face that because of
the intransigence of the Government, not because the
nations of the United Nations were not willing. We
have made it clear we are willing. We have made it
clear that the terms of the resolution reflect what was
said to us in Khartoum and separately. We have put
forward the most conciliatory resolution possible. That
is why we ought to do everything possible now to
ensure that the resolution is implemented.

I have three simple priorities for the moment. The
first is to strengthen and extend the mandate of AMIS.
Resolution 1706 (2006) provides for that, in part.
Clearly, the other part is a decision by the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. But we cannot
leave a vacuum in Darfur. A vacuum where the forces
of the Government of the Sudan, the J anjaweed and the
rebels are allowed to fight it out is bad for all of us, but
it is particularly grim for the citizens living in Darfur.
Providing the capabilities and the financing for the
continuation of AMIS is basic. It is not enough to have
pious declarations that if this force continues, the
funding will be provided. It is time for words actually
to lead to delivery, and delivery means strengthening
AMIS.

Secondly, there are the problems in Chad. Chad,
with no recognizable border with Darfur, has a real
problem at the moment. But the need to provide
adequate security for people in camps in Chad is
obvious. That is part of resolution 1706 (2006), and the
United Kingdom looks to the Department for
Peacekeeping Operations to come up with proposals to
actually deliver that security. Moreover, it must plan on
the assumption that if the crisis does unfold in Darfur,
it is quite likely that Chad will have an even bigger
humanitarian problem. So it is very important to
prepare to cope with that and to actually have security
provided in the camps in Chad.

Thirdly, we should maintain our efforts to
persuade President Al-Bashir. All of us - regional
organizations, countries with particular influence that
they can bring to bear in Khartoum - need to persuade
the President that actually putting in place the
provisions of resolution 1706 (2006) is good for the
Sudan, because in the end, providing peace and
security in Darfur is the best insurance for the integrity
and stability of the Sudan. It is good for the region, and
above all, it tackles one of the big humanitarian crises.

The United Nations has made it clear that it is
ready to fulfil its part. The question is, is the
Government of the Sudan prepared to fulfil its
obligations to its own people?

