Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras): I wish first, on
behalf of the Central American countries, to convey our
deepest condolences to the people and Government of Japan
for the recent tragedy in that brotherly country. We offer
that nation our solidarity and cooperation, within our
modest resources.

We fully endorse the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Indonesia in his capacity as
Coordinator of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Central American delegations wish to thank the
Secretary-General for submitting his "Supplement to an
Agenda for Peace: position paper of the Secretary-General
on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations".

It is an honour for my delegation to address this
Council on behalf of the countries which make up the
Central American Group.

In recent years the international community has
witnessed profound changes in the work of this world
Organization, such as its adoption of a new approach to,
and new concepts on, the maintenance of international
peace and security, the promotion of economic and social
development as the foundation of lasting peace, and
environmental sustainability. These activities currently
shape the work of our Organization and will obviously
determine the role which it will play in international
relations in the years to come.

Of all these activities, the new peace-keeping
operations monopolize a great portion of the United
Nations agenda and, because of their complexity, a large
share of its endeavours and financial resources. Although
the Charter contains no provision defining those activities,
they are the instruments which enable the Security
Council, in coordination with the Secretary-General, to
fulfil its primary responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security once all the ways and
means for the peaceful settlement of disputes envisaged
in Chapter VI of the Charter have been exhausted.

We believe that its peace-keeping operations have
made the United Nations an essential factor in
international relations, since they enable it to contribute
creatively to removing the root causes of conflict while
upholding democratic values and ensuring respect for
human rights. The tasks of the new peace-keeping
operations are not limited to monitoring cease-fires or the
cessation of hostilities between the parties in conflict, as
was the case with traditional peace operations. They may
include, depending on the circumstances, the participation
of United Nations forces in the protection of humanitarian
operations, as in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Somalia, or
in various matters pertaining to civil order provided for in
agreements negotiated between the parties, or at the
request of Governments, as with the operations in El
Salvador, Cambodia and Mozambique, to name but a few.

In any event, whether in traditional or new
operations encompassing a broad range of civil activities
envisaged in negotiated agreements, the three principles
on which peace-keeping operations are based must be

 

observed: the consent of the parties, impartiality and the
non-use of force, except in self-defence.

Mandates that may require the use of force should
have the consent of the parties and should be extensively
analysed by the Security Council, given their serious
political and economic costs as well as the obvious risk
they may entail for the peace-keeping forces, which may
not have the necessary capability and training. In this
regard, we agree with the Secretary-General's statement in
the "Supplement to An Agenda for Peace" that international
problems cannot be solved quickly or within a limited time
and that it is necessary to resist the temptation to use
military power to speed them up. Resorting to the use of
force should be considered a posteriori and as a last resort
in peace-keeping.

Since 1992, when the Secretary-General submitted his
report "An Agenda for Peace", not only were the
foundations laid for a systematic process of concrete reform
in this Organization, but a conceptual framework also
emerged in which to undertake in-depth reflection on the
Charter's purpose of maintaining international peace and
security. The report "An Agenda for Peace" continues to
constitute the basis that has enabled Member States to
propose consistent reforms aimed at formulating strategies
and mechanisms leading to the early and peaceful
settlement of disputes.

Some of the measures adopted by the Secretary-
General, including the strengthening of permanent
consultations with the Security Council, the establishment
of an early-warning mechanism that could be used in
situations that endanger international peace and security, the
constitution of fact-finding missions and the establishment
of regular meetings with troop-contributing countries are all
measures that strengthen the capacity of the Security
Council in carrying out its overall political direction of
peace-keeping operations.

One of the measures that the Secretary-General has
suggested to increase the peace-keeping capacity of the
United Nations, given the seriousness of not having
adequate troops and equipment available, is the setting up
of a rapid reaction force as a strategic reserve of the
Security Council, for deployment whenever there was an
emergency need to prevent a crisis from escalating. On this
point, the Government of Honduras and the Governments
of the other Central American countries have taken note of
the difficulties and obstacles faced by peace operations in
particular instances and therefore share the idea of a rapid
reaction force as well as the adoption of measures to
improve its capacity in terms of equipment, training and
intelligence capability of troops intended for peace
operations. At the same time, we believe that there should
be further clarification of the circumstances and situations
in which that force would be deployed.

We believe that an essential element throughout
"Supplement to An Agenda for Peace" is the decision-
making process in the Security Council, which should be
as transparent as possible. The Security Council must
improve its consultation mechanisms and offer more
opportunities for countries affected by Council decisions
to present their positions and to make them known before
informal consultations begin.

We support preventive diplomacy and peacemaking
as techniques that make it possible to identify potential
areas of conflict, the offer of good offices when conflicts
are still developing and crisis resolution before they
degenerate into armed confrontation. We believe that
consolidating the tasks of preventive diplomacy in the
Secretariat's Department of Political Affairs was a
measure of singular importance for achieving those ends.
Equally important is its coordination with the Department
of Peace-keeping Operations and the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs, whether in terms of establishing a
peace-keeping operation or of alleviating the suffering
resulting from conflict.

We also believe that it is crucial to make extensive
use of the services of Special Representatives or Envoys
in fact-finding or good-offices missions, bearing in mind
the current increase in intra-State conflicts, especially in
Africa and Europe. Given the lower cost of these
missions as compared with the enormous cost of war in
terms of human suffering and material damage, we
believe that financial support should be forthcoming for
these activities, and we encourage the Secretary-General
to continue to carry them out.

Timely information to all States represented at the
United Nations about peace operations will no doubt
contribute to substantial support by the international
community for the actionsof the Secretary-General and
the Security Council. This information should not only be
timely, but in an appropriate form, so that every State can
express its point of view on each case, whether writing to
the Secretariat or at plenary meetings of the Council, so
that Members may have broad and general information at
their disposal before they take decisions.

 

The activities involved in post-conflict peace-building
are among the most important instruments available to the
Organization in promoting peace and security, because they
lay down the foundations for lasting peace. We agree with
the Secretary-General that all the activities which constitute
this phase should be entrusted to multifunctional operations
until normality is restored, when these tasks may be taken
over by the programmes, funds, offices and agencies of the
United Nations system active in the economic, social,
humanitarian and human rights fields.

Central America is today an example of a movement
from war to peace and from peace to democracy, and now
we are working intensively on regional integration
programmes to achieve sustainable development. We hope
that the United Nations and the international community
will continue to support the efforts of our countries to that
end.

With regard to disarmament as an instrument for
international peace and security, we, together with the Non-
Aligned Movement, adhere to the principle that general and
complete disarmament can be attained only in the
multilateral forum provided by this Organization. We
believe that the elimination of the manufacture, use and
threat of use of weapons of mass destruction will help to
foster regional and world peace and security, as the Council
recognized in resolution 255 (1968) of 19 June 1968 and
reiterated in its Summit declaration of 31 January 1992,
when it stated that the proliferation of all weapons of mass
destruction constitutes a threat to international peace and
security. In this regard, we consider it essential that the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
be indefinitely and unconditionally extended at the
Conference of the Parties to be held this year.

In his supplementary report the Secretary-General
refers to "micro-disarmament", which we consider relevant
both for the prevention of outbreaks of conflicts and for the
process of post-conflict peace-building. We agree with his
statement that the proliferation, trade and use of light arms
and anti-personnel mines not only fuel conflicts, but also
sap the limited resources of the countries that acquire them,
which are usually developing countries. In this respect, we
endorse the Secretary-General's appeal for continued
priority to be given to the problem of the proliferation and
export of anti-personnel mines and for the States producing
them to declare a moratorium on their production and
export.

With regard to sanctions as coercive measures for the
resolution of conflicts, we believe that when such sanctions
are imposed they should be accompanied by measures
that curtail their adverse effect on the civilian population
and third countries. We therefore agree with the
recommendations that when the Council imposes
sanctions it should at the same time adopt measures to
facilitate the work of the humanitarian agencies that assist
sectors of the population affected by sanctions, and that
a mechanism should be established to assess the collateral
damage to third States, with a view to assisting those
States, in accordance with the provisions of Article 50 of
the Charter.

The United Nations has more experience in peace-
keeping than any other body. It has the structures for
establishing, financing and directing such operations. On
the other hand, regional organizations, with the exception
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, lack these
structures, and for the most part their financial situation
is worse than that of the United Nations. This situation
remains an obstacle to regional organizations' assuming,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter, a leading
role in peace-keeping functions.

Consultations, diplomatic support through what have
come to be called "Friends of the Secretary-General" or
contact groups, technical or operational support, joint
deployment of field missions and joint operations have all
given proof of valuable and varied cooperation. We
believe that in this area the Secretary-General should
continue to hold periodic meetings, such as the one held
on 1 August 1994, with the heads of regional
organizations that have cooperated in peace-making and
peace-keeping activities in order to assess that
cooperation, with a View to augmenting it in the future.

Financing is one of the most important factors
affecting the implementation of peace-keeping operations.
As we all know, the demand for peace-keeping operations
has grown in recent years, and the more extensive and
complex the operations are, the greater the need for
financial resources to be invested. The statistics on the
costs of peace operations provided to us by the Secretary-
General speak for themselves: they show that the sizeable
increase in such costs exceeds to an alarming degree the
budget for development activities.

On this point, we wish to draw attention to some
elements that should be given serious study: first, for
developing countries, the financial burden of having to
make pro rata contributions to peace-keeping operations;
secondly, the diversion to these operations of resources
intended for economic and social development activities

 

in those countries; and, thirdly, the cutbacks in the
programmes of United Nations specialized agencies when
developing countries find it impossible to make regular
contributions to them.

These are some of the problems underlying the high
cost of peace operations. We therefore believe that a
balance should be sought between the cost of these
activities and the cost of economic and social development
activities.

Finally, it is fitting to recall today the statement of the
Security Council on the occasion of the first Summit
meeting, where the members of the Council agreed that the
world now has its best opportunity to achieve peace and
security since the very creation of the United Nations. At
that meeting members of the Council undertook the
commitment to work in close cooperation with the Member
States of the Organization in their efforts to solve their
problems, in particular those pertaining to economic and
social development. They also acknowledged that peace and
prosperity are indivisible and that lasting peace and stability
call for effective international cooperation to eradicate
poverty and promote a better life for all within a broader
concept of freedom.

