Mr. Suarez Moreno (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank the Russian Federation
for convening today's debate on cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security. We also welcome the briefings from Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, Mr. Nikolai Bordyuzha, Mr. Rashid Alimov
and Mr. Sergey Ivanov.

Our delegation places particular importance on
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations,
including the Security Council, and regional and
subregional organizations. We firmly believe that the
contributions of these organizations to the areas of
peace and security reinforce the work ofthis multilateral
institution in resolving conflicts, in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

While the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security lies
with the Security Council, the many conflicts and crises
around the world call for close cooperation between
all United Nations bodies and regional organizations,
particularly in cases where such organizations have a
closer perspective of regional and local conflicts and a
knowledge of their underlying causes, which allows for
close and mutually beneficial cooperation. We firmly
believe that regional and subregional bodies, such as the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Commonwealth of
Independent States, among others, play a fundamental
role in promoting dialogue and cooperation with a
View to addressing the challenges and threats to peace
in those regions. There is therefore a need for those
institutions to work in close cooperation with the United
Nations as strategic allies in the areas of international
and regional peace and security. The independence,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of countries are
common goals of their members States.

Such institutions play an important role in the
maintenance of peace in a very broad region that spans
from Eastern Europe to the Far East. Despite all of
their efforts, political and economic stability in the
region is currently affected by a number of challenges
related to security threats, which include terrorism,
violent extremism, radicalization, and recruitment of
foreign terrorist fighters coming from the region and
being recruited by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and other groups, as well as ethnic and internal
sociopolitical disputes that increase the risk of armed
conflicts in the region. Tension and border disputes that
are linked to delimitation problems are further negative
factors.

The challenges facing Central Asia call for an
effective and coordinated response from countries
in the region, which must address the challenges and
security threats that the strategic geographical zone is
facing by establishing bilateral and regional cooperation
links. We therefore appreciate the initiatives and the
meetings that those organizations have organized
with countries of the region and with other members
of the international community to address the main
challenges that they currently face. In that regard, we
support the focused approach of those regional and
subregional organizations to seek greater cooperation
between the States of Central Asia in the areas of
combating terrorism, preventing violent extremism and
radicalization, with a View to implementing the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which
includes a number of activities aimed at improving
capacity building and information exchange.

The improvement of the political stituation in
Afghanistan, particularly in the context of its transition
and reconciliation process, will have a significant
impact on the stability of its neighbours. Nevertheless,
although there have been achievements in combating
terrorism, violent extremism and drug trafficking, such
problems still pose a threat to the country's stability.
We therefore commend the efforts of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization in their commitment to combat
those scourges in coordination with Afghan authorities.

For the sake of the stability and security of the
region, it is crucial that these issues be addressed by
establishing conditions conducive to lasting solutions to
regional problems, based on mutual benefits for States
and the principles of international law. Diplomatic
measures and mechanisms for prevention, both of
the United Nations and of regional organizations,
need to be coordinated and targeted towards an early
identification of possible crises and an exchange of
information. Venezuela commends the progress made
by the United Nations to work with the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy in Central Asia, which seek
to establish methods to prevent conflicts and create
peacekeeping mechanisms.

In conclusion, we highlight the importance of
continuing to encourage the efforts being made by
those regional and subregional organizations to
create specific areas of cooperation suited to each
circumstance, taking into account the particular
characteristics and interests of member States. We also
encourage increased dialogue and contact between
countries of the region, with the aim of identifying
areas susceptible to disputes or conflicts, in order to
take appropriate confidence-building measures to
develop cooperation strategies that benefit all members
States and the international community as a whole.

