I would like to begin by congratulating the presidency of Germany on its successful steering of the work of the Security Council for the month of July amid this unprecedented challenging time of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We also thank the German presidency for organizing this important debate. I take this opportunity to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his comprehensive briefing this morning (annex 1). My delegation aligns itself with the statement submitted by the United Arab Emirates on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (annex 47). The overall situation in the occupied Palestinian territory unfortunately continues to be characterized by tensions and conflicts, violating the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to self-determination. The situation has worsened due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Amid this dual jeopardy, Israel's illegal and unilateral plan to annex large parts of the occupied West Bank, including the Jordan Valley and the land on which it established its settlements and the wall, could not be more worrisome. The annexation threat of Israel is a clear and grave violation of international humanitarian law and international human rights law, including the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the Fourth Geneva Convention, and contrary to the relevant resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and Security Council. The annexation plan, if implemented, will have acutely adverse economic, political, humanitarian and human rights ramifications in the occupied Palestinian territory. It will have grave consequences for peace in the Middle East. Above all, it will pose a serious impediment to the efforts of the international community and the United Nations to advance the international peace and security agenda. We therefore join the international community's show of global solidarity in urging Israel, the occupying Power, to stop the implementation of its illegal and unilateral annexation plan. Furthermore, these efforts have to be sustained and followed up in the long run. We call upon Israel to bring an end to all violations, provocations and aggressions against the Palestinians, in response to the Secretary- General's global ceasefire appeal. The unabated construction of settlements, the land confiscation, the demolition of Palestinian homes and properties and the blockade of the Gaza Strip by Israel also need to be halted. The sanctity of Islamic and Christian holy places, particularly the Al-Aqsa Mosque, must be maintained at all costs. We remain deeply concerned by the continued socioeconomic downturn and deteriorating humanitarian condition of the Palestinian people, which has been further aggravated by the COVID-19 pandemic. The international community must ensure that Israel allows unfettered access for humanitarian and medical assistance for the Palestinians to confront the pandemic. The pandemic has put a greater demand on the perennially outstretched capacity of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Therefore, the United Nations COVID-19 revised response plan for the occupied Palestinian territory, the UNRWA COVID-19 response flash appeal and the Agency's core programme budget require immediate support. We call upon the international community to come up with generous and predictable funding and technical assistance to enable UNRWA to continue its work, which is a lifeline for Palestinians. A multilateral effort is the only way to bring about lasting peace in the Middle East and resolve the Palestinian crisis. Bangladesh believes that the timely implementation of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Quartet road map and the Arab Peace Initiative is of singular importance in that regard. The threat of annexation has made the international community's greater resolve and renewed action to carry forward the political process more imperative than ever before. We expect the Security Council to redouble its efforts to stop Israel's illegal and unilateral annexation plan of the Palestinian territory, in fulfilment of its Charter obligations, through the implementation of its relevant resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016). As for us, we will continue to firmly stand by the cause of the Palestinian struggle for self-determination until the establishment of the State of Palestine on the basis of the two-State solution and the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
