Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): I take this opportunity
to congratulate you, Sir, and your country, the United
Kingdom, on your assumption of the Security Council
presidency for this month and for organizing this
important meeting on the security situation in Burundi.
1 also thank you for inviting Uganda to brief the
Council on the efforts of the East African Community
to facilitate dialogue in Burundi.

Until recently, Burundi had been a success story,
based on the efforts undertaken by the region to address
insecurity in the country. The efforts of the region led
to the signing of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement. The Heads of State of the countries of
the region have continued to provide their support for
peacebuilding efforts in Burundi. Fifteen years after
the signing of the Arusha Agreement, all the country's
political leaders, including those in exile, must aim
to find common cause and commit to building on the
stability that was ushered in by the Agreement.

Uganda underscores the role of regional and
subregional organizations in the peaceful settlement
of conflicts, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. The United Nations and the
international community should support the efforts of
regional and subregional organizations to address the
challenges relating to peace and security, human rights
and development.

On 31 May, an emergency summit of the East
African Community was convened on the situation
in Burundi. Those attending the summit included His
Excellency Mr. Jacob Zuma, President of the Republic
of South Africa and guarantor of the Arusha Accord,
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region, and the Executive Secretary of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. The Heads of
State were concerned about the violence in Bujumbura
and other parts of Burundi that had led to the deaths of
many people, as well as to the influx of refugees into
neighbouring countries and the destruction of property.
The summit called upon all parties to stop the violence
and exercise restraint.

At the third extraordinary summit of the Heads
of State of the East African Community, held on
6 July, His Excellency Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni,
President of the Republic of Uganda, was asked to lead
and facilitate a high-level dialogue in a bid to find a
lasting solution to the political situation and to ensure
that peace returns to Burundi. Accordingly, on 14 and
15 July, President Museveni was in Burundi and met
with all the stakeholders in a bid to create momentum
for dialogue. The President has also been in contact
with the Secretary-General and leaders in the region.

Subsequently, President Museveni delegated The
Honourable Chrispus Kiyonga, Uganda's Minister
of Defence, to continue facilitating the dialogue in
Burundi. On behalf of the President, the Minister
traveled to Bujumbura and chaired a series of
stakeholder meetings on 16, 17 and 18 July. In those
engagements, the Minister underscored the need to find
a durable political solution through dialogue among all
parties and called on them to desist from incitement
and violence. He left Bujumbura, and elections for the
President took place on 21 July.

On 26 July, His Excellency Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza
sent his special envoys, Mr. Pascal Nyabenda, Speaker
of the Burundi Parliament, and Mr. Agathon Rwasa,
First Deputy Speaker, along with two other members
of Parliament, to Kampala. It was further agreed that
the East African Community-mandated dialogue must
continue.

Uganda remains committed to facilitating the
dialogue, as mandated by the Heads of State of the
East African Community. In that regard, Mr. Kiyonga
visited Bujumbura on 28 and 29 October in order to
follow up on his assignment in Burundi. He held
meetings with the President of the Senate and his two
deputies; the President of the National Assembly with
his two deputies, including Mr. Rwasa, who comes
from the opposition; the Minister of Home Affairs; and
the Commission appointed by President Nkuruziza to
conduct the Inter-Burundi dialogue. In all the meetings
he held with the officials mentioned previously, the
Minister of Defence received similar, consistent
messages indicating that while they welcome the East
African Community intervention, their preference
is for the Community to play an advisory role to the
Commission.
Minister Kiyonga reiterated that the East African
Community facilitation efforts would proceed as
originally conceived, but would indeed work with the
Commission. In the light of the Minister's position,
the officials promised to get back to the Community
after consultations with their principal, His Excellency
Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, President of the Republic
of Burundi. In view of the recent meetings held in
Bujumbura, we are optimistic that there will be progress.
The next summit of the East African Community Heads
of State is scheduled to take place on 30 November, and
the security situation in Burundi will certainly be on
the agenda.

It is important to note that the region has remained
actively seized of the matter and that recently, on
20 October, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region held a meeting of Ministers of
Defence in Luanda, which discussed, inter alia, the
security situation in Burundi. In its recommendations,
the meeting, first, appreciated the efforts of the East
African Community mediation process led by His
Excellency Mr. Yoweri Museveni, President of the
Republic of Uganda, in search of peace and stability in
Burundi; and, secondly, welcomed the willingness of
the Government of the Republic of Burundi to engage
in an all-inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue on various
themes to be conducted in and outside Burundi in
consideration of peace and unity, as required by the
people of the country. At the same time, the African
Union Peace and Security Council has continuously
demonstrated its ability to follow the security situation
in Burundi closely, as reflected in its recently adopted
communique of 17 October. All these regional efforts
are consistent with Chapters VII and VIII of the United
Nations Charter.

We stress the importance of coordination among
international and regional efforts in supporting dialogue
in Burundi. All efforts must be focused on a credible
and inclusive dialogue aimed at re-establishing the trust
and reconciliation that will ensure confidence-building
among all parties and a return to the security and
stability that will spur development in the country.

