Sir Jeremy Greenstock: I just wish to catch up
with some of the questions raised and comments made
before people depart for lunch.

I am extremely grateful for the general support
which the Committee has had from those members and
non-members of the Council who have spoken and for
the careful thought that has gone into their
presentations this morning. They have been generous in
their praise of the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) so far, but I want to underline once
again, as many speakers have said, how important it is
that this be a team effort. A lot of people have
contributed to it, not least, may I say again, my own
staff, both in my delegation and in the support I have
had from London.

I think that Ambassador Mahbubani rightly
pointed to some of the areas where the CTC has made a
difference, but I think it goes beyond his four points.
The overall determination of virtually all Member
States to do something about terrorism has definitely
taken off since 11 September and since the adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001). One of the most important of
them is the extra legislation that is now being passed. It
is not just looking at legislation which is now going
forward, it is the actual adoption of new legislation.
The increase in the ratifications of the conventions and
the real cooperation that is beginning to take place in
stopping terrorist actions and the financing of terrorism
amount to more than intentions; it is actually
happening now. And I want very quickly to move on to
the area of assistance and make that an actual and not
just an intended measure.

There was clearly some confusion over numbers,
because 143 plus 50 does not add up to 189. The fact is
that we have had, as I said in my report, reports from
Member States and others, including the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the European
Union, the Cook Islands and Switzerland, which are
not Members of the United Nations as such, yet. That
adds up to 193. There are 50 which now need to move.
I am grateful to those who said how important that is.

It is the Committee's approach to liaise with non-
reporters in a cooperative way since virtually all of
them are not reporting because they have difficulties.
Japan and others have said "well then, they need
assistance, and that assistance must be arranged". That
is something I now want to do. May I inform the
Council and, indeed, the Committee, that I am now in a
position to move forward with the appointment of the
seventh expert and will take action on that within the
next 24 hours. It is an important appointment and one
on which I want work to get going.

Regional organizations are absolutely vital, as
many people have said. Frankly, I think that as we
move forward in the CTC's work with regional
organizations, this could be the beginning of a model
of cooperation with regional organizations in other
aspects of the Council's work. I think we need to give
some thought to that. I particularly appreciate
Norway's work with the Organization of African Unity
in setting up a project to get them going in
implementation, a project which I did not know about.
Inevitably, because of lack of experience in this field,
Africa is in danger of falling behind in this whole area,
and I very much appreciate that sort of donor-State
activity with regional organizations.

Cameroon and others referred to the whole
concept of State responsibility. I think that Ambassador
Belinga-Eboutou expressed that very well. It lies at the
heart of the effective implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). In the end, the CTC can be only a catalyst
for this, although, if we have to, at the end of the day,
there is a bit of a stick to wave. But States must take on
their own responsibility. There is nothing more
important than that. That is where it is in their own
interest to use their regional organizations and for that
to be an active area.

On human rights, I think we have the balance
right. I have taken careful note of what the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has said
recently and of what the Secretary-General has said.
But I think the Committee has got the balance right.
The Committee is in consensus on human rights: it is
awareness and discussion and liaison. But it is not
implementing action as far as human rights obligations
are concerned. The Committee is working up to its full
mandate but not beyond it.

I will pick up some of the points from regional
organizations and other Member States after lunch. But
Spain, on behalf of the European Union, mentioned
lessons learned and the spreading of lessons learned.
One very useful paper produced recently on the subject
of lessons learned from reports so far was written by
the spokesman for the Committee's experts, Mr. Walter
Gehr. It has now been distributed to all Member States
as a resource. I suggest that the delegations look at it. It
is a useful addition to the category of lessons learned.

Spain also mentioned the Secretariat setting up a
unit. Before this meeting, I discussed with Sir Kieran
Prendergast whether the Secretariat wished to speak. I
do not think that unit is yet fully formed enough to
make an input. It will be up and running, I understand,
by the end of June. In the next debate that we have, I
hope that the Secretariat will make a full contribution.

As for the Vienna institutions mentioned by
Spain, there will be an important series of seminars and
symposiums in earlier June. I will be going to one of
them on 3 and 4 June.

I will pick up other points after lunch because
people want to get away. I thank everyone for the
positive tone of the debate so far.

