Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): The resolution we have just
adopted concludes one of the most detailed and complex
peace-keeping operations of the United Nations. Over a
four-year period, our Organization's direct involvement
has made a fundamental contribution to the transition in
El Salvador from a society plagued by violence and civil
war to a new reality based on the values of democracy
and respect for human rights. Italy is particularly glad to
have taken part in ONUSAL from the beginning with a
contingent of police observers.

Although there are still grey areas, we are convinced
that some aspects of the situation that are still fragile at
present can be overcome through the consolidation of
democracy. We welcome the significant progress that has
been made and pay tribute to the architects of this result:
the political leaders of El Salvador who believed most
firmly in national reconciliation, and the United
Nations - the Secretary-General, his Special
Representatives and all the ONUSAL personnel.

The peace process is not yet complete. Some of the
agreements reached between the Government and the
FMLN at Chapultepec Castle in Mexico City in 1992
have not yet been fully implemented. We take note of the
Secretary-General's statement in his report dated
24 March that until there has been a complete follow-up
to the commitments, the irreversibility of the process
cannot be taken for granted (S/1995/220, para. 68). The
United Nations will continue to maintain a presence in
El Salvador. This testifies to the Organization's ongoing
involvement in this delicate phase of post-conflict peace-
building and, through its close ties with the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), this structure
will make possible an integrated approach to the complex
and interrelated problems of the country's political,
economic and social development. In this regard, let me
recall the efforts undertaken by my Government with a
$120 million programme, over a five-year period - the
PRODERE - in support of restoring stability to Central
American countries, including El Salvador.

The specific task of the United Nations will be to
verify compliance with the commitments made by the
parties and to give an impetus to the process of national
reconciliation. The Security Council will be able to
continue following developments in the El Salvador
situation also through the flow of information that this
United Nations presence allows.

 

The United Nations has been a catalyst in expanding
democracy in Central America. In El Salvador the
Organization's first commitment was a human-tights-
monitoring mission. which steadily expanded to become a

multifunctional operation. Some unique characteristics of
ON USAL could serve as a model for other peace-keeping
operations.

El Salvador has proved to be another United Nations
success story attesting to our Organization's lasting
effectiveness, particularly its capacity to develop a variety
of instruments for intervention adapted to the specific
characteristics of a crisis area. This is one of the reasons
why the international community must continue to
observe the evolution of the situation in El Salvador and
must support all initiatives that can strengthen democracy.

