Ms. Sanders (United States of America): The
United States welcomes Mr. Schwarz-Schilling to the
Security Council today, as well as Prime Minister
Terzie. We appreciate the very important work they are
doing in Bosnia and Herzegovina and, as it is so
significant, we would like to offer our thoughts on the
state of affairs there.

Regarding the elections and Government
formation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the United
States welcomed the conduct of the 1 October
elections, but we were disappointed by the level of
nationalist rhetoric during the election campaign. We
call on the newly elected leaders to set aside that
divisive rhetoric and form a Government as soon as
possible that will move forward with urgently needed
political, economic, defence and rule of law reforms.

Regarding constitutional reform, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has a constitution that was shaped by the
necessity to end the war, not by the need for
functionality, fiscal sustainability and economic and
social development. Constitutional reform will be
needed to accelerate progress towards the European
Union (EU) and Euro-Atlantic institutions. The United
States urges early adoption of the package of
constitutional amendments agreed by six political
parties in March. The package enjoys widespread
international support and would create more functional
State structures that are better able to meet the needs of
the Bosnian people and Euro-Atlantic standards.

These reforms would only be first steps in a
longer-term process. The United States is committed to
supporting a next phase of reforms once this phase is
completed.

On the transition of the Office of the High
Representative, we continue to support the June 2007
timeline for closing the Office, and we welcome the
EU's desire to establish an enhanced EU Special
Representative mission. We believe that, after over a
decade of peace implementation and State-building
reforms, Bosnians are capable of assuming greater
responsibility for the future of their country.

We are committed to reviewing the decision of
the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board to
terminate the Office of the High Representative next
February to take into account the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and regional issues. However, we do
not believe a lack of progress on reform is sufficient
rationale to delay the return of sovereignty to the
Bosnian people.

On police reform and EU integration, we fully
support the EU and the Office of the High
Representative's engagement on police reform, and we
appreciate the Office's leadership on this issue.

Signing a EU Stabilization and Association
Agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina is one of the
best ways to ensure that the country continues to
pursue political and other reforms necessary for a
strong, stable future.

Finally, on police decertification, the United
States remains committed to working with the Security
Council and the Office of the High Representative to
reach a solution.

