Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): I would like to thank you, Mr; President, and
ask you to convey our thanks to your predecessor, our
colleague and friend Ambassador Mahugu of Kenya, for
the competence and talent with which he presided over
the work of the Council in February.

Every one of us bears an indelible memory of the
image of that handshake, in Washington in September
1993, between the President of the Palestinian Authority,
Mr. Yasser Arafat, and the then Prime Minister of Israel.
Mr. Yitzhak Rabin, who was assassinated in so cowardly
a manner in October 1995. i

That day the whole world bore witness to an event
whose historical significance transcended the geographical
confines of the Middle East and the destiny of the peoples
involved. We felt then that wewere experiencing an
"extraordinary moment, and were virtual eye-witnesses to
a major turning point in the tortured history of Arab-
lsraeli relations. We thought that a new page had been
turned, bearing in bold capitals the inscription "Peace,
Reconciliation and Coexistence" -- words that had been
absent for so long from daily human discourse in that part
of the world, because they had been drowned out by the
deafening thunder of guns and the indiscriminate blast of
bombs.

Our hopes knew no bounds. We were surprised to
find ourselves dreaming of friendship and harmony
between the Arab and the Israeli peoples. We believed in
the complete withdrawal of the occupation forces and in
an end to the hostilities that for so long had brought such
bloodshed to that part of the world and with it had
plunged so many families, on both sides, into mourning.
We thought that the reasons for killing one another and
for pursuing the war could not stand up to common sense
and would surely yield to reason. We had hoped to see,
on a horizon darkened by such great bitterness and
despair, a new dawn whose glow would enlighten the
hearts and minds of all in a region that had seen such
grief. '
"cm", New".

Fifty~second year 5 March 199;

 

To be sure, we knew that peace was not easily built,
and that great difficulties could be involved in such an
undertaking. But so many obstacles had been overcome and
so much progress had been achieved since the October
1991 Madrid Conference that we felt safe in our belief that
peace was now possible and lay within our grasp. '

As in any process of this kind, goodwill and
determination are needed to overcome the uncertainties
inherent in the complexity of conflict. Without complete
understanding of what is really at stake, of the common
destiny that unites the peoples of the Middle East, lasting
peace cannot be established in a region where decades of
exclusion and hatred have left wounds that are difficult to
heal over.

Modern history teaches us that great political courage
and humanism are needed to overcome the prejudice and
fear that produce in us the fear of "the other". It is the duty
of every statesman and every leader to resist short-sighted
pressure and to reject the ascendancy of policies that are
merely political.

The Israeli Government decision to establish new
Jewish settlements in East Jerusalem runs counter to the
spirit of peace that now prevails in the region, and
constitutes an additional obstacle to the creation of a
climate .of understanding, reconciliation and religious
tolerance in that age-old holy city held so clear by the
world's three great monotheistic religions. We must
remember the sacred nature of Jerusalem in order to
understand better the feelings of disagreement and
opposition engendered by such a decision ---- which
moreover is illegal, as it completely ignores the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

The status of Jerusalem cannot be altered without
provoking the disapprovallofthe international community.
The measures decided upon by the Israeli Government have
added to the injustice of which the people of East
Jerusalem are already victims, having been evicted to make
room for newcomers. The resulting demographic change
and sociological imbalance have already exacerbated
tension and deepened H the differences between the
Palestinians and the Israeli settlers.

It is up to the Israeli Government to show restraint
and to respect the rights of the Palestinians, many of whom,
having had their property confiscated, are living in
conditions that are, intolerable and that violate their rights.
Under the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, Israel
must shoulder its responsibilities as the occupying Power.
Building new Jewish housing in the southern part of East
Jerusalem, in'the Jabal Abu Ghneim area, where Arabs
have always lived, is senseless provocation, for it is
taking place at the very time when a new phase of
negotiations is beginning following the recent agreement
on Hebron. The, Israeli Government must reverse its
decision, for the status of Jerusalem and all related
questions must be the subject of discussions in the
framew0rk of the dynamic of peace that is already under
way.

For decades, the international community has sought
a solution to the Middle East conflict. If a settlement is to
be conclusive and lasting, it must result in full enjoyment
by the Palestinians , of all their rights. The peace
process -- some of whose vagaries we have already
mentioned in order to show how necessary it is that it be
consolidated --- must continue on the terms agreed upon
by the Palestinian National Authority and the Israeli
Government. The pace and timetable must be maintained;
everything must be done to ensure that the rights of all
parties are taken into account, with respect for the
principles of justice and equity. The well-being of the
Jewish inhabitants of Jerusalem cannot be achieved at the
cost of the Palestinians being driven from their land. We
absolutely must correct the political and socio-economic
imbalances caused by 30 years of occupation.

In the Middle East as everywherevelse, an end to
hostilities does not mean a return to peace. That requires
sincere commitment and exceptional abilities, not the least
of which is political courage. Will the Israeli leaders be
able to heed the call of the Security Council and act
accordingly?

Guinea~Bissau considers that the peace process must,
continue, and must enjoy the unwavering support of the '
international community. The Palestinian National
Authority and the Israeli Government must try to
overcome all the obstacles to bring about a conclusive
peace based on respect for the inalienable rights of one
and all.

The history of the Middle East will record theheroic
sacrifices of those who have not hesitated to overcome
their own prejudices and oppose the ignorance and
intolerance of extremists of all stripes to show us the path
to follow: the path of dialogue, negotiation and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, which has been so
forcefully advocated by the United Nations and so long
desired by the peoples of the region.
Security Council 3745th meeting
Fifty-second year 5 March [997

 

We must hope that the supreme sacrifice of those who
hava given their lives for the cause of peace in that part of
the world will continue to illuminate and inspire the
political leaders and the peoples of the region in their quest
for peace, justice and a better life for all.

