Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like to start by thanking the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Feltman, for his briefing
on the situation in the Middle East. I also thank the
representatives of Palestine and of the State of Israel for
their statements.

In this debate, I will address the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, the Syrian crisis and the situation in Lebanon.

As for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the
situation on the ground has seen no tangible progress
since the Council's last meeting to examine the
issue. Concerns persist as the hope for a two-State
solution - Israel and Palestine living side by side
in peace and security - evaporates, due to ongoing
unilateral initiatives and provocations by both parties.

On the one hand, settlement activities have not
halted. Settlement construction and the expulsion of
Palestinian families continue, as does the blockade of
the Gaza Strip. On the other hand, rocket firing and
other provocative acts from the Gaza Strip towards
Israel have not ceased. While Palestinians fight
to regain their confiscated land, Israel defends its
legitimate right to its existence and to security.

My country believes that although both parties clearly
have rights they wish to exercise, the only acceptable
solution should be that of peace, mutual acceptance and
coexistence. That is what the international community,
including the Security Council, has worked towards
for decades. However, given that the lack of success
with regard to the two States is perceived as a failure
on the part of the Council, the situation should prompt
the Council now to review its many resolutions and the
various initiatives by outside players and partners.

In that context, my country believes that the
effective implementation of the Quartet road map
and the Arab Peace Initiative should be firmly
supported - indeed, demanded. At a time when it
is important to relaunch the various initiatives, both
parties equally must show unfailing political will to
begin the negotiations necessary to achieve a lasting
settlement of the question.

In that respect, the Togolese delegation welcomes
the recent proposal by Minister Barak to dismantle
dozens of Jewish settlements in the West Bank. Such
an approach will certainly constitute the beginning
of a disengagement, which my country strongly
encourages. Here my country takes the opportunity to
request that the Israeli authorities ensure an effective
disengagement - in other words, not to free up one
zone simply to occupy another in the West Bank.

Similarly, Togo encourages the continuation of
informal meetings between the Palestinian Authority
and Israel. It calls upon the Quartet to continue its
efforts so as to make progress in the negotiations on
issues that divide the parties. In our view, the resumption
of negotiations is urgent, and any preconditions to
resumption will only delay a settlement of the issue.
We also believe that the negotiations should include all
parties. That is why we call upon Hamas and associated
groups to renounce violence and to work with the
Palestinian Authority within the framework of direct
negotiations.

Now I will take up the situation in Syria, which
is on the cusp of setting off the entire region if the
Security Council does not take the measures required
by the level of danger. If the worst that all of us fears
were to happen, our Council will have failed in its
responsibilities as defined by the Charter of the United
Nations.

The events of 3 October, including the bombing
of the Turkish village of Akcakale, which claimed five
victims, and the rapid and determined response of the
Turkish authorities have strengthened our fear. The
Council's firmness in condemning that bombing and
other suicide car bombs in Aleppo are an encouraging
sign, yet they are not enough to put an end to the
determination of all parties to the conflict to use all
violent means.

In the light of the scale of the war on the ground,
Togo believes that the Security Council should use all
means at its disposal to lead all parties to the conflict
to effectively implement Kofi Annan's six-point plan
and the Geneva Action Group for Syria communique
(S/2012/523, annex), while awaiting new proposals to
settle the crisis, which will be presented by the Joint
Special Representative for Syria, Mr. Brahimi. For the
time being, my country calls on all parties in Syria to
halt without delay massacres and massive violations of
human rights, briefly, violence of all types, as well as
the destruction of their own country.

On the issue of refugees and displaced persons,
my country expresses its gratitude to the donors and
humanitarian organizations for their multiform and
ongoing support. Faced with the continuing violence,
the international community will need to further
mobilize to increase the necessary humanitarian aid
for refugees and displaced persons, whose numbers
continue to increase each day.

As for Lebanon, we welcome the extension of
the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL), pursuant to resolution 2064 (2012),
given the role of that Force in maintaining peace and
security in the country. The continuing occupation of
Ghajar by the Israelis and ongoing tensions along the
Blue Line justify that measure. I reiterate our gratitude
to the countries contributing troops to UNIFIL and
pay tribute to all of its military and civilian personnel
for their efforts in the service of peace in southern
Lebanon. We also wish to encourage them to work to
strengthen their cooperation with the Lebanese armed
forces and the Israel Defense Forces.

While Lebanon is experiencing internal problems
that it is attempting to resolve through anational dialogue
that is scheduled to resume on 12 November, the war
in neighbouring Syria has exacerbated the situation,
particularly with regard to security. The deadly clashes
in August between Sunnis and Alawites in Tripoli
demonstrated the real impact of the Syrian crisis on
Lebanon. The flow of Syrian refugees, estimated by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to be
close to 80,000, is additional cause for serious concern,
given the growing insecurity caused by the situation at
a time when the Lebanese Government must face many
other security situations in the south of the country,
along its borders with Israel and in the zones where
Hizbullah and other armed groups are carrying out all
types of activity in total impunity.

My country congratulates the Lebanese authorities
for the urgent steps they have taken to put an end to
inter-communal violence in Tripoli and to address the
flow of refugees into their country. We urge them to
work to prevent violence and to further secure their
border with Syria.

