Mr. Tladi (South Africa): I would like to thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her progress report and for all
the efforts she and her Office have made in the fight
against impunity.

South Africa is a State party to the Rome Statute,
and as such, we are committed to all the objectives of
the Statute. The values underpinning the Statute include
the belief that the most serious crimes of concern to
mankind must not go unpunished, and the pursuit of
peace, security and the well-being of the world. These
are the dual objectives of the Rome Statute, and both
must be pursued with equal vigour.

Our support for the work of the Prosecutor and the
ICC in Darfur is based on the conviction that those who
have committed serious crimes against the men, women
and children of the Sudan must be held accountable,
whether through the ICC or national systems, in
accordance with the principle of complementarity. As
we have also said in the past, however, those who are
directly affected by the conflict in Darfur will take
little comfort in the discussions here today, held in very
comfortable conditions, if we do not take all practical
measures to end the conflict.

In this regard, we note with concern that the
Secretary-General's report in October (S/2012/77l)
signalled that the situation in Darfur had deteriorated.
While mindful of the need for the Council to continue
addressing wider Sudan-related issues, it is important
for the Council not to neglect the situation in Darfur.
It is only when the international community acts with
conviction and in concert, using all available means,
that efforts exerted by different players will reap
benefits for the victims of atrocities.

We wish, in this regard, to stress our continued
support for the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. We
also call for the implementation ofthe recommendations
of the African Union (AU) High-level Panel on Darfur
and express our unwavering support for the AU High-
level Implementation Panel for the Sudan. We welcome
in this regard the Prosecutor's intention to make the
recommendations of the AU High-level Panel one of the
main areas of attention as she interacts with the Chair
of the High-level Implementation Panel and the Chair
of the African Union.

Even with all of these processes, we note
that, ultimately, the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
including in our sisterly State of the Sudan, rests with
the Security Council. We believe that Council support
of AU processes would advance long-term peace and
justice in the Sudan.

We have taken note of the developments with
respect to the Banda and Jerbo case in the ICC, and
we look forward to a decision on the start of the trial,
subject of course to the Trial Chamber's decision on the
defence's leave to appeal.

South Africa is concerned about the allegations of
continuing violence in Darfur, including acts of aerial
bombardment that indiscriminately target civilians,
ground attacks and the recruitment and use of child
soldiers. We wish at this point to also express our
concern at reports of the rise in the number of new
militia in the north and west of Darfur, brandishing new
weapons. It is further disconcerting that the violence
has resulted in the deaths of several peacekeepers and
that the perpetrators of the violence show no respect for
the peacekeepers of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. We are particularly
concerned about the allegations of widespread sexual
and gender-based violence targeting those most
vulnerable. If the information contained in the report
is found to be true, those found to have committed
such acts should be held accountable, and we urge full
cooperation into the investigation of these atrocities.

All the alleged acts of continuing violence are also
a sobering reminder that the institution of criminal
proceedings will not, on its own, help to protect those
who bear the brunt of the political conflict in Darfur.
The Council should therefore use all the tools in its
repertoire, including supporting AU processes, to
definitively address the conflict in Darfur.

We have taken note of the Prosecutor's call for the
Security Council to ensure the Sudan's compliance
with resolution 1593 (2005). While we understand
the Prosecutor's frustration at the lack of arrests of
individuals with outstanding arrest warrants, we would
point out that the problem of impunity in situations
referred to the ICC by the Security Council goes much
deeper and is more systemic than just non-cooperation
by individual countries.

Over the past few months, there have been
several meetings, official and unofficial, in which the
relationship between the Council and the ICC has been
examined. The constant and consistent refrain in all
of those meetings has been that the Court is caught in
the crossfire of the political dynamics of the Security
Council. That is reflected in the skewed manner in which
the referral resolutions themselves are drafted. With
respect to cooperation, for example, some members of
the Council - those that have the greatest influence on
the referral resolutions - have reserved for themselves
the right not to cooperate with the Court, which raises
serious questions about credibility of the process.

In order to enable the ICC to execute its mandate, the
Council should insist on full cooperation with the Court
by all States Members of the United Nations, including
permanent members of the Council, in situations that it
refers to the Court. Until that question and other related
questions are resolved, securing cooperation may
continue to be an uphill battle. We are convinced that
the Prosecutor's call for full cooperation, which South
Africa fully supports, will ultimately be realized only
when the Council stops seeing referrals as an end in
themselves.

