Mr. Bodini (San Marino): One year ago, Security
Council resolution 1612 (2005) was adopted, providing
the mandate for the establishment of a monitoring and
reporting mechanism on children in armed conflict.
Unfortunately, since then more children around the
world have been mentally, physically and sexually
abused or even maimed. More have become killer
children, or children killed. Those numbers are
growing at a catastrophic pace.

San Marino has decided to take the floor on this
issue because it believes it is one of the most important
issues at stake. Every time that a child is abused or
killed, not only does a human life end, but also his or
her dreams and his or her contribution to his or her
family and society as well. When a child is forced to
become a killer for whatever reason - whether
religious, political, or ethnic - an even greater crime
is committed. That child, who is, in fact, the prey of
hatred and violence, will destroy not only his own
future, but the growth of our collective well-being.

We have to stop the diabolic and vicious cycle
that obliterates the lives of our children. We have to
forge moral values and provide hope and future
aspirations for a decent life, so that we do not allow the
armed conflicts to continue - or to develop in the first
place.

We applaud the establishment of the Security
Council Working Group chaired by France, and we
commend Ambassador de La Sabliere for his excellent
work. However, we believe that more can be done. We
believe the Security Council, the Governments of the
affected States, the relevant United Nations agencies
and the non-governmental organizations must improve
their working methods and more forcefully prevent
such abuses. They must bring to justice the criminals
who take advantage of those youths.

Article 24, paragraph 1, of the United Nations
Charter states that
3
"Members confer on the Security Council
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and agree that in
carrying out its duties under this responsibility
the Security Council acts on their behalf."

As a Member, I cannot think of a more
compelling duty for the Council than to stop armed
conflict carried out by child warriors. San Marino,
along with, I am sure, the vast majority of Member
States, asks the Council to implement effectively and
without delay resolution 1612 (2005). What, in fact, is
more important for the Security Council than to protect
the right of so many children to enjoy happy and
fruitful lives?

