Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen,
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General for
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone, and Mr. Guillermo Rishchynski, Chair
of the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their statements.

I would like to welcome Mr. Samura M.W. Kamara,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Republic of Sierra Leone.

With resolution 2097 (2013), the Security Council
extended the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL)
to 31 March 2014 so as to assist the Government in
bringing to completion the efforts undertaken since its
establishment on 4 August, 2008. During that time, we
have observed positive progress overall, with a generally
satisfactory situation, as underscored in the reports of
the Executive Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the mission and of leaders of the various
United Nations agencies on the ground.

Throughout its mandate, UNIPSIL has
continuously worked to promote national dialogue
and the freedom of the press, to strengthen the
capacities of parliamentarians, and to implement the
recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. One of the most outstanding results
was the holding of peaceful and credible elections in
2012, for the first time in Sierra Leone. As a result
of that positive development, on 21 October 2013 the
International Monetary Fund approved the new 2013-
2016 economic and financial plan for Sierra Leone.

With the sense that UNIPSIL's work has concluded,
the process of drawing down begins by addressing
pending tasks. Its closure will mark the end ofmore than

15 years of a United Nations peacekeeping operation
in Sierra Leone. The broad success of the mission's
operations is due to the determination of the Sierra
Leonean people to rebuild their country and to build
peace. It has also been thanks to the commitment of the
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General and
his entire team, as well as effective cooperation between
the host country, the United Nations and regional and
international partners.

The experience in Sierra Leone could serve as an
example and shows that the international community
can succeed and achieve positive results when all
stakeholders work together to promote peace, stability,
democracy and development in a post-conflict country.
We thank UNIPSIL for having garnered this success
for the United Nations, and we call on the international
community to maintain its support for the Sierra
Leonean Government in maintaining and strengthening
peace in the country, taking into due account the
priorities of the Agenda for Prosperity.

In conclusion, we would like to express our support
for the draft presidential statement to be adopted at the
end of this meeting.

