Mr. Pedersen (Norway): We take the floor today
to draw attention to the grave consequences of Syria's
tragic path to civil war and to stress that we must not
lose sight of the unresolved Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Both conflicts require a political solution.

The historical changes and popular uprisings
in the Arab world, in particular Tunisia, Egypt and
Libya, have removed lifelong dictators and replaced
them with representative Governments. Those changes
were driven by the people demanding greater political
freedom, which is their legitimate right. Governments
that draw their legitimacy from the consent of their
people, rather than from fear and repression, are best
suited to delivering justice and lasting order, stability
and peace. The international community must now
help to consolidate those developments by providing
political and economic support, while holding the new
Governments accountable.

Nineteen months ago, the conflict in Syria began
not as a sectarian civil war but as a call for dignity,
freedom and democratic change through the peaceful
protests of the Syrian people. It was a genuine call by
the Syrian people. It was not an external manipulation
or a pretext for foreign intervention, as the regime is
propagating. Tragically, the call for change was met by
brutal military force, not dialogue.

President Al-Assad and his regime decided to
turn the legitimate struggle of the Syrian people into
a sectarian war by redefining peaceful protests as
terrorism and foreign conspiracy. Every Government
has a responsibility to protect its people but Al-Assad
chose to turn the deadly State apparatus against the
Syrian population. The popular demands for meaningful
change have never been given serious consideration by
the Syrian regime.

Syria's conflict has already spilled over into
neighbouring countries and is destabilizing the region,
as we have seen on the Syrian-Turkish border. We
condemn the shelling by the Syrian forces and the
continued violence in the strongest possible terms.
All violence and atrocities in Syria, including the
systematic use of sexual violence and torture against
children, men and women, must stop. Crimes of that
nature must never go unpunished. Even in times of war,
there are rules. All parties to the conflict are bound
by international humanitarian law. It is our duty to
end impunity for international crimes and to ensure
accountability for the crimes committed.

The Syrian Government bears the primary
responsibility for the conflict. One tragic result of
the conflict is the escalation of humanitarian needs
both inside Syria and beyond. We commend Syria's
neighbours for their generosity in receiving Syrian
refugees and for their efforts to support them. Increased
humanitarian support and access are necessary and all
parties must protect the civilian population, ensure
unhindered humanitarian access and protect health
workers and medical facilities.

As the level of violence intensifies, it is urgent to
move forward with a meaningful political transition
that meets the aspirations of the Syrian people and
brings stability. Such a plan has already been endorsed
by an overwhelming majority of the General Assembly.
A credible political transition must be inclusive and
peaceful and must preserve the unity of the State, while
protecting the rights of all constituencies in Syria. To
make progress towards transition, the violence must
end, Al-Assad's regime must cede power and the
political opposition must unite around a road map for
peace and shared principles.

By staying engaged with all parties, the Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States for Syria, Lakhdar Brahimi,
plays a key role in helping to find common ground in
order to move the political process forward. Norway
fully supports his efforts. However, it is unfortunate
that Mr. Brahimi's tasks have been hampered by a
divided Security Council. It is indeed inexcusable
that the Security Council has failed to act on its clear
responsibilities and to use its collective weight to
impose serious consequences in the event of the Syrian
Government not ending the violence or complying with
its responsibilities.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains deadlocked,
with no political solution on the horizon. That deadlock
must be broken and the negotiations on a two-State
solution resumed.

On 23 September, Norway once again hosted a
meeting of the donor support group for the Palestinian
Authority, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee on Assistance
to the Palestinians, in New York. The meeting was
held against the backdrop of the serious fiscal crisis
facing the Palestinian Authority, which may be looking
at a financing gap of not less than $400 million at
the end of this year. The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
was established in accordance with the Oslo Accords
to mobilize funding to promote the development of
a Palestinian institutional structure upon which an
independent and viable Palestinian State can be built.
That aim has been achieved. The assessment made
last year that the Palestinian Authority is ready for
statehood still stands.

However, the Authority should not be allowed to
become a perennial client of the international donor
community. The task of the donors will not be complete
until the Palestinian economy can prosper and fiscal
independence is assured. The reports to the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee meeting noted that the constraints
on the Palestinian economy are limiting its prospects
for reaching sustainability. While acknowledging
that Israel has taken steps to facilitate growth in the
Palestinian economy, the donors called on it to take
further steps to improve access in the West Bank and
Gaza, including in Area C and East Jerusalem. Further
realization of the potential of the Palestinian private
sector can be achieved by relaxing Israeli restrictions
on access to land, a range of raw materials and export
markets.

While welcoming the Palestinian Authority's
efforts to strengthen its fiscal position, the donors
noted the importance of further mobilizing all available
Palestinian resources in order to overcome the current
crisis and continue to reform its institutions. The donors
reaffirmed their willingness to continue to support the
Authority, but only as part of an international effort to
promote the two-State solution.

The current political stalemate is, however,
untenable. The Israeli occupation, which severely
hampers Palestinian economic development, remains
the main obstacle to the realization of Palestinian
statehood. A self-sustaining Palestinian economy
cannot be achieved as long as the occupation remains
in place and illegal settlements continue to expand,
encircling East Jerusalem and undermining the very
concept of the two-State solution.

Norway, as Chair of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee,
urges donors to honour their outstanding commitments
and continue their assistance in helping to build a viable
Palestinian economy that can sustain the institutions
that are vital for statehood. Ifthe present fiscal crisis in
the Palestinian territory is not resolved, there is a risk
of growing social and political unrest that could spiral
into chaos.

The continued impasse in the negotiations between
the parties threatens the common vision of the two-
State solution and is an obstacle to a peaceful future for
the Palestinian and Israeli people. That is why Norway
calls on both parties to resume negotiations on the final
status issues. It is the only way to achieve a viable and
just solution.

