Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
the Russian Federation for the opportunity to discuss
holistically the situation in the Middle East and North
Africa. I think that we all agree that many ofthe conflicts
in the region share root causes and complex linkages.
We agree that an approach to resolving such conflicts
that needs to consider each conflict in isolation will not
succeed. They need to be looked at in the round. I think
that we are also aware that there are some existentialist
struggles between some Member States in the region,
but not all are aggressive towards their neighbours or
commit unfriendly acts towards them.

People have been saying that the people ofthe Middle
East and North Africa region should perhaps have their
own Helsinki Final Act moment. I do not want to be
prescriptive. However, I think something that brings
the region together would be very worthwhile in that
regard. We would be happy to join any consideration
of that issue. Overall our understanding of any conflict
should be shaped by an analysis that looks at the
full breadth of root causes, the role of regional and
international actors and the individual history and
circumstances of the country concerned. In turn, the
response of the Security Council and of the United
Nations as a whole to such conflicts must be holistic.

Before I turn to the Russian concept note
(S/2018/524, annex) and our own views, I would like
to start by fully endorsing the French Ambassador's
remarks about Iran. We will have another opportunity
to talk about Iran later this week, at which time I will
expand upon my remarks. For now I would just like
to pledge the support of the United Kingdom to what
he said.

There were many points in the Russian concept note
with which we agreed. We agree that the humanitarian
consequences ofthe various conflicts in the Middle East
region are devastating and that the statistics released by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) are truly staggering. A total of 22 million
people are in need of assistance in Yemen, 13 million in
Syria, 1.9 million in the occupied Palestinian territories
and 1 million in Libya. The humanitarian relief efforts
of all Member States, international actors and ordinary
citizens have indeed helped to avert some suffering
but it is not enough, and, according to OCHA's own

statistics, 66 per cent of humanitarian appeals are yet to
be fulfilled. We recently wrote as the United Kingdom
to the Secretary General to set our own humanitarian
contribution to the crises in the Middle East.
We continue to see examples of States restricting
access to humanitarian agencies and attacks by armed
groups on humanitarian workers. What justification
can there be for such attacks? We agree with you,
Mr. President, that humanitarian assistance should not
be politicized but, as long as such attacks continue,
it will be. Conflict has affected religious and ethnic
minorities in particular, for example, the Yazidi in
Syria and Iraq and the Baha'i in Iran and Yemen.
Terrorist actors and State institutions in the region have
been responsible for some of the worst persecutions in
history. Like you, Sir, we hope that the Security Council
can unite behind efforts to resolve conflicts peacefully.
We should do all we can as the Security Council to
support efforts made by the Secretary-General and his
Special Representatives to bring peace to the region,
make serious progress in Syria, Yemen and Libya, use
our collective and bilateral efforts to put pressure on
those who oppose or undermine such efforts and ensure
that peacekeeping missions are fit for purpose. With
regard to the Middle East peace process, which has
been mentioned by a number of speakers, we reiterate
our support for the two-State solution and look forward
to the American proposals, which we hope will be
issued soon.

There are some areas where we do not share your
views, Mr. President, as set out in the concept note. I
would like to begin this part of my statement by saying
that I have just come from the General Assembly debate
on the issue ofthe responsibility to protect. It strikes me
that issue goes to the heart ofmany of our disagreements
about how to handle conflicts. Today's concept note calls
for a commitment to the supremacy of international law
and the need for a collective approach to the problems
of the region - and we can endorse that fully. However,
when populations are injured or persecuted because
of the actions of their own Governments, it not only
f louts international human rights law and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which every country in
the Chamber has pledged to uphold, it could also be a
precursor to a wider conflict. If the Security Council
and the international community do not take an interest
at that early stage, there is a much greater likelihood
that the situation will spiral out of control and that there
will eventually be conflict, including cross-border
conflict, whether armed incursions or sending refugees
across borders. Ultimately there is therefore also a much
greater likelihood notjust that the Security Council will
ask to take action, but that it will need to take action in
order to address the root causes. I therefore invite all
countries that do not believe that the Security Council
should review situations of human rights persecutions
in individual countries to see the logical train of where
ignoring such events is likely to lead.

If I may, I would like to quote from the preamble
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which
celebrates its seventieth anniversary this year:

"... it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to
have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against
tyranny and oppression, that human rights should
be protected by the rule of law".

That is the reason why we in the United Kingdom
believe that human rights is properly relevant to Security
Council discussions on any given international peace
and security situation.

You say, Mr. President, that unilateral action is
doomed to failure. Like all of the speakers so far, we
in the United Kingdom would like to see the Security
Council take collective action, but it is blocked. And
where it is not blocked, it is subsequently disregarded.
International action cannot solelybe a matter of the lowest
common denominator. Several speakers have already
mentioned Syria. We are all aware of the circumstances
in that country. The Security Council has been blocked
from holding to account those responsible for violating
international law. A draft resolution (S/2014/348) to
refer the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court was vetoed in 2014 (see S/PV.7180). This year a
draft resolution (S/2018/321) that would have allowed
the Joint Investigative Mechanism to continue its vital
work was vetoed (see S/PV.8228). The use of chemical
weapons, whether by terrorists or State actors, must be
investigated. Those responsible must be held to account,
and we would assert that much greater danger lies in
letting it be thought that chemical weapons can ever
be used as a weapon of war and that the international
prohibition on their use can be disregarded.

Furthermore, there have been reports over the
weekend of air and artillery attacks against the
de-escalation zone in south-western Syria. Such
reports are deeply concerning and appear to point to
the Syrian Government. A military offensive by the
Syrian Government would be a flagrant violation
of the ceasefire and the de-escalation agreement in
which Russia has been involved. We urge everyone
with influence on the situation to help uphold the
commitment and to encourage restraint.

Sanctions are a vital part of the Security Council's
arsenal. As Article 41 of the Charter of the United
Nations makes clear, they give very real effect to
our decisions and turn our words in the Chamber
into tangible consequences for those who threaten
international peace and security. Sanctions are not
our first resort - they are not a measure we ever take
lightly - but we know that they work. They have helped
bring peace and security to Liberia and Sierra Leone.
They helped bring Iran and the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to the negotiating table. And they
continue to play a vital role in the fight against Da'esh
and Al-Qaida in Iraq, Syria and beyond.

We believe that there are additional issues that would
merit discussion by the Council that are not covered in
today's concept note, but which could underpin future
discussions by the Council on this important subject.
We agree with the Secretary-General that political
participation in the region remains weak and that we
must strengthen democratic institutions. I would like
to echo his tribute to Tunisia and endorse his words
about the problems caused by retarding economic
opportunity. A genuine holistic approach to conflict in
the region cannot ignore the issue of good governance.
Good governance from strong, stable State institutions
is the best way to maintain peace and security.

Bad governance can be devastating, and we have
seen that in a number of countries in the region. As
I was saying earlier, when Governments violate their
citizens' human rights we know that the risk of conflict
and suffering increases. It is the Council's responsibility
to consider and be informed on all these issues, owing to
their impact on international peace and security. As an
international community, we must support institutions
that uphold the values that the United Nations was set
up to protect and that work for the benefit of all citizens.

Lastly, I would like to say a word about post-
conflict reconstruction. Failure to stabilize and
reconcile communities after a prolonged conflict will
fail to restore peace and security in the long term.
It is not a trade-off between peace and justice. The
task of the Council is to help the United Nations and
countries themselves find the right way to have both
peace and justice. I think we all know that the role of
women can be vital in that endeavour. International
actors, including the Security Council, play a vital
role in ensuring that limited resources are distributed
effectively in support of institutions that address the
root causes of previous conflicts.

