The President (spoke in Spanish): Before we
proceed to the item on our agenda, it is with great
shock that I wish to inform the members of the Security
Council of the sudden passing yesterday of our dear
colleague and friend, the Permanent Representative of
Cote d'Ivoire, Mr. Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue.

There are no words to express our feelings of
sorrow at this sad news. On behalf of all members of
the Security Council, I express our deepest condolences
to the wife and family of the Ambassador, as well as
to the Government and people of C6te d'Ivoire for
the loss of a great diplomat who always participated
in Council discussions with independence and in a
constructive manner. He was committed to the Charter
of the United Nations, the maintenance of international
peace and security, and the need to put an end to the
suffering of millions of people affected by conflicts
and humanitarian crises, especially in his own dear
continent of Africa. We will remember him with great
respect and appreciation.

I therefore ask that we all now rise and observe
a minute of silence in memory of our dear colleague,
Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute ofsilence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/53)

Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (5/2018/279)

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Colombia to

participate in today's meeting.
On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome
His Excellency Mr. Oscar Adolfo Naranjo Trujillo,
Vice-President of Colombia, and Minister for Foreign
Affairs Maria Angela Holguin Cue'llar and their team.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules ofprocedure, I invite Mr. Jean Arnault,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document 8/2018/279, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.

I now give the floor to Mr. Arnault.


