Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): I wish to thank
you, Sir, for taking the initiative to convene this
debate. I also wish to express my sincere appreciation
to Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his thorough
and passionate briefing, which gives us a picture of the
progress achieved and of the ongoing concerns about
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. This
briefing confirms his focused and action-oriented
approach.

Italy fully associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Czech Republic
on behalf of the European Union. I will touch on points
of particular interest to my country.

Today we have heard once again from Under-
Secretary-General Holmes a very disturbing
description of the negative effects of conflicts around
the world, especially in Gaza and southern Israel:
denials of humanitarian access and the appalling
consequences of hostilities, including the scourge of
sexual violence. When sexual violence targets or is part
of a widespread attack against a civilian population, it
becomes a method of warfare. This is inadmissible. In
such cases, sexual violence constitutes a threat to
international peace and security and the Security
Council, in our view, should be able to intervene.

In operational terms, allow me to take advantage
of my country's recent experience as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council to recall the following.

When it comes to peacekeeping, United Nations
operations should be clearly mandated to ensure the
protection of civilians, as was the case during the
negotiations for the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, and
to subsequently report on it. Once again, we welcome
the joint study being conducted by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO).

We also welcome the positive developments in
the Secretary-General's proposals for an informal
consultation forum on protection among Council
members at the expert level. We firmly believe that this
would enable all Council members to systematically
consider the protection of civilians in the Council's
deliberations, specifically on the establishment,
assessment and renewal of peacekeeping mandates. In
this regard, we should encourage DPKO's development
of policies and guidance to ensure the consistent and
harmonized implementation of the mandates.

With regard to access, we need to enhance the
Emergency Relief Coordinator's monitoring of and
reporting on serious access constraints.

On a more general note, I would like to recall the
reaffirmation in resolution 1674 (2006) of the principle
of the responsibility to protect, a cardinal achievement
of the United Nations. This principle implies that
sovereignty brings special responsibilities.
Governments must protect their own populations, and
the best way for them to do so is to promote human
rights, the rule of law and democratic governance.
Only when a Government is unable or unwilling to do
so should the international community intervene. The
responsibility to protect should not be perceived in a
confrontational manner; it should be seen instead as an
instrument available to the international community to
overcome crises, provided that the conditions referred
to in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the Summit Outcome
Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1) are met.
In this framework, the debate on the upcoming report
of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General, Mr. Ed
Luck, will be a timely opportunity to build on the
consensus achieved at the 2005 World Summit and to
concretely implement the responsibility to protect.
Italy intends to actively participate in that debate.

I would also like to recall my country's
commitment to combating impunity for international
crimes. In situations in which any civilian population is
the target of attacks, the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court provides the legal basis
for holding accountable those responsible for the
attacks if a State is unwilling or unable to do so. In this
regard, we must reiterate our commitment to ending
impunity.

In closing, we welcome the Council's
endorsement of the aide-memoire and stress the need to
implement the approaches it sets out on a more regular
and consistent basis.

