Mr. Gillerman (Israel): At the outset,
Mr. President, allow me to congratulate your
Permanent Representative and the entire delegation of
the United Kingdom on their able stewardship of the
Council and their impressive leadership during the
month of April. I would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe for his informative briefing.

I must admit that, while heartened and
encouraged by the statements made by members of the
Council who recognized the impressive and positive
changes on the ground and highlighted the
opportunities, I was very saddened by the sense of
"deja vu all over again" demonstrated by the
Palestinian observer. It is eerie, and very distressing
and boring, if that statement indeed speaks for the
Palestinian people. Speaking of Gaza as a "massive
prison" blatantly ignores the fact that Israel left every
single inch of Gaza nearly two years ago and that it is
the Palestinians themselves who turned it into a prison for
their own people by making it a terror base and a launching
pad for missiles into Israel from day one. Speaking of the
"poor Palestinian prisoners" as "victims" is a blatant
attempt to portray them as poor victims who were
imprisoned for parking violations rather than bloody
murderers who committed horrendous acts of murder and
who are responsible for the deaths of hundreds of innocent
civilians, including women, children and babies.

Yesterday, we in Israel celebrated our
Independence Day, marking Israel's fifty-ninth year of
statehood. It is, of course, a time of great joy and
festivity. We celebrate the greatest miracle to happen to
our people in contemporary history: the gift of our own
country, to be a free people in our homeland. We
celebrate the vibrancy and vigour of the State of Israel.
We celebrate its remarkable renaissance and growth,
especially for such a small country and after only 59
years of existence. And we celebrate the beauty and
openness of Israeli democracy, the bountiful and rich
contributions of Israelis to international arts and
culture, science and medicine, and the resilience of a
people who fervently dream of peace each and every
day.

And yet the reality of Israeli history means that
Independence Day is also a solemn time, when we
remember the difficulties of the past. We honour the
valiant courage of our soldiers who were killed while
defending the people of Israel and the great tragedy
that befell the Victims of terror. We mourn them, and
we miss them. They would have contributed so greatly
to life in Israel and to the betterment of the entire
world.
But it is not only the reality of history that lingers
in our minds. It is also the reality of the present day
and the challenges ahead.

I would like at this point also to commend the
Secretary-General for his timely and intensive visit to
the region last month. Having accompanied him during
his visit to Israel, I was privileged to witness first-hand
his commitment, dedication and integrity.

Coming back to the reality on the ground, that
harrowing reality was demonstrated yet again
yesterday, when Hamas, by its own account and
declaration, launched more than 28 Qassam rockets
and 61 mortar shells at Israel, a fact that was clearly
blatantly ignored in the statement we just heard from
the representative of Palestine. The rockets detonated
across a large area of land, and as far north as the city
of Ashkelon. These attacks, which came as Israelis
woke up to celebrate Independence Day, were nothing
short of an act of extreme provocation. Later in the
day, we learned that Hamas's fierce rocket fire was just
a front to divert attention away from its truly evil plans
to kidnap an Israeli soldier. Thankfully, the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) thwarted the kidnapping.

Yesterday Hamas declared the ceasefire that had
been in place in the Gala Strip null and void. Since the
ceasefire began at the end of November 2006, Israel
has continually exhibited restraint with respect to the
more than 200 rockets fired at it by Palestinian
terrorists. Israel always reserves the right to defend
itself and its people, as set out in article 51 of the
United Nations Charter, and will do so if the attacks do
not stop. I strongly advise the Palestinians and the world
not to mistake this restraint for acquiescence or to take it
for granted. We will not just lie back and take it, and we
will do all that is necessary to put an end to this violence.

If there are still any sceptics out there, yesterday
the Hamas-led Palestinian Government showed its true
colours. Israel needs no further evidence to know that
Hamas's ways are not the ways of peace. Hamas has
shown it will not stop its campaign of terror until its
unholy ambitions of destroying Israel are fulfilled.
The international community, represented by the
Quartet, has made the obligations of the Palestinian
Government very clear: to recognize Israel, renounce
violence and terror and abide by previous agreements.
Hamas also still holds the Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit,
kidnapped by its terrorists last June. Those basic
conditions are principles of peace. As the Palestinian

Government flouts those conditions and sees terror as a
legitimate goal, the international community should
continue its policy towards that Government.
Nothing- no initiatives, summits or declarations -
can take the place of an end to Palestinian terror. We
will continue to engage with President Abbas, as Prime
Minister Olmert has been doing in their biweekly
meetings, but we will fight Hamas as if there were no
Abbas.

Nine months after the adoption of resolution 1701
(2006), the situation along the Blue Line in the north
remains a matter of great concern. In particular, Israel
has identified three major areas that demand urgent
attention: the presence of armed Hizbullah elements
south of the Litani river and the transfer of weapons
from Syria to Hizbullah in Lebanon in violation of the
arms embargo; the concern that some of those weapons
are destined for southern Lebanon; and the continued
abduction of our soldiers, Udi Goldwasser and Eldad
Regev, kidnapped by Hizbullah terrorists nearly 10
months ago. Their continued detention and the absence
of any sign of life pose a grave humanitarian crisis.

I would like to mention at this time that there are
five more Israeli soldiers being held captive, without
any information given on their safety or whereabouts.
They are Ron Arad, Zachary Baumel, Yehuda Katz,
Tzvi Feldman and Guy Chever. We pray for their safety
and await their return home. We urge the international
community and this Council to do their utmost to make
this happen. We also pray for the safe return of the
British journalist, Alan Johnston.

Resolution 1701 (2006) is unequivocal in its
demands for the disarming of Hizbullah south of the
Litani River, for an end to the transfer of arms to
Hizbullah terrorists and for the immediate and
unconditional release of our soldiers. The blatant
actions of Iran and Syria - the sponsors of terror in
Lebanon, who are rearming Hizbullah and sending
weapons in defiance of resolution 1701 (2006) - must
end now.

Lastly, I wish to note that Israel welcomes the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/ 147) on
the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and is
encouraged by the presidential statement adopted by
the Council during its 5564th meeting, on 17 April
2007 (S/PRST/2007/ 12). In particular, Israel is pleased
with the attention given to the illegal movement of
arms across the Lebanese-Syrian border and with the
call to enforce the arms embargo. Israel is hopeful that
a concerted effort in both areas will lead to greater
stability and security.

As Israel looks forward to a prosperous and
peaceful coming year - our sixtieth year of
independence - we know there is no shortage of
challenges ahead of us. But we are prepared to meet
each and every one of them, no matter what it takes.
Israel yearns to live in peace with all her neighbours.
Though we know that these efforts can be strengthened
by moderates in our region, we also know that no one
can make peace for our neighbours. It is up to the
parties themselves to show the courage to face down
the extremists and embrace their responsibilities.

In the meanwhile, Israel will continue to defend
itself, while praying for peace, taking strength in one
another and putting trust in our faith and traditions, in
our social progress and human values and in our
people, wherever they may be.

