Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation warmly welcomes Foreign
Minister Kerim among us to brief us on the situation
along the Macedonian-Yugoslav border. We thank him
for his detailed briefing.

Like all previous speakers, the Chinese
delegation condemns the acts of violence provoked by
the Albanian extremists. China believes that currently
the violence of the Albanian extremists has escalated,
spilling over into the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, along the border with Kosovo. China
supports the issuing of a Security Council presidential
statement and supports a timely response by the
Security Council to prevent the situation from spinning
out of control. China support the efforts of the
Government of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia to safeguard its sovereignty and territorial
integrity and encourages it to seek peaceful means of
resolving the dispute.

China also hopes that all concerned will
undertake political and diplomatic efforts to bring an
early negotiated end to this armed conflict and to
restore stability to this region.

Easing tension along the border of Kosovo and
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is linked
to resolution of the Kosovo question. China believes
that the United Nations Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) need
to take further measures to curb the activities of the
Kosovo Albanian extremists. Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) must be implemented in its
entirety. In particular, we call on KFOR to take into
account the views of the Government of Macedonia
and take effective action to beef up border patrols so as
to stop the Albanian extremists from crossing the
border and to stop the trafficking of illicit weapons.

The current situation shows once again that in the
long term durable peace can only be realized in the
region by fostering cohesion, reconciliation and
tolerance among the ethnic communities and by
promoting inter-ethnic harmony. Countries and parties
in the region and the international community should
strive for this goal.

