Ms. Brandt: Let me start by thanking the Secretary-
General for his leadership and support; Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui for her relentless
efforts to protect children in the midst of conflict
and instability; France for using its leadership of the
Security Council to shine a light on the continued crisis
of children trapped by conflict; Malaysia, as Chair of
the Security Council's Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict; Julie Bodin of Save the Children, an
essential partner for UNICEF in addressing the issue of
the recruitment and use of children; and Junior Nzita
Nsuami, President of Paix pour l'enfance.

Last year, in 2014, the world celebrated the twenty-
fifth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. And yet, in so many countries around the world,
as the Secretary-General just pointed out, 2014 was the
worst year in which to be a child.

This year, we celebrate the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1612 (2005), which established the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, and the eighth
anniversary of the Paris Principles, now endorsed by
105 States. And yet this year, the world's youngest
citizens in Iraq, Syria, South Sudan, Nigeria, Mali and
the Central African Republic are still being recruited
into armed groups, used, orphaned, killed - their lives
stolen, their innocence lost.

When a boy is abducted from his Village and made
to fight; when a girl is taken from her family, exploited
and abused; when children are targeted because of
their ethnicity or religion; and when a child witnesses
massacres and sees the worst of humanity, rather than
the best, we are rightfully outraged.

But our outrage is not enough. Our outrage must
be matched by action to end and prevent all grave
violations of child rights, by making abduction a trigger
for the listing of parties to conflict in the Secretary-
General's report on children and armed conflict, by
encouraging more States to endorse the Paris Principles
and by working directly with all parties to release and
integrate children, and by working on measures such as
age verification, screening and improved monitoring to
prevent such things from happening.

Yes, we are seeing some signs of success. Recently,
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
just stated, about 3,000 children were released from the
Cobra faction in South Sudan, and we hope that more
will be released soon, as the process is still ongoing.

But being released is only a first step. Imagine the
struggles such children face when they return to their
communities: their psychological wounds, the pain
and stigmatization they live with, the mistrust in their
neighbours' eyes.

Consider the more than 140 Kurdish children
abducted by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
in Aleppo last May and held for four months. Now
released, they tell of horrifying abuse: beatings with
water pipes and electrical cables; being forced to watch
Violent Videos of battles, beatings and executions; and
starvation. Yes, these children have experienced the
worst of humanity. After all they have endured, how
can we expect these children, and so many like them
around the world, to overcome their suffering and be
able, and willing, to build their lives anew? They need
our immediate support.

UNICEF and the South Sudan Government are
therefore working together to care for and protect
released children in interim care centres, where they
receive food, clothing and health care as well as
counselling and programmes to address sexual and
gender-based violence. Most are now reunited with
their families and will be going to school and receiving
vocational training to improve their chances of finding
ajob, earning a living and contributing to their families
and communities. Let me here echo the call made by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
support to these essential programmes.

In the Central African Republic, over 2,800
children associated with the anti-Balaka and ex-Seleka
armed groups have now been released. UNICEF is
now working with the communities to reintegrate
these children and assist the nearly 10,000 others still
associated with these groups. Such efforts not only help
these children begin the long process ofrebuilding their
lives; they also send a powerful message to each and
every child who has survived: "Your life matters, your
future matters, you matter". They send a message to all
armed groups and armed forces that the use of children
in armed conflict, in any way, is unacceptable and will
not be tolerated.

They also send a message to these children's
communities and, indeed, to the world, that children
who experience conflict are not without hope. We
cannot give up on them, and we can rebuild shattered
lives and shattered societies. Because as we heal these
children, we also heal divided societies by erasing the
stigma that released children face and building peace
and, most importantly, hope. As one released South
Sudanese boy said,

"I really want to go to school now. I have never
been to school, and, after I finish, I want to help
the people in my community f to help them get
food. If I had children, I would never let them be
soldiers".

Together, let us make 2015 a year of progress for
children like this, who have great hope for the future
and the generous, humane spirit required to translate
this hope into reality.

