Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks President Agius, President Meron and
Prosecutor Brammertz for their briefings on the work
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.

The International Tribunal's ended its judicial
activities on 29 November and will be formally closed on
31 December. China welcomes the efforts of President
Agius in fulfilling his commitments and commends the
contributions made by successive judges, prosecutors
and staff of the International Tribunal.

Over the past six months, the Mechanism has
pursued its judicial activities, issuing 211 decisions and
orders and advancing case-related work in an orderly
manner. China has taken note of the efforts made by
the Mechanism to streamline its internal processes. We
hope that the Mechanism will assume the remaining
functions of the ICTY in a smooth manner and expect
that it will learn from the Tribunal's past experiences
and lessons learned, and continue to increase efficiency
and cut costs in order to meet the request of the Security
Council that the Mechanism be small, temporary
and efficient.

Since its establishment by the Security Council in
1993, the ICTY has carried out judicial activities and
upheldjustice by punishing over 160 criminals for serious
international crimes, although it has not been able to
implement its completion strategy on time. The judicial
practices of the ICTY have enriched and developed
international criminal law, while its experiences and
lessons learned have served as references to other
international judicial organs established afterwards.
China has consistently supported the rule of law at the
international level and the work of the ICTY and the
Residual Mechanism. China will continue to support
the work of the Mechanism.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank Uruguay, in its capacity as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, and the
Office of Legal Affairs for their work.

