Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, this is our first public meeting since you
assumed the presidency of the Security Council, and I
would like to tell you how pleased and appreciative we
in Cameroon are to see you in the presidency. I wish to
assure you of our fullest cooperation. I also would like
to avail myself of this opportunity to congratulate our
Chinese colleague for his excellent presidency
throughout November.

My delegation is gratified that Mr. James Morris
has taken the initiative of coming to address the
Council about the alarming humanitarian situation in
Africa, in particular from the point of view of the food
crisis. The information he has given us was clear,
comprehensive and very useful, because he has given
us an overall exhaustive picture of World Food
Programme (WFP) activities throughout the world. He
has also communicated to us the acute nature of the
food crisis facing Africa.

Mr. Morris emphasized the diversity of the causes
that underlie the food crisis in Africa. He very aptly
highlighted weather-related factors, health, landmines,
governance issues and conflict situations. Cameroon
plays host to two WFP offices, both national and
regional. We are in a position to assess how apt his
comments are. In Central Africa, the climate in the
northern part, as well as civil disorder, have been the
most obvious causes of famine in the region, and we
are very grateful to WFP for its efforts.

I would like to underline the importance of a
horizontal approach in supporting WFP. We must
support and encourage agricultural production in the
vicinity of deficit areas, so that this may serve as a
supply base. I would like to commend WFP on its
efforts to take into account the alimentary habits in the
areas concerned, thus avoiding having to create new
eating habits for an already impoverished population.

The many questions I would have liked to put
have already been raised by some of the previous
speakers. Nevertheless, I would still like to ask
Mr. Morris what could be done to reduce dependency
on a small number of donors. We thought we heard him
say that 10 entities provided 90 per cent of WFP's
resources.
And finally, we would like to congratulate
Mr. Morris and his team for having stimulated this
important debate and for their commitment in
emergency situations that face the entire international
community. I appeal to all donors and the international
community to further diversify sources of funding.

