Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at the
outset, Sir, to congratulate you sincerely on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May. We take this opportunity to hail
the rich programme of work you have laid out for the
month. In the same vein, my congratulations go also to
our friend Sir Jeremy Greenstock on his sterling
performance as President last month, and on the
outstanding results achieved under the United Kingdom
presidency.

We had originally had no intention whatsoever of
making a statement at today's meeting of the Security
Council on the report of the Panel of Experts on the
Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/200l/357). We are convinced of the validity
of the reasons for which the Council established the
Panel of Experts, and we believe that the Panel has put
a great deal of work into the preparation of this
commendable report. We hope that, within the context
of its mandate to maintain international peace and
security, the Council will be able to find appropriate
ways to put an end to the plundering of the wealth of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to punish
the perpetrators.

Yet because of the Ugandan regime - the stench

of whose corruption has become suffocating - we are
forced to make this statement. The President of that
country and his regime - who are known to lie as
easily as they breathe - have once again chosen to
deflect the accusations against them by spreading
falsehoods. They have therefore spread falsehoods
regarding the reasons for their open invasion of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - an invasion that
violates all international laws and customs ~ by using
flimsy pretexts which include the need to contain the
danger emanating from Sudan. Those pretexts include
the false accusations contained in the letter from the
Minister Counsellor of Uganda to the President of the
Security Council (S/2001/378), which the Minister of
Uganda said today contained their official position with
regard to the report of the Panel of Experts.

Facts are always self-evident. Sudan's borders
with the Democratic Republic of the Congo are now, as
they have been for more than 10 years, under the
control of the rebels of the Sudan People's Liberation
Army (SPLA) in southern Sudan. Moreover, since 1996
the borders with Uganda have been under the control of
the rebels acting in collusion with that country, which
also undertook a similar invasion of Sudanese territory.
The point nearest to the border between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda to be under the
control of Sudanese Government is over 150 miles
away.

How could the false pretexts so often repeated by
the Ugandan leadership be accepted logically? The
ongoing pretexts put forward by the Ugandan regime to
claim that the invasion of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo took place to end security threats from
Sudan did not stand for long. For the report of the
Panel of Experts has revealed a fact which has become
amply clear to everyone, which we have often repeated
in this Chamber, in the General Assembly and in other
forums, and which has nevertheless fallen on deaf ears.
We have said more than once that the Ugandan
invasion of the Democratic Republic of the Congo was
part of that country's very dangerous scheme to exploit
the wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
That is also the conclusion reached by the Panel of
Experts mandated by the Council to investigate such
violations.

Paragraphs 27 and 28 of that report clearly
indicate that Uganda's intervention in areas where gold
and diamond mines are located took place for
economic and financial aims. Political and security
pretexts were merely a cover for systematic and broad-
based operations to loot the wealth of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In the final analysis, those
operations were in the interest of the corrupt President
of Uganda and the corrupt members of his family. Is
Uganda claiming that Sudan gave the order to set up
the Panel of Experts, or that Sudan was the one to carry
out investigations and draft the report of the Panel?
Uganda's letter and its message against Sudan is, in our
opinion, an insult to the intelligence of others.

The Ugandan regime that is trying to convince
the international community, by using illogical and
completely nonsensical pretexts with regard to its
aggression against the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, is the same regime that is causing the crises
and catastrophes being suffered in the Great Lakes
region. It is the same regime that threatens regional
peace and security. It is the very same regime that
violated international principles - foremost among
those being the Charters of the United Nations and of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) fl in an
unprecedented action that runs counter to every
international principle regarding international relations.

Even if we were to assume that Uganda
intervened in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for security reasons, such a pretext should still be
clearly condemned by the Security Council as far as
international relations are concerned because it
represents a distorted logic regarding safeguarding
international peace and security. It is a very dangerous
justification because it would theoretically allow any
State to attack Uganda on the same basis. We must also
bear in mind that several countries bordering Uganda
face very serious security threats coming from
Ugandan territory, including that Government's direct
support for terrorists, outlaws, mercenaries and child
abductors.

The Ugandan regime lamenting Sudan's support
of rebel groups in Uganda before the Council today is
the very same regime that has embraced the rebellious
movement in southern Sudan and is providing those
rebels with logistical and military facilities for their
terrorist acts in southern Sudan. In fact, the Ugandan
regime is also carrying out the systematic exploitation
and looting of the natural resources of Sudan in areas
bordering Uganda that are occupied by the rebels, just
as they are doing in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We also have information pointing to the
systematic looting of Sudan's gold, timber and ivory
resources. This makes it clear that the corrupt clique in
Uganda was not satisfied with the wealth looted from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, wealth that
transformed Uganda overnight into a gold- and
diamond-exporting State. Instead they went further and
proceeded to loot the southern part of Sudan.

The Ugandan regime can make all sorts of claims
and allegations and advance all sorts of pretexts. But it
will not succeed in convincing the international
community that their intervention in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was for security purposes. The
proof is clear and the report is self-evident; not to
mention the fact that the leadership of Uganda has been
known to be blood-thirsty and to have expansionist
aims known to all.

The Ugandan President should be considered the
new Hitler of Africa. He is attempting to build an
illusory empire upon the skulls of the innocent peoples
of the Great Lakes region.

Sudan has responded to all of the proposed
initiatives and mechanisms aimed at putting an end to
differences with Uganda. Unfortunately, they have not
borne fruit because of the lack of political will on the
part of the Ugandan side, which has attempted to
impede all of the agreed-upon measures.

The Ugandan leadership must recognize that it is
no longer protected by forces behind which it can stand
as it implements its own agenda. The President of
Uganda will no longer be the spoiled child of certain
Powers. Times are changing, and interests are also
changing. All of the immoral actions that have taken
place have become clearly evident.

Sudan totally rejects the Ugandan accusations,
which are aimed at drawing Sudan into a separate
battle. This is a desperate attempt to turn attention
away from the documented crimes of looting which are
clearly set out in the report before the Council. Sudan
calls on the Security Council to act firmly, after
obtaining all of the evidence and the facts, to deter the
Ugandan leadership from its course of action,
following public recognition of its invasion of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, its continued
looting of that country's wealth and its continued
presence therein.

