Ms. Ramirez (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
and foremost, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this meeting of the Security Council so
as to enable all Members of the Organization to have an
opportunity to hear the President of the Republic of
Zambia, Mr. Frederick Chiluba. For the same reason I
wish to thank the representative of Gabon for having
taken the initiative.

First of all, the information we have just received is
highly important, because President Chiluba has played a
fundamental role in the peace process. His actions in the
Lusaka process are highly appreciated by our delegation.
We know that the President personally has been an
important factor in finding a peaceful resolution to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Secondly, we think that what he has said is very
appropriate and timely, as it gives a clear orientation to
the Security Council.

President Chiluba enumerated six elements that the
Council should take into account. I would essentially like
to refer to three of them, particularly the first. The
President talked about the need for "an appropriate
mandate". All of us know that "an appropriate mandate"
is key to the success of any peacekeeping operation.

 

Mr. Chiluba also said that humanitarian consequences were
an important element to be taken into account.

The third element I wish to emphasize is the need for
the international community to cooperate in the economic
reconstruction of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Since this was said by someone who perhaps knows better
than anyone else the painful experience of the country and
the complexity of the work to be done, we do not think that
the Council can disregard it.

My first reaction to what President Chiluba said was
that there is a very complex task ahead that calls for a great
joint effort, not only on the part of African leaders, but also
on the part of the United Nations and the international
community. We will all have a role to play in this job. By
helping the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we will be
helping pacify not only the entire region but also all of
Africa.

Finally, I would like to ask President Chiluba what he
believes to be the essential elements to achieve a stable
peace in the Great Lakes region.

