Mr. Zambrana (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would like to
welcome the presence of Mr. Leonard She Okitundu,
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Regional Integration of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Bolivia is also grateful for the briefing
from Mr. Maman Sidikou, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). We thank him for
his mediating efforts and his support to the authorities of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in strengthening
the security and stability in the country.

We deplore the recent attack on MONUSCO
by the Allied Democratic Forces, offer our deepest
condolences to the families, the people and the
Government of Tanzania for their loss of two members
of their contingent in that attack and hope that the
injured recover swiftly. We condemn the current
climate of violence and the deterioration of the security
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
regret that the new areas of conflict that have emerged
include disputes over access to natural resources,
conflicts between armed and intercommunal groups
and ethnic violence.

We firmly condemn the actions that have
resulted, as Mr. Sidikou mentioned, in approximately
8.5 million people, including 5.5 million children,
needing humanitarian assistance. We deplore the fact
that 3.8 million people have been internally displaced,
an increase of 16 per cent since January, according
to the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2017/824).
We also condemn all actions aimed at intensifying
intercommunal tensions and inciting violence, as well
as any acts of sexual exploitation. We believe that all
such acts, including those in which the national police
have participated, should be duly investigated and the
people responsible brought to justice and tried in the
appropriate courts.

Bolivia supports the political initiatives and
recommendations of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/825) on the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
which seeks, among other things, to have a positive
effect on the plans for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, as well as for the repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration of the various insurgent groups,
both Congolese and foreigners, operating within the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also commend
MONUSCO's increased efforts to bring security to
civilians, and we encourage it to continue working for
peace and stability in the region, in coordination with
the military forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in accordance with its mandate.

The current political stalemate and uncertainty
about elections are crucial issues that must be resolved if
we are to put an end to insecurity in the region. Progress
on the political situation is essential, and we reiterate
that the principles of preventive diplomacy and good
offices aimed at reaching a negotiated political solution
that respects the sovereignty ofthe Democratic Republic
of the Congo must not be neglected. In that regard, we
note the convening of a forum for reconciliation in the
Kasai region in Kananga on 19 September, and we call
on the parties to implement the confidence-building
measures contained in the political agreement.

In that regard, Bolivia believes that the
Comprehensive and Inclusive Political Agreement
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo signed on
31 December 2016 between the Government and the
opposition represents a solid foundation establishing
a road map for organizing presidential elections
in accordance with the country's Constitution and
resolution 2277 (2016). We believe that the Agreement
should be respected and supported by all stakeholders
with the aim of holding peaceful, credible, inclusive
and timely elections that can lead to a peaceful transfer
of power. In that regard, we call on the signatories to
the Agreement to create the conditions that can enable
the political process to make progress and materialize.

We also call for the adoption of an agreed-on
election calendar to be published by the Independent
National Electoral Commission and for the completion
of voter registration, in accordance with the Agreement.
As updated by 10 September, voter registration had
reached 41 million, ofwhich we would like to emphasize
that 48 per cent are women. We commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the Special
Envoy for the the Great Lakes Region and MONUSCO
for using their good offices in collaboration with national
political stakeholders and Government authorities to
encourage implementation of the Agreement.

Strengthening dialogue and cooperation with
regional and subregional partners is key to preventing
and settling conflicts. We therefore commend the call
by the Southern African Development Community for
the publication of an elections calendar and by the Peace
and Security Council ofthe African Union for providing
the Electoral Commission with the necessary resources
to implement the Agreement of 31 December 2016.
Bolivia urges them, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and the Economic Community
of Central African States to hold periodic consultations
with the United Nations, the African Union and other
international stakeholders so as to ensure that the
region and the international community support the
implementation of that agreement.

Finally, I would like to say that we are firmly believe
that it is African initiatives and the Congolese people
and their institutions who should make decisions about
the future of their country. Our duty is to support those
decisions and respect their sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. It is our belief that that will be
a decisive factor in the promotion of peace and stability
and the development of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

