Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): Uganda congratulates
you, Mr. President, and the United Kingdom delegation
on your assumption of the office of the President of the
Security Council for the month of August. We also
thank you for organizing this important debate and
welcome the participation of United Nations force
commanders. The timing could not have been better.
I wish to thank Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy
and Malcorra for their very informative briefings to the
Council. I also thank General Agwai, Force
Commander of the United Nations-African Union
Mission in Darfur, for sharing his experiences with the
Council.

Since the year began, we have witnessed a
number of initiatives undertaken to improve United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We commend all
these efforts because they have facilitated greater
interaction between the various stakeholders at
different levels, which will further enhance practical
progress in United Nations peacekeeping. It is
necessary that we sustain these efforts.

This debate comes at a time when United Nations
efforts to resolve conflicts by peaceful means are being
put to the test by new threats to global peace and
security. Impunity, terrorism, piracy and other forms of
social injustices meted out by non-State actors are on
the rise in the theatres of peacekeeping operations. The
humanitarian consequences of these actions on
innocent civilians, including women and children, are
alarming.

Therefore, Uganda considers the following points
to be key. First, it is important to recognize that an
ineffective United Nations peacekeeping capability
anywhere around the world greatly undermines the
credibility of the United Nations in the eyes of the
public. It is imperative that United Nations
peacekeeping be adaptable to emerging challenges,
such as we have seen in Somalia. A shift to more robust
and comprehensive United Nations peacekeeping, such
as we have seen in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, can yield positive results.

Robust peacekeeping is what the United Nations
requires to ensure the protection of civilians, United
Nations personnel and humanitarian aid workers in the
field today. However, to that end a clear understanding
of the situation on the ground is required, and the
missions must be provided with the necessary
capabilities to effectively implement their various
mandates.

Secondly, the relationship between the Security
Council and troop-contributing countries is crucial, and
there is a need to strengthen the existing mechanisms
for engagement. It is crucial because it is they that
implement the mandates on the ground, where they
often face considerable risk.

It is fundamental that political objectives and
peacekeeping mandates for missions be clear and
credible. A stronger understanding among troop and
police contributors, donor countries and the Security
Council as to what is expected of peacekeepers in
fulfilling these objectives can greatly facilitate the
achievement of mission objectives. Uganda therefore
supports Security Council efforts to strengthen
cooperation and interaction amongst stakeholders in
peacekeeping operations.

Thirdly, the challenges of modern peacekeeping,
as we have seen in recent times, clearly indicate that
not even the United Nations is capable of tackling the
challenges on its own. The United Nations should fast-
track its efforts to broaden the contributor base by
working with partners at the regional and subregional
levels. It should take advantages of these capacities
and build on the efforts so far taken in this regard.

The United Nations should take maximum
advantage of the strengths of regional organizations,
such as the African Union, and of subregional
organizations, such as the Southern Africa Development
Community, the Economic Community of West African
States and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, and of the roles they can play. However,
this requires a deliberate and conscious effort to
establish strategic relationships with these organizations
in order to strengthen their capacity to contribute to
United Nations efforts in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Fourthly, early consideration of peacebuilding
activities during the peacekeeping stage is critical to
the success of peacekeeping missions. Without tangible
peace dividends, such as the provision of basic services
like health care, education, shelter, and the
improvement of the standards of living of populations
affected by conflict, the chances of peace are very slim.
There is therefore an urgent need for the United
Nations system to ensure greater coherence in
peacekeeping, peacemaking, peacebuilding and
development activities. Uganda therefore supports
efforts aimed at more comprehensive United Nations
peacekeeping.

Uganda pays tribute to the men and women of the
United Nations for their tireless sacrifice. They serve
in some of the most dangerous and hostile places in the
world but continue to keep many people safe and give
them hope. We especially remember and honour those

who have paid the ultimate sacrifice in the service of
peace.

Finally, we thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for the draft presidential statement, which my
delegation fully supports.

