Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Sandra Honore, for her introduction of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/20l6/753).

We align ourselves with the statement to be made
by the representative of Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.

My country conveys its solidarity and condolences
to the people and the Government of Haiti for the lives
lost and material damage caused by the passing of
Hurricane Matthew. As noted by Mr. Stephen O'Brien,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
the hurricane has caused the worst humanitarian crisis
in Haiti since the 2010 earthquake. We are pleased to
see that international assistance is already arriving in
the country and that the United Nations and the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
continue to play an important role on the ground. We
are also pleased to hear of a new focus, on the part
of the Secretary-General, in confronting the cholera
epidemic on two levels. The first seeks to organize
support and response efforts in the fight against cholera
and the other will supply material assistance to those
most affected by the cholera epidemic.

We welcome the ongoing progress made by the
Haitian National Police and encourage further efforts
to make it better able to provide security to the people.
We are pleased to see that, even in these difficult
circumstances, the executive branch is committed to
working jointly with the Provisional Electoral Council
to organize elections as soon as possible so as to ensure
the handover of power to a democratically elected
President on 7 February 2017.

We await with interest the new elections timetable.
According to what we have heard, it should be
provided tomorrow. Despite that, we remain convinced
that the strategic assessment should be carried out
independently and irrespectively of the electoral
timetable. That necessary strategic assessment will
allow us to determine which type of United Nations
presence is really required in Haiti.

Uruguay in particular has been on the ground in
Haiti since MINUSTAH began, in 2004, and is there
still today. With the same commitment that has driven
us from the outset, today we understand that the
gradual drawdown of MINUSTAH is a direction we
must duly follow. Therefore a responsible transition
process must be initiated, leading to the consolidation
of the country's insititutions in order to achieve the
development and well-being of its people.

Allow me to conclude by once again expressing
my country's recognition of the men and women
working as part of MINUSTAH for their dedication
and commitment to recovery and stability in Haiti. In
many cases these people have given up their lives in
the fulfilment of their duties, including Uruguayan
members of the Mission, whom I acknowledge in
remembrance now.

