Mr. Ohin (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to convey my warm congratulations to the
Kingdom of Morocco on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and for taking the
initiative to organize this important meeting on the
Sahel. I would also like to thank the Special Envoy for
the Sahel and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees for their clear briefings.

The objective of this meeting, which is to explore
ways of moving towards a more comprehensive and
coordinated approach on the question of the Sahel,
is very opportune, given the timing and context. The
international community is today mobilized in various
ways to find the most appropriate solutions to the many
ills attacking the region. We are pleased to note that
this debate is in accordance with the debate held by
the Council on 21 February, during Togo's presidency,
on the theme of the impact of transnational organized
crime on peace, security and stability in West Africa
and the Sahel region (see S/PV.6717).

Ten years ago, the countries and the peoples of
the Sahel were perceived throughout the international
community as being resolutely committed to stability,
democracy and development. The progress achieved
in those areas was favourable to its emergence from
crisis, political reforms and economic growth policies
to deal with the challenges resulting not only from
historic, sociological and cultural hurdles, but also and
above all from the austerity of nature itself. However,
as a consequence of the burden and nature of those
challenges, neither could the structural problems be
resolved in such a short period of time, nor was the
resilience of the people strong enough to effectively
address the recurring shocks of food crises due in
particular to drought.

In such conditions, it is not surprising that the region
has become a breeding ground for many scourges,
whose adverse effects could not be anticipated due to
lack of wherewithal and resources. This state of affairs
has jeopardized the progress made and destabilized
the States involved and their structures. These
scourges are transnational organized crime, including
drug trafficking and weapons trafficking; religious
extremism; terrorism and drought. The convergence of
these factors explains the multidimensional nature of
the political, economic, security, humanitarian, human
rights crisis in the Sahel, and justifies the international
community's mobilization, not only by reason of the
tragedy emerging on all of the aforementioned levels,
but also given the central geographical position that
the Sahel occupies with respect to other regions, and
especially given the impact ofthe crises on neighbouring
regions.

In that respect, Togo welcomes the work undertaken
by the Secretary-General to give the region an
integrated strategic plan, whose principal objectives
are to optimize United Nations action for the full
resolution of the many challenges facing the region.
Togo appreciates in particular the integrated approach
adopted by our common Organization in the context of
this strategy, which takes into account the complexity
of the factors in play and the interwoven challenges
to be taken up in the areas of security, socioeconomic
development, governance, human rights and the
humanitarian situation.

For our part, we are pleased to note that the
strategies developed by the Economic Community of
West African States and the West African Economic
and Monetary Union include vital components that
will be taken into consideration in the United Nations
strategy for the Sahel. Togo hopes that the strategy
will be adopted very swiftly. At the same time, the
strategy will have the merit of taking the transregional
dimension into account.

We also welcome the existence of the European
Union Strategy for Security and Development in
the Sahel, which stresses the fact that security and
development are inextricably linked in Sahel and require
close regional cooperation to allow for the growth of
economies and poverty reduction. On that specific
point, we would like to underscore two fundamental
considerations.

First, we must not lose sight of the impact of the
situation in the Sahel on the regions of West, Central
and East Africa and the Mahgreb with regard to the
food crisis and insecurity. The definition of priorities
and approaches to solutions and their modalities for
implementation must take into consideration the
repercussions on the other regions. Those repercussions
must be assessed in advance and must also be
considered as the programmes drawn up for the Sahel
are implemented.

Secondly, we would like to recall that there can
be neither development nor good governance without
stability and security. As a result, we must at no time
lose sight of that consideration. On the contrary, it must
help to identify and deal with the underlying causes of
the problem.

Anyone talking about the Sahel today is clearly
focusing on what is unfortunately happening in Mali,
while bearing in mind the significant threats to peace
and security in the north of that country and the
humanitarian tragedy there, with thousands of refugees
in neighbouring countries. We need to reconcile
the urgent settlement of the Malian crisis, with its
multidimensional aspects, with a comprehensive
approach that takes into account the entire Sahel region,
which must definitely be seen as part of a long-term
effort.

In that connection, we would like to reiterate
Togo's serious concern about the situation in northern
Mali and to call on the entire international community
to consider implementing the universal principle of
helping vulnerable populations. We make that appeal
because there is certainly a conflict situation in northern
Mali that is putting the people, in particular women and
children, at the mercy of the abuses of extremist and
terrorist groups, which are skilled in contemporary
practices and prevent humanitarian access, thus sealing
the tragic fate of thousands facing an acute food crisis.

The situation of those people calls to us to assume
our responsibility to protect, since they are undeniably
deprived of the necessary minimum to live in dignity.
The duty to protect that we therefore need to highlight
is justified by the fact that the minimum requirement
for human security and the protection of people and
property are necessarily closely tied to the existence of
a secure State with stable institutions.

In adopting resolution 2071 (2012), the Security
Council took a decisive step and clearly indicated its
readiness to uphold human rights and democracy over
darkness, religious extremism and terrorism, and to
favour dialogue over force. However, the armed groups
in northern Mali have clearly chosen another path,
namely, to disregard human dignity. It is therefore
imperative that the Council decide to restore hope to
Malians, in particular those living in the north of the
country, by adopting a new resolution that authorizes
the deployment of the international support mission for
Mali.
With regard to the Sahel as a whole, Togo is, for
its part, committed to making its contribution as a
neighbouring State of certain Sahel countries for the
success ofvarious initiatives, in particular by providing
grain through the World Food Programme. As a country
with access to the Atlantic, it already performs that
function for the landlocked States within subregional
bodies, such as the Economic Community of West
African States and the West African Economic and
Monetary Union.

Beyond general mobilization, the problems of the
Sahel require particular attention. A mechanism that
brings together all the relevant actors under United
Nations coordination must be put in place. Togo
welcomes the new appointment by the Secretary-
General of his Special Envoy for the Sahel and calls
on him to work together with the other special envoys
in the region, including the African Union High
Representative for Mali, in order to seek solutions to
the many problems facing the Sahel region.

