Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Let me first express my
gratitude to the Permanent Representative of Sweden
and the Deputy Permanent Representative of Chile for
their insightful briefings and very good ideas.

The topic chosen by you, Mr. President, is very
timely. The international community now faces serious
threats posed by the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. Its fourth nuclear test, conducted on 6 January,

and the ballistic missile launch on 7 February are
both clear and flagrant violations of Security Council
resolutions and the international non-proliferation
regime. Japan reiterates that the most urgent task
now for the Council is to expeditiously adopt a new
resolution with further significant measures in response
to those dangerous and serious violations, as we agreed
last Sunday.

The word "sanctions" has a punitive connotation.
Moreover, one cannot find that word in the Charter
of the United Nations. What we call sanctions are, in
fact, non-military measures stipulated in Article 41
of the Charter. They include a "complete or partial
interruption of economic relations and of rail, sea,
air, postal, telegraphic, radio, and other means of
communication, and the severance of diplomatic
relations". I wish to emphasize that those measures are
not a punishment, nor an objective, rather they are one
of the most important tools that the Security Council
has at its disposal to find a comprehensive solution to
the conflict in question.

The second point I wish to make is on compliance.
Article 25 of the Charter stipulates that all Member
States are obliged to implement Council decisions
irrespective of whether they are involved in the
decision-making or not. Last year's report by the Panel
of Experts established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1874 (2009) describes that issue very well.

"The Panel continues to observe Member
States' lack of implementation of the Security
Council resolutions, noting that inaction and low
reporting levels may be due to lack ofwill, technical
capacity and/or issues within their domestic legal
systems. The resolutions are effective only when
implemented." (S/2015/13], annex, p. 5)

I totally agree with the Panel's opinion and observations.
I would like to remind all Member Governments of
the importance of implementing Security Council
resolutions by all Member States, in accordance with
Article 25 of the Charter.

The third point I want to touch upon is the
importance of expert panels. We currently have
11 expert panels with a total of 65 experts. I commend
all panel experts for their dedication. The Council relies
on those panels for their technical inputs of high value.
Therefore, it is indispensable that we select competent
experts in order to ensure the quality of services.
The independence of panels is also crucial. They are

exposed to a lot of political pressure. In order to allow
them to perform their duty properly, we must respect the
independence and integrity of those technical bodies.
In that connection, the annual reports of individual
panels should be published without exception. Those
publications are also important to ensure transparency.

To further enhance transparency, I am ready to
provide non-Council members with briefings after the
formal meetings of sanctions committees, as some of
my predecessors as chairs of sanctions committees
have previously done. In that context, your decision,
Mr. President, to conduct this debate in an open format
is a very good one, because the wider membership can
hear how the Council members view sanctions and the
way they are being conducted. It also allows us to listen
to the views of non-members.

Before closing, I would like to make a few remarks
on the working methods of subsidiary bodies. I was told
in early December 2015 to preside over the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1636 (2005)
concerning Lebanon and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) concerning
Yemen, as well as the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. One
month before assuming the membership of the Council
was not enough to carry our the necessary preparation,
including observing the meetings of those bodies.
Since the election of Security Council members will
now be held in June instead of October, I propose that
chairs be appointed no fewer than three months before
commencing their chairmanship and be able to observe
meetings immediately after their appointment. I note
that this point was also made by two briefers, as well
as the representatives of Angola, New Zealand and the
United Kingdom this morning. I am also ofthe view that
the duty and honour of chairing 23 subsidiary bodies
of the Security Council should not be monopolized by
the 10 elected members. Indeed, that pleasure, duty
and honour can also be shared by the permanent five
members.

Japan, as chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions in
2010, took the lead in compiling presidential note 507. I
would like to make a concrete contribution in that area
during my chairmanship of that Working Group with
the support of all Security Council members.

