Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing appreciation to Mr. Pascoe and
Ms. Malcorra for their briefings. I would also like to
welcome the presentation made by Ambassador Duale
this morning. The situation in Somalia calls for an
urgent response by the Security Council, so Japan
commends you, Mr. President, for holding this timely
debate.

Japan shares the serious concern over the
worsening security situation in Somalia. We condemn
the attacks by rebel groups against the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG), which have been
intensifying since early May. As the security situation
deteriorates, the humanitarian situation also worsens,
with growing numbers of refugees and internally
displaced persons, as Mr. Pascoe reported.

In order to respond effectively to the security
situation, we should make an urgent effort to
strengthen, first of all, the Somali security institutions
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
The pledges made at the donors conference in Brussels
need to be disbursed in an expeditious manner. As a
part of its pledges, Japan will soon disburse $9 million
to the trust fund in support of AMISOM.

AMISOM. plays an indispensable role in support
of the TFG. We sincerely appreciate the troop
contributions made to date by Burundi and Uganda,
and we thank other countries that are actively
considering providing troops. We commend the African
Union for its decision to extend the mandate of
AMISOM. until 31 January 2010.
Japan believes it is essential to make the utmost
effort to increase AMISOM. troop levels to the full
strength of 8,000, as requested by the Secretary-
General. To realize this target, speedy implementation
of the United Nations logistics support package is
vitally important. We commend the work done by the
Department of Field Support. We fully support those
efforts.

09-3985]

The instability in Somalia is caused by internal as
well as external factors and affects stability in the
region as a whole. It is essential and urgent to cut off
external military and economic assistance to the rebel
groups. The countries in the region need to come
together to assist the TFG.

Japan is closely following the ongoing discussion
among the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the African Union member States,
including at the recent summit in Sirte, on strengthened
measures to support Somalia. The international
community must enhance its support to the TFG,
including through diplomatic efforts. It is our belief
that, before any action is taken, the full implications
and effectiveness thereof must be carefully considered.
Japan is ready to take active part in the discussion in
the Council on the way forward.

The top priority is to address and improve the
worsening security situation in central and southern
Somalia. Humanitarian and reconstruction needs must
be met in parallel. The importance of speedy
disbursement of earlier pledges cannot be
overemphasized in this context.

Anti-piracy measures are another high priority,
which are closely related to the security situation on
land. Longer-term solutions will require restoring
stability and governance inside Somalia. Meanwhile,
international cooperation is essential to protect one of
the most important transport routes. Japan, for its part,
has sent two destroyers and two P-3C maritime patrol
aircraft to the Gulf of Aden as part of the anti-piracy
measures. We also enacted a new Law on the
Penalization of Acts of Piracy and Measures against
Acts of Piracy. We extend support to the piracy-related
centres in the region and for a training and job creation
programme for young people, who may be potential
candidates for future pirates.

Japan will chair the next plenary meeting of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia in
September at Headquarters in New York. We hope that
the coordinated efforts of the international community
will have a positive influence on the security situation
on land. It is important to provide the Somali people
with the tangible benefits of the assistance of the
international community and to create the necessary
conditions for them to achieve stability in the country.

