Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to take the
floor on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
States members. The candidate countries Montenegro
and Serbia, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.

First, let me thank today's briefers for their
presentations. In particular, I wish to recognize the
tireless work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui in the interests of
children affected by armed conflict. Her mandate is as
relevant today as ever, given disturbing reports of grave
violations against children committed in many ongoing
conflicts, such as in Syria, the Central African Republic
and South Sudan. I would also like to thank specifically
Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for the very moving and
important statement that he made here today.

The European Union fully supports the
campaign "Children, not soldiers", which the Special
Representative initiated yesterday with UNICEF and in
collaboration with other United Nations partners with a
view to ending and preventing the recruitment and use
of children by Government armed forces in conflict by
2016. We are extremely grateful for the strong emphasis

that the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has placed on all
of these issues, including through its initiative to hold
today's meeting.

I would also say that it is particularly important
that the Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict continue to make good use of
the various instruments in its toolbox to respond to
all types of grave violations, whenever they occur,
including those committed by non-State groups. It is
essential that Member States afford the United Nations
unconditional access to armed non-State actors and that
the issue of children and armed conflict be addressed in
peace negotiations.

We concur with the worrying assessment of the
Secretary-General in his reports on the increasing use
of schools for military purposes, which may render
them more vulnerable to attacks and put more children
out of school or in risk of injury, abduction or other
violations. We therefore strongly welcome the efforts
of Luxembourg as the chair of the Working Group to
agree at the Council level on concrete measures that
could prevent such misuse and ensure accountability.

We urge all parties to conflicts to stop attacks on
schools and hospitals and on protected staff, and to
respect their civilian character. In the meantime, as a
mitigating measure, the European Union will continue
to pay attention to the education and wellbeing of
children affected by conflict. As Council members
will recall, the EU's Nobel Prize money has been
used for the Children of Peace initiative. Through that
programme from 2012 to 2014, the EU has reached out
to approximately 108,000 children in countries such as
Syria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Pakistan
and Colombia. Protecting and promoting child rights
everywhere, especially in conflict-affected countries,
is an earmarked priority of the European Union's
human rights funding instruments.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) continues
to play a crucial role in fighting impunity. Serious
crimes of international concern should be dealt with by
national judicial systems but, when they are unwilling
or unable to do so, States parties to the Rome Statute
should consider referring those situations to the ICC. It
is also important that the Security Council use its power
to refer situations to the ICC. Further institutional
dialogue between the Court and the Security Council
and the effective follow up of referrals made by the
Security Council to the ICC could assist in ensuring
accountability.

All States members of the European Union are
parties to the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict and adhere to the same
international child-protection standards. That is also
an important milestone in the light of the European
Union's role in crisis management and peacebuilding,
with approximately 7,000 civilian and military staff
deployed in various conflict zones.

Equally important is the need to train peacekeepers
on child protection issues and to ensure the inclusion
of child protection provisions in the mandates of
crisis-management operations, in standard operating
procedures and in rules of engagement.

The European Union has made serious efforts
over recent months to strengthen its capacity in child
protection in headquarters and in operations. In
June 2013, in cooperation with UNICEF and several
non-governmental organizations, the European Union
organized the first regular training for its staff on
children and armed conflict. The course will be given
on annual basis. In October 2013, with the help of
Belgium and Save the Children, the European Union
tested its predeployment child protection training
module for civilian and military personnel.

As of February 2014, a toolkit aimed at integrating
child rights in development cooperation had been
finalized for use, not only by European Union staff but
also by all other donors and civil society organizations.
The toolkit was developed in cooperation with UNICEF.

In 2013, the European Union was careful to
mainstream the promotion of human rights, child
protection and international humanitarian law in the
mandate of the EU Training Mission in Mali. This
year, we incorporated child protection in the ongoing
planning for the European Union operation in the
Central African Republic.

We believe that regional and subregional
organizations have an important role to play in the
promotion and protection of the rights of the child,
including during armed conflict. There are a number of
initiatives we have organized together with the African
Union, the World Bank and the United Nations i for
instance, a workshop on children in armed conflict,
held in Addis Ababa in September 2013. At the
Europe-Africa summit next month, our heads of States
and Government will make commitments towards
further cooperation, including on the protection of
civilians. We hope to develop partnerships with other
organizations as well.

Let me conclude by expressing the hope that the
Security Council will remain a forum that is guided in
its decisions on peace and security by the best interests
of children. Children deserve this.

