Ms. Loj (Denmark): I too would like to express
my gratitude to the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, Mr. Guterres, for his comprehensive and
very informative report to the Council on the effects
which a number of conflicts on the Council's agenda
have on refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs) in conflict zones.

Without spending too much time on each of the
conflicts mentioned, I wish to offer a few comments
and pose a few questions which address some points of
importance for the work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
vis-a-vis the protection of refugees and IDPs.

First, let me offer a few thoughts on UNHCR's
role in the United Nations reform process. Denmark
supports the ongoing humanitarian reform process
aimed at improving the capacity and preparedness of
the humanitarian system. In particular, IDPs, as the
largest vulnerable group globally, must be better
protected. That point, unfortunately, is being
underlined every day by the ongoing events in Darfur,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, northern
Uganda, et cetera. For that reason, Denmark welcomes
the decision of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee
to implement a cluster approach, and we compliment
UNHCR for taking on some major tasks in that regard.
However, the financial implications of the new cluster
approach to IDP situations still seem uncertain.

Denmark has taken note of UNHCR's appeal to
donors to rapidly provide contributions to start IDP
interventions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Liberia and Uganda. We fully recognize this and will
be considering additional funding. Furthermore, we
understand that UNHCR currently faces financial
difficulties because it cannot get up-front money from
the Central Emergency Response Fund before the Fund
is operational, which will occur by mid-March.

How does the High Commissioner assess the
prospects for the financing of his additional activities?

Secondly, on the issue of peacebuilding, refugees
and IDPs are victims of conflict, and their safe return
must be a priority in post-conflict peacebuilding. The
Security Council, for instance, has a specific
responsibility to include protection of civilians in the
mandates of its missions. However, to find a
sustainable solution, all relevant actors must be
involved. Denmark thus fully agrees with UNHCR that
durable solutions for displaced populations must be
integrated into the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Support Office,
once their work commences.

We regard UNHCR's partnership with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to create
better conditions for the safe return of displaced
populations in integrated peacekeeping missions as an
important step towards more sustainable peacebuilding.
However, we have also noted that on earlier occasions
the High Commissioner has stated that many of the
voluntary repatriations that UNHCR is carrying out
today may not be durable.

How do we ensure more durable activities?

Thirdly, on the Convention Plus project, Denmark
has been a strong supporter of bringing about durable
solutions for refugees through Convention Plus. We see
Convention Plus as a major instrument in ensuring the
transition from relief to development assistance. It is,
however, also important that more donors commit
themselves to support Convention Plus projects in the
field. We count on UNHCR to continue its advocacy
role vis-a-vis donors. It is, in that regard, a very
positive development that UNHCR has started
collaboration with the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) on a Framework for Durable
Solutions in Africa.

How does the High Commissioner assess
progress in getting other development agencies
involved?

Fourthly, on the transition from relief to
development assistance, the early recovery cluster,
under UNDP lead, will play a key role in building a
bridge between relief and development. The early
recovery cluster should also help UNHCR to deliver
durable solutions and protection in post-conflict and
post-disaster situations. United Nations organizations
with a longer-term development mandate must take
over from UNHCR. We need to ensure that return of
refugees and IDPs is made sustainable. The Sudan,
Liberia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
examples of where we rapidly need to see a stronger
presence of development agencies in the field.

Let me, in that regard, mention that UNHCR is a
key partner in the Danish Regions of Origin initiative,
which supports a number of UNHCR programmes to
improve protection and ensure durable solutions. We
regard the Regions of Origin initiative as a key
instrument in tackling some of the transition issues
arising from repatriation and in reintegrating refugees
and IDPs. The experience gained from Danish support
to the transition programme in Sri Lanka has revealed
difficulties experienced by United Nations agencies in
working on transition in an integrated manner.

I would therefore like, in conclusion, to
encourage UNHCR and other United Nations agencies
to improve the coordination of their activities in the
field.

