Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Like others, I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Hasegawa, for introducing the
Secretary-General's report (S/2006/251) and updating
the Council on the current situation in Timor-Leste.
Furthermore, I would like to welcome His Excellency
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste,
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, and to thank him for his
excellent and inspiring presentation.

Greece aligns itself with the statement to be made
shortly by the Permanent Representative of Austria on
behalf of the European Union.

In the period under review, there were positive
developments but also some worrisome setbacks in the
overall internal situation in Timor-Leste. We are
pleased to see the full operation of the Office of the
Provedor for Human Rights and Justice as well as the
drafting of a national human rights action plan, to be
adopted this month. However, dealing with fighting
impunity for human rights crimes and abuses
committed in 1999 remains an open issue. We therefore
look forward to the relevant report of the Secretary-
General's as requested by the Security Council.

On the other hand, the dismissal of nearly 600
soldiers and the ensuing demonstrations and violent
incidents clearly show the fragile security situation and
the need to reinforce the capacity of the Timorese
defence institutions.

The mandate of the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOT IL) is coming to a successful end
on 20 May. Over the past 12 months, UNOTIL has
greatly contributed to providing the Government of
Timor-Leste with effective assistance in building the
State's capacity in all sectors.

In his report, the Secretary-General clearly
identifies the remaining serious challenges in the fields
of defence, police, justice, human rights, public
administration and border control, especially in the
light of the preparations for, and holding of, next year's
first presidential and parliamentary elections since the
country's independence in 2002.

We acknowledge and appreciate the important
contributions made by bilateral donors and United
Nations specialized agencies such as the United
Nations Development Programme, and by institutions
such as the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund. We are also pleased to note that the Secretary-
General's report underlines all activities related to the
transfer of certain UNOTIL tasks to other international
actors on the ground. The question, though, is whether
that kind of arrangement in providing further
international assistance is sufficient for the next crucial
one-year period.

The President, the Government and the political
parties of Timor-Leste have asked for the establishment
of a new United Nations office. Upon the request of the
Security Council, the Secretary-General has presented
his proposals in that regard. Greece has carefully
examined the Secretary-General's proposals, and
believes that they are well-structured and are tailored
not only to the challenges of organizing and holding
Timor-Leste's first national elections but also to the
need for further strengthening State institutions and the
human-resource capacity of the country. The latter is
indispensable to the viability of a new democratic
State.

Having considered every aspect of the needs in
Timor-Leste under the present circumstances, Greece
fully supports the establishment of an integrated United
Nations office along the lines proposed by the
Secretary-General. My delegation looks forward to
working with the other members of the Council
towards achieving consensus in that regard.

In conclusion, I wish to express our thanks and
deep appreciation to Mr. Hasegawa and the personnel
of UNOTIL for their hard work, dedication and
efficiency in accomplishing the tasks of their mandate.
UNOTIL, along with all previous United Nations
missions in the country, has contributed to making
Timor-Leste a success story of the United Nations. The
people of Timor-Leste deserve a peaceful, democratic
and prosperous future, and they have our full support.

