Mr. Oshima (Japan): Japan appreciated the
Secretary-General's briefing yesterday in the Security
Council, as well as his proposals and ideas to address
the developing crisis in the Middle East region. Japan
supports the Secretary-General's ongoing good-offices
initiatives aimed at defusing the crisis. The proposals
laid out yesterday are being carefully considered by my
Government.

I thank Mr. Nambiar for the additional briefing
today and express our appreciation for the efforts he
and his team members have made to defuse the
escalating crisis. I also thank the Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Jan Egeland, for his briefing and take
this opportunity to commend the humanitarian agencies
- the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and the other agencies, funds and
programmes - for all the efforts they are deploying to
address emergency humanitarian needs in the region.

In the past months, we have witnessed
widespread and deeply troubling changes in the Middle
East situation and the continued deterioration of
conditions almost day by day: the attacks by Hizbollah
across the Blue Line, the abduction of two Israeli
soldiers, the ensuing Israeli military operations against
Hizbollah, bases and civilian infrastructure in Lebanon,
and a further escalation of hostilities. These
developments have dramatically changed the political
and security situation in the region, with many already
killed or wounded on both sides, causing extreme
concern to the international community and the
Security Council.

We agree that obstacles need to be overcome as
soon as possible to reach a ceasefire and reduce the
level of violence quickly. The international community,
through the Security Council, must make its position
clear on the need for an immediate cessation of
hostilities by Israel and other parties in order to protect
civilians and the civilian infrastructure.

We are also very concerned at the very heavy toll
on innocent civilian lives in Palestine, Israel and
Lebanon and at the extreme deterioration in the
humanitarian situation of Palestinians in Gaza and
people in Lebanon, as well as the damage caused by
the missile rocket attacks by Hizbollah against Israel.

We therefore fully support the acceleration of
humanitarian assistance to the people affected and of
reconstruction and development assistance, including
restoration of the civilian infrastructure destroyed in
the crisis. In that regard, the idea of establishing safe
corridors for humanitarian access, as explained in
detail by Mr. Egeland, deserves support. We expect and
welcome the fullest cooperation by the Lebanese and
Israeli Governments in that regard. We also expect the
Lebanese Government to take the lead in the
reconstruction process, by exercising its ownership of
the process, with the support of the international donor
community.
During his trip to the region last week, which
included visits to Israel, Palestine and Jordan, our
Prime Minister Koizumi expressed his support for
President Abbas and announced additional
humanitarian and other assistance to the Palestinians,
bringing Japan's aid to the Palestinians since May 2005
to a total of $103.1 million. Furthermore, he proposed
a concept called the "corridor for peace and
prosperity", which aims at promoting regional
cooperation in the mid- to long-term to achieve
coexistence and mutual prosperity. All of the leaders
expressed their support.

In the more immediate term, the Summit of the
Group of Eight meeting in St. Petersburg last weekend
issued a statement on the Middle East with
recommendations on how the current crisis should be
addressed. Japan fully associates itself with that
statement. It calls on Israel to exercise the utmost
restraint and seek to avoid casualties among innocent
civilians and damage to civilian infrastructure, and to
refrain from acts that would further destabilize the
Lebanese Government. It affirms that extremist
elements and those who support them cannot be
allowed to plunge the Middle East into chaos and to
provoke a wider conflict, and also warns that they must
immediately halt their attacks.

In light of that, it is urgently necessary to create
conditions for a cessation of hostilities that will be
sustainable. That will require the return of the Israeli
soldiers in Gaza and Lebanon unharmed, an end to the
shelling of Israeli territory by Hizbollah, an end to
Israeli military operations and the early withdrawal of
Israeli forces from Gaza, and the release of the arrested
Palestinian Ministers and parliamentarians.

Prime Minister Koizumi, for his part, conveyed
his firm belief to the leaders he met last week in the
region that there is no alternative but to work towards
coexistence and mutual prosperity. He called for Israel
to exercise maximum restraint and for President Abbas
to provide the necessary leadership.

Concerning the situation in Lebanon, we will
need to ensure the cooperation and efforts of all
countries concerned, including neighbouring countries
such as Iran and Syria, for full implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006). It is essential
that the disarming and disbanding of Lebanese and
non-Lebanese militias and the extension of control by
the Government of Lebanon over all of its territory be
implemented in a manner that will not destabilize the
region. We commend and support the efforts of the
Lebanese Government for full sovereignty and
expansion of political independence.

With regard to the possibility of an international
security and monitoring presence, Japan would like to
emphasize that any kind of presence should be
designed to contribute to implementing resolution
1559 (2004) and to bringing about stability in the
region and should have the consent of all the relevant
parties. The details on issues such as the possible size
of the presence, its mandate and demarcation of
responsibility with the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon need to be studied carefully.

In light of the deterioration of the situation in the
Middle East and its serious implications for
international peace and security, the Council should act
swiftly and in unity, in order not only to express its
concerns, but also to create conditions for a cessation
of violence that would be sustainable and to address
the immediate humanitarian requirements in Lebanon
and Palestine. To that end, Japan will continue to
participate actively in the discussions in the Council,
while continuing to pursue its own diplomatic efforts
in cooperation with all the concerned countries in the
region, in order to defuse the crisis and restore calm
and stability to the region.

