The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Israel, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jacob
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
10 April 2002 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2002/37l, and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
today, Wednesday, 10 April 2002, regarding the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now continue its consideration of the item
on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council supports the Joint
Statement (S/2002/369) issued in Madrid on 10
April 2002 by the Secretary-General, Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
Secretary of State of the United States, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Spain and High
Representative for the European Union Common
Foreign and Security Policy, which is annexed to
this statement, as transmitted to the Security
Council by the Secretary-General. The Council
calls upon the Government of Israel, the
Palestinian Authority and all States in the region
to cooperate with the efforts to achieve the goals
set out in the Joint Statement and insists on the
immediate implementation of resolutions 1402
(2002) and 1403 (2002)."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2002/9.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.40 p.m.

