Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): First of all, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this wrap-up
meeting and for giving us, the departing members of
the Security Council, the opportunity to share our
views on the work of the Council over the past 12
months. This exercise will certainly be beneficial for
the Council's future work as well as for the new
members who will be joining the Council next year.

I should also like to congratulate you, Mr.
President, and your delegation on the manner in which
the business of the Council is being conducted this
month. There is no doubt that it has been a very busy
month, but we are happy to note that you have striven
very hard to maintain your initial plan to end the
Council's normal business today. I should also like to
thank your deputy, Ambassador Franco, for the daily
annotated programme that he has been sending to our
Missions. That has helped us enormously in preparing
for Council consultations and public meetings in a
better way, with the result that the work of the Council
has become more effective. It would be a good thing if
that practice could be maintained in the future.

In addition, my delegation is very grateful to you,
Mr. President, for having prepared and circulated a
non-paper to serve as a general guide for today's
meeting. In it you have asked us to assess the main
contributions, political relevance, difficulties and
dilemmas of the Security Council, using examples of
the work accomplished during the year 2002, and to
identify similar problems for the Council for 2003. I
will try to follow your guidelines and will focus on a
number of issues that, I believe, have been and will
remain very significant for the Council.

Throughout the year, the Security Council has
striven very hard to maintain international peace and
security. Its commitment and perseverance have
resulted in many success stories, such as an
independent Timor-Leste and a stabilized and more
peaceful Sierra Leone, Angola and Kosovo - to name
only a few - as well as the remarkable Council action
in Afghanistan. Those success stories can provide very
useful lessons to the Council as it deals with other
conflict situations and further complex issues.

During the course of the year, the Security
Council has also made significant progress in its
working methods, particularly in the area of increased
transparency and interaction with the wider United
Nations membership. The increase in the number of
public meetings and of public briefings preceding
consultations on certain issues has been highly
appreciated by the general membership and has helped
to break the divide between the Council and other
United Nations Members. The Council should continue
to give the general membership the opportunity to
express their views and proposals on issues of which
Council is seized. In our View, that approach remains
the most effective way to obtain the greatest support of
the international community for any Security Council
action, as evidenced by the overwhelming response that
resolution 1373 (2001) obtained through the
methodology adopted by Ambassador Sir Jeremy
Greenstock. Maintaining that approach, which in turn
will strengthen the centrality of the Council, will be a
major challenge for the Council in the years to come.

Closely linked to that is the need for the Council
to be perceived as a credible and even-handed body
that looks at all issues with the same objective,
impartial and constructive approach. No distinction
should be made, in our view, in the manner in which
any particular subject is treated as opposed to another,
nor should there be any distinction between one group
of members and another within the Security Council.
Any such divide would be harmful to the Council's
long-term relationship with the rest of the international
community. Council unity should remain the constant
objective of every member, since we all know that the
Council is most effective when it acts in unison.
Consensus-building on the basis of collective interest,
rather than divisions along the lines of national
interests, needs to be emphasized.
One of the major challenges for the Council in
the future will be the effective implementation of its
decisions and resolutions. Dozens of resolutions remain
unimplemented, some of them because of defiance by
members and others because they are simply
impractical. Several decisions concerning appeals and
urgent calls - for example, on rebel movements in
Africa or even for the disarmament of Kisangani -
have not been complied with. It will be necessary for
the Council to address that important issue to ensure its
own credibility.

As the Council discusses situations in areas
affected by conflict, we rely mostly on reports of the
Secretary-General and on briefings by the Secretariat
or by Special Representatives of the Secretary-General,
which undoubtedly are both comprehensive and
extremely useful. However, our experience has shown
that, no matter how comprehensive such reports or
briefings are, there is much vital information that we
fail to obtain. That is why we feel that it is extremely
important for Council members to undertake regular
field visits to familiarize themselves with the situation
on the ground by interacting with the actors and the
local communities. Such visits also help to create
greater awareness among Council members of the real
needs and expectations of people at the grass-roots
level, thereby allowing for discussion beyond the
purely academic level. We have found all the field
missions in which we have participated to be extremely
useful, enlightening and, in many ways, very effective
in terms of the message that the Council sends to the
parties.

We feel that the Council should consider splitting
visiting missions into two or even three groups, as in
that way it would be possible for such a mission to visit
more places and to meet with more people in a
particular country. As the Council discusses the whole
question of field missions, it may wish to consider such
a proposal.

With the success of the peace processes in several
conflict situations in Africa, namely Sierra Leone,
Angola, Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the challenge that we will face will be the
consolidation of peace in those countries. The Council
must work towards that objective to ensure that those
countries reach a stage where peace becomes
irreversible. The signing of peace agreements is a
crucial stage in any process. That is the time when the
prompt support of the international community is most
important. It is an opportunity which we cannot miss,
even though sometimes we tend to become complacent
and start focusing attention elsewhere. Our experience
in Guinea-Bissau and in the Central African Republic
should remind the Council of the importance of peace
consolidation; in this context, we feel that it will have
to work in close cooperation with all United Nations
agencies for peace to be permanently anchored.

A full, comprehensive and effective programme
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) represents another challenge that the Council
will have to address next year and in the years to come.
Ways and means will have to be found to deal with
those not willing to undergo voluntary DDR. My
delegation has always supported the voluntary basis for
undertaking DDR, but at the same time we have always
stressed the need to have contingency plans in respect
of those who continue to undermine peace. Incomplete
DDR is a source for future instability.

In the same vein, we feel that the demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration of ex-
combatants should be taken at a regional or even
continental level, especially in the case of Africa,
where there is such mobility and such "demand" for
combatants. We hope the Council will give serious
consideration to this issue.

The Council has been quite effective with
conflicts that are already full-blown. On several
occasions, especially during brainstorming sessions, we
have discussed the need for the Council to focus
attention on preventive measures that can be more
effective and more economical. At the beginning of
this year, the Council very timidly addressed the crisis
which Madagascar was experiencing at that time.
Currently we have been doing the same with the crisis
in Cote d'Ivoire. The Council is often reluctant, lest it
be accused of interfering in the internal affairs of a
sovereign State, to address what we would consider to
be a clear pre-conflict situation.

While we fully understand the limitations, we
believe there is a need for the Council to see how it can
best intervene in situations where conflicts may be
averted, before they escalate to uncontrollable scale. In
this regard, we feel that the Council should work
closely with regional and subregional organizations and
should fully utilize their early warning systems. Closer
cooperation with the African Union in the preventive
field is absolutely vital. The New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD) and its Peer Review
Mechanism provide the necessary framework to avert
crisis situations, and the Security Council could work
in helping to strengthen the institutional capacity of the
African Union and in implementing N EPAD.

Mauritius will be completing its two-year term in
the Council at the end of this month. Our membership
has been an extremely enriching and challenging
experience for us, especially in View of our size,
resources and influence. But it is that very specificity
which has led us to take a stand based on principles,
objectivity, impartiality, sense of justice, even-
handedness, fair play and, above all, consensus-
building to preserve and strengthen the unity of the
Council.

As one of the representatives of Africa, we have
tried to focus the Council's attention on African issues
and to bring a new perspective in dealing with some of
the burning questions afflicting our continent. While
advocating a global and comprehensive approach to
problems in Africa, we have highlighted the
specificities of each situation, which has to be viewed
on its own merits. We are pleased with the
establishment of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, just as
much as with the beginning of a new phase of
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council. It is our sincere hope
that the Council will continue to further strengthen
such cooperation in the future. As we look back on our
performance, we have a feeling of great humility, as
well as some pride that our modest contribution may
have helped consolidate peace and international
security in the world.

I would like, in conclusion, to express my
Government's sincere thanks and gratitude to all
members of the Council, whose assistance and support
have been of immense value to us. I wish to equally
thank the whole Secretariat team for their support,
especially during the Mauritian presidency. Last but
not least, I want to thank my own team, both those who
are sitting behind me and those who work behind the
scenes, for their dedication and hard work.

I would like to end my intervention by reading
out a quote from former President Clinton of the
United States, who has said that:

"We have no choice but to learn to live together,
to choose cooperation over conflict, to give
expression to our common humanity by following
simple rules: everyone deserves a chance;
everyone has a role to play; we all do better when
we work together; we are not as different as we
think".

