Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
children and armed conflict. I also thank the Secretary-
General for his ninth report on the issue, contained in
document S/2010/181. We believe that his
recommendations merit careful consideration and
subsequent implementation and compliance by
Member States and parties to armed conflict. Having
said that, I would like to mention that reporting might
preferably be confined to, and carefully concentrate on,
the mandates of the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

We commend the Security Council and its
Working Group for their continued efforts in ending
violations against children in armed conflict. Those
initiatives have yielded significant and tangible
successes. As reflected in the Secretary-General's
report, last year, too, several listed parties to armed
conflict signed agreements to adopt action plans to end
their recruitment or use of child soldiers. The United
Nations system-wide response to this issue is also
laudable. In that connection, I take this opportunity to
thank UNICEF for its leadership role in the monitoring
and reporting mechanism. The Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, and her team deserve our particular
praise for their dedicated efforts.

While addressing this matter, we have to focus a
bit more on the supply side of the issue. The use of
children by non-State armed groups does not take place
in a vacuum. A range of conditions, many of which
underlie the conflict itself, also make children
vulnerable to joining groups that participate in that
conflict. Conditions that might make children in those
settings vulnerable to recruitment include poverty,
discrimination, inequality, exclusion, hopelessness and
desperate situations. They also include a culture of
political violence, tensions over issues of religion and
identity and a history of the use of child soldiers, all of
which combine to create a situation where conflict is
possible and where children can be used or abused by
armed groups. Success in ending children's
involvement in armed conflicts therefore depends
largely on addressing the root causes of motivation and
desperation and on building societies where the rights
and dignity and the hope for a better future of all
children are upheld.
Needless to say, we still have a long way to go.
The pace of progress is still slow, and its impact is not
yet felt by the thousands of children in the ranks of
fighting forces. While progress has been made through
action plans to release child soldiers in several
situations of concern, the overall situation of children
in armed conflict remains grave. There are 55 entities
on the list contained in the annexes to the Secretary-
General's report, out of which 16 have been there for at
least 5 years. Some kind of enforcement criteria should
be contemplated to make parties listed in the annexes,
particularly persistent violators, comply fully with the
action plans in a time-bound manner. Caution,
however, has to be taken to make sure that such
enforcement in no way hurts the very vulnerable group
we are addressing here: children.

Peace remains the main hope for securing the
release of child soldiers from armed forces and groups.
While we appreciate the gradual expansion of child
protection provisions in peacekeeping missions, we
would nevertheless like to see such provisions be made
an integral part of the mandate of all ongoing and
future peacekeeping, political and peacebuilding
missions.

The issues of children under foreign occupation
need to be appropriately addressed. In line with
paragraph 198 of the Secretary-General's report, we
hope that all parties in situations of armed conflict will
adhere to international normative instruments
protecting educational facilities from attacks.

It has been 10 years since the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict entered into
force. We note with sadness that one third of the States
Members of the United Nations are still not party to it.
We would like to urge those States to become parties to
the Protocol. Children are the future of our world and
they bear the torch of the culture of peace. It is our
solemn duty to protect their physical safety and their
right to live on planet Earth with their minds free of
fear and filled with hopes and dreams.

