Mr. Cunningham (United States): Our
discussion today focuses on a tragic dimension of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo: the
continuing plunder of the country's natural wealth by
foreign invaders, by Congolese rebel groups, by self-
proclaimed allies of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and by the continuing corruption within the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
itself. It is an important discussion, and I am
particularly glad to see the high-level attendance that
we have today.

Taken together, the report of the Panel of Experts
on the illegal exploitation of natural resources, issued
in April, and the addendum to that report, issued in
November, give an accurate and compelling picture of
the theft of the natural patrimony of the Congolese
people. They also make it clear that it is the parties to
the conflict themselves, foreign and Congolese, who
can end this tragic situation if they have the political
will and courage to do so.

I want to address the addendum to the report,
which is our focus today. We commend Ambassador
Kassem and his Panel of Experts for the preparation of
a professional report, which, using sound methodology,
followed up on the leads identified in the initial Panel
of Experts report.

It is an act of courage to speak the truth to power,
and the Ambassador and his team of experts have
shown such courage in identifying for the international
community the foreign parties and their Congolese
proxies who are illegally exploiting the wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, prolonging the
conflict and hindering implementation of the Lusaka
peace process.

The very fact of this Panel's existence and its
work in documenting and informing the Council of the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
had a beneficial effect on the peace process. The first
report of the Panel of Experts produced concrete

results- Uganda's establishment, for example, of a
national Commission of Inquiry to investigate
allegations in the report.

We welcome the pledges that several countries
have made since the addendum was issued to
investigate allegations concerning their nationals.
Several Governments, however, refused to fully
cooperate with the Panel. We urge them, as well as all
other Governments whose nationals are mentioned in
the report, to investigate the allegations made and
report back to the Council. Each of us has an obligation
to cooperate with this type of investigation.

One Government which the Panel identified as
not cooperating with its work is Zimbabwe's. We are
greatly concerned about the Panel's conclusion that the
Government of Zimbabwe is the most active of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's allies involved in
the exploitation of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo's natural resources, and that this relationship
has been used by Zimbabwean officials for personal
enrichment.

It is important that the Council continue to let
those who are responsible for the theft of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's wealth know that
the Security Council is aware of this, will continue to
bring them to the world's attention and will seek to
assist in ending this plunder.

For this reason, the United States supports an
extension of the Panel's mandate for an additional six
months. During that time, the Panel should provide
recommendations for specific actions that the
international community, regional States and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
can take, working through existing international
organizations and United Nations agencies, to address
the issues in the addendum.

For instance, in the area of timber resources, the
United States is working with the African Timber
Organization to co-sponsor a conference on forest law,
enforcement and governance, which will be held in
2002 in the Republic of Congo and which will focus on
the Congo basin's forests. It would be useful for the
Panel to make specific recommendations that
conference participants could address within the
framework of the African Timber Organization to fight
illegal logging in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in the Congo basin.

Sll'V.4437

 

As the United States assessed the
recommendations in the addendum, we were guided by
the principle that the Council should take action which
will support the Lusaka peace process. Let me say a
word about those recommendations. First, let me say
that we have doubts about a moratorium banning the
import of gold, timber, coffee and other natural
resources from foreign-held and rebel-held areas of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Such a targeted
moratorium on resources from specific areas would
likely be unenforceable because of the difficulty of
tracking these kinds of commodities. It also seems
likely to us that such a moratorium would run the risk
of having a negative impact on the Congolese people
themselves. It might be more effective to address
export controls on natural resources through existing
international mechanisms. To address illegal logging in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example, as
I mentioned, the United States is working with the
International Tropical Timber Organization and with
the United Nations Forum on Forests. We urge other
States to join us in those efforts.

We support the Panel's call for a review by all
States in the region of their existing legislation to
determine whether new laws are needed to investigate
and prosecute illegal trafficking in the resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. But such a review
can take place without a moratorium having been
declared.

The report calls for a United Nations review of
the concession agreements entered into between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other
Governments and private entities. The Panel's call for a
review of concession contracts is sound and should be
pursued. We think that the review would be better
undertaken by organizations that already have the
expertise that is needed. It is not necessary to create a
new mechanism. The World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) are best positioned to undertake
the review of existing contracts between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other entities as
part of their renewed assistance to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The review should, of course,
be in full cooperation with the Government.

We strongly agree with the Panel's call for the
World Bank, the IMF and international donors to
evaluate their assistance to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in order to determine whether any of their
assistance is being diverted to finance the conflict in
the Great Lakes region. It is key for those entities to
bolster the transparency and efficiency of their
assistance programmes.

In conclusion, let me emphasize a key point in
my Government's approach to the issue of illegal
economic exploitation. The pursuit of the natural
wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo was
not the initial cause of the conflict in the country and in
the region. But, as the addendum to the report makes
particularly clear, the pursuit of that wealth is the
reason why many parties want the conflict to continue
and why they act to block the Lusaka peace process.
Those parties know that if Lusaka is implemented the
days of plundering the wealth of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will end. Our goal, therefore,
must continue to be the full implementation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. A peace based on the
Lusaka Agreement is the surest, and ultimately the
only, way to stop the crimes outlined in these reports as
well as to spark an economic renewal for the region.

It is now up to the leaders of the States and
groups identified in these reports to demonstrate the
courage and will to end this exploitation and to allow
the Lusaka peace process to bring peace to the region.

