The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Lebanon and Israel, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Salam
(Lebanon) and Mr. Carmon (Israel) took seats at
the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2008/583, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Belgium, Croatia, France,
Italy, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
Members also have before them document S/2008/425,
containing the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1701
(2006), and document 8/2008/568, containing the text
of a letter dated 21 August 2008 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhana's.

In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Viet
Nam


The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1832 (2008).

I now give the floor to the representative of
Israel.


