Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish
to thank you, Madam President, and the Nigerian
delegation for organizing this meeting. My delegation
is of the view that the briefings today afford us an
opportunity to reflect on, among other things, the role
played by the United Nations in general and by the
Council in particular, as well as the role of the relevant
actors at the national and regional levels in implementing
the security sector reform (SSR) agenda in various
contexts, including those outlined in resolution 2151
(2014). In that connection, I thank you, Madam, for the
detail concept note (S/2015/614, annex), which serves to
frame and conceptualize our discussion today.

I join other Council members in expressing
appreciation to Mr. Titov, Assistant Secretary-General
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict; and
Ms. Izumi Nakanitsu of United Nations Development
Programme, for sharing their Views and perspectives,
which have helped enrich our discussions today.

Iwish to echo the concern expressed by Ms. Bangura
in her earlier briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7428),
which highlighted, among other things, the disturbing
trend of increased instances of sexual violence,
including rape, sexual slavery and forced marriage,
particularly in the context of conflict situations and
increasing violent extremism. In certain instances,
security personnel are themselves guilty of practicing
such heinous acts. There can be no better example of
the need for SSR to become implemented in States than
the evidence of those charged with the responsibility of
protecting civilians.

On that note, Malaysia commends the Secretary-
General for taking decisive action in responding to
the allegations of sexual violence by United Nations
peacekeepers. All troop-contributing countries,
including those contributing national forces, must
maintain vigilance and not hesitate to investigate and,
where appropriate, hold perpetrators to account to
ensure that there is no impunity.

In reaffirming support for resolution 2151
(2014) and its continuing implementation, I wish to
elaborate on the issue of SSR in the context of post-
conflict peacebuilding. Indeed, the importance of
security sector reform was among the themes raised
during the Council's informal interactive dialogue on
peacebuilding on 25 June. Certain key points emanating
from that exchange could, in my delegation's view,
frame possible responses to the challenges, questions
and issues raised in the concept note for today's meeting.

For instance, Malaysia highlights that given its
unique convening role, the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) is well placed to coordinate the participation ofa
wide array of critical regional and international actors
to assist concerned countries, including on reform of
their security sector. By bringing together security and
development actors, the PBC can perform a bridging role
between United Nations principal organs and actors,
thereby addressing fragmentation and the duplication
of efforts. In the context of reforming the security
sector, which itself is a precursor to establishing an
environment conducive tosustainable development and
peace, this is a crucial element. At the same time, the
inclusive nature of the PBC membership, drawn from
the general membership of the United Nations and the
Council, along with other actors, means that it is also
well placed to ensure that national priorities could be
factored into the Council's mandate design process.
That element is particularly crucial to ensuring the
buy-in of concerned countries regarding possible SSR
initiatives.

Through its partnerships with regional
organizations and international and national financial
institutions, the PBC could help sustain the attention
and commitment of the international community
towards national peacebuilding priorities, with a focus
on addressing drivers of conflict and building resilient
institutions, including the SSR agenda. Within the
context of existing peace operations, it is conceivable
that such assistance could be provided in the draw-
down phase. That said, it is worth highlighting that SSR
efforts need not necessarily follow armed conflict.

The United Nations and a number of regional
organizations have a wealth of experience and have
to date built up a substantial corpus of knowledge
on security sector reform. The fact that the majority
of United Nations peacekeeping operations contain
SSR components, each with its own peculiarity and
adaptation to the situation and specific needs on the
ground, indicates that the design and implementation
of the SSR agenda must continue to be the product of
close cooperation and collaboration among the United
Nations, the concerned country and other relevant
actors. In that connection, Malaysia is encouraged
to note that the implementation of the African
Union's policy framework on security sector reform
is proceeding apace at the national, subregional and
regional levels.

On the donor side, we note the strong frameworks
under which the European Union, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development are assisting the overall security sector
reform agenda. Ongoing efforts are necessary to
coordinate actions and efforts between both donor and
recipient with a View tseeking mutually satisfactory
outcomes to the reform agenda.

On a related note, efforts aimed at curbing the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and their
munitions, especially in conflict situations, deserve
our full commitment and support. Malaysia strongly
believes that limiting the supply and availability of
such weapons could effectively contribute to peace
initiatives and to post-conflict peacebuilding. It is for
that reason, among others, that Malaysia co-sponsored
resolution 2220 (2015), adopted on 22 May.

In conclusion, allow me to recap certain key points
that I believe could be useful in taking forward the SSR
agenda, as follows. First, SSR initiatives, particularly
those spearheaded by the United Nations orother
multilateral or regional actors, should remain inclusive
and take into account national priorities, thereby
ensuring the buy-in of concerned countries. Secondly,
SSR must be recognized as not a exclusively technical
but also a political exercise. A certain level of flexibility
must be built into SSR initiatives, particularly at both
the design and implementation phase. Thirdly, regular
coordination among the various actors, including those
within the United Nations system, is crucial to ensuring
that efforts are not fragmented or duplicated. Finally,
a key element of SSR should be a focus on limiting
the supply of small arms and light weapons and their
munitions to conflict situations.

