Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, allow me to thank Secretary-General
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Stephen O'Brien, for
their briefings.

Uruguay expresses its deep concern about the
current situation affecting South Sudan. The worsening
violence, in particular since July, has had devastating
consequences for civilians. There have been widespread
violations of human rights law and humanitarian law,
including extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances,
rapes and other acts of sexual violence, arbitrary arrests
and imprisonment, attacks against civilians and attacks
against medical facilities, humanitarian assistance
workers, medical personnel and media workers. Some
human rights violations are increasingly taking on an
ethnic nature, and hate speech is increasing throughout
the whole country, which is extremely alarming, given
the fact that it could lead to large-scale atrocities.
Furthermore, the humanitarian crisis in the country is
increasing in scope and intensity as a result ofthe armed
conflict in several parts of the country, the exacerbation
of the food-security situation and the worsening of the
economic situation.

The United Nations figures are disturbing: more
than 1 million refugees, more than 1.6 million internally
displaced persons and almost 5 million people who are
in a state of acute food insecurity. After the Security
Council mission to the country last September, we
returned very aware of what has happened there.
Uruguay calls upon all the parties involved in the
conflict and on the entire international community
to bring an end to the suffering of civilians in South
Sudan. The situation is unsustainable.

In that connection, we must continuously remind
the Government that its main responsibility is that of
protecting its own citizens and that it should provide that
protection regardless of their ethnic origin or political
affiliation. Also, the political leaders of South Sudan
must behave responsibly and reject any incitement to
violence, while opting for the path of dialogue. In the
final analysis, they must honour their leadership.

On this point, we take note ofthe statement delivered
by the President of South Sudan, Mr. Salva Kiir, on
14 December, when he announced the beginning of a
national dialogue process. We hope that that process
will truly be inclusive in nature. We urge all the
parties to join in a dialogue process, with a view to
achieving reconciliation and peace in the country, just
as happened five years ago, when South Sudan became
an independent country. Today we must seek unity and
pluralism, which is the only way to put the country on
the path towards stability and development.

Lastly, I would like to mention the work of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
whose mandate was renewed unanimously a few days
ago by the Council. It is crucial for UNMISS to be
able to fulfil its mandate fully. We therefore urge the
Government of South Sudan to fully cooperate with
the implementation of resolution 2327 (2016), including
the deployment of the Regional Protection Force, as
well as lifting any restriction on the Mission. Neither
UNMISS nor the Regional Protection Force are against
the Sudan. To the contrary, they are for South Sudan.

In conclusion, I would like to wish every success
to the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of UNMISS, Mr. David Shearer, and
assure him of my delegation's support and cooperation.

