Ms. Lingenfelder (South Africa): South Africa
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation
to this important debate on conflict prevention and
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
insightful briefing, and we would also like to pay tribute
to Ms. Navi Pillay, outgoing United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, for her hard work
and commitment in working to ensure the protection
and promotion of human rights for all humankind. In
the same breath, we welcome Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid
Al-Hussein of Jordan's appointment as the new High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and we look forward
to working with him.

South Africa aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and with that to be delivered by the
representative of the Republic of Zimbabwe on behalf
of the Southern African Development Community.

South Africa has long recognized the importance
of conflict prevention in averting such outbreaks.
Besides the humanitarian consequences of conflict, the
escalation ofpeacekeeping costs over the years has also
required that the international community focus more
on preventing conflicts rather than merely managing
them once they have started. Conflict prevention is
anchored in the text of the Charter of the United Nations,
specifically in Chapter VI, which gives the Security
Council a substantive toolkit for the pacific settlement
of disputes and the maintenance of international peace
and security, including negotiation, inquiry, mediation,
conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to
regional agencies or arrangements or other peaceful
means of the parties' choice.

We welcome the progress the United Nations has
already made through a plethora of initiatives such as
the good offices of the Secretary-General, the creation
of special envoys, the establishment of an early-
warning system and the Mediation Support Unit, and
the deployment of special political missions, country
teams and regional offices, as well as other diplomatic
initiatives aimed at preventing conflicts. Security
Council action should support such efforts rather than
be at odds with them. We have seen occasions where
the Council's actions have undermined United Nations
and regional efforts to mediate conflicts peacefully.

As a member of the Friends of Mediation, South
Africa is part of an effort by Member States of the
General Assembly to reset the focus on preventive
measures for conflict management, and we urge all
Member States, including Council members, to heed the
Assembly's call for the provision of sustained political
support, expertise and timely and adequate resources
both for mediation efforts and for implementing agreed-
on outcomes of mediation processes. It is critical that
we ensure predictable resources for mediation efforts
and for support to United Nations mediation capacity-
building activities and those of regional and subregional
organizations.

Africa continues to bear the brunt ofviolent conflicts.
For that reason, the African Union has worked tirelessly
since its inception to establish a comprehensive Peace
and Security Architecture founded on the recognition
that both preventive diplomacy and post-conflict
reconstruction and development are key to eradicating
conflicts on the continent. In our subregion, the
Southern African Development Community continues
to play a critical role in ensuring subregional stability.
In that context, the region's Organ on Politics, Defence
and Security, which South Africa is soon to chair,
has undertaken mediation efforts to quell potential
conflicts. The efforts of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) to end conflict
in that region are a welcome step. In that regard, we
would like to urge that the Nairobi declaration signed
in December 2013 be fully implemented as soon as
possible. South Africa looks forward to participating in
the Great Lakes Private Sector Investment Conference,
to be organized in December by the Special Envoy for
the Great Lakes Region of Africa in collaboration with
the ICGLR.

The mechanisms that the African Union has put in
place in this area testify to the continent's commitment
to addressing peace and security challenges in a
comprehensive manner. With that in mind, the African
Union has always striven to deepen its partnership
with the United Nations on matters relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security, while
at the same time recognizing that the peaceful resolution
of disputes remains a sovereign responsibility. The
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union for maintaining peace and security is
informed by the reality that regional organizations have
a comparative advantage in confronting such challenges
within their regions. All of these efforts are anchored
in the United Nations Charter, particularly Article 33,
which establishes mediation as one of the diplomatic
methods for the pacific settlement of disputes. As the
nature of conflicts has tended to change, becoming
intra- rather than inter-State, preventive diplomacy
has become an indispensable tool for both the United
Nations and regional organizations.

In the last few years, we have witnessed a
reduction in the number of violent conflicts as a result
of the collective efforts of the United Nations, the
international community and regional organizations.
However, many countries' recent relapses into conflict
are disconcerting, and we need to work together to
prevent the loss of hard-earned gains.

In conclusion, South Africa strongly believes that
dialogue is critical. We therefore hold the view that
in preventing lapses and relapses into conflict, we
must always underscore the importance of creating
and maintaining peace through inclusive dialogue,
reconciliation and reintegration. In developing
mechanisms for early warning and conflict prevention,
our efforts should always be made in the context of
the rule of law, with respect for national sovereignty
and in line with the Charter of the United Nations.
Finding a global strategy for conflict prevention,
including traditional means of mediation as well as
the peacekeeping and peacebuilding methods deployed
under the Charter, is essential. We firmly believe that
socioeconomic development, lying at the heart of
conflict prevention, is a critical component for realizing
sustainable peace and can help develop economic
opportunities in countries affected by conflict.

