The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

Every month, the Security Council convenes a
meeting on the Middle East. We have lots of meetings
on specific countries and conflicts in the region but
today's debate is our opportunity to talk about the
Middle East as a whole. It is our opportunity to look
at the threats that go beyond one country's borders, the
threats that affect not just every country in the Middle
East but all too often every single one of us.
Regrettably, these monthly meetings routinely turn
into Israel-bashing sessions. That is the way the Security
Council has operated for years. It is a formula that is
absurdly biased against one country. It is a formula that
is painfully narrow in its description of the conflicts
in the region. And it is a formula that does nothing
to help find solutions. The truth is these Security
Council meetings do not do anyone in the region any
favours, least of all the Israelis and the Palestinians.
These meetings do nothing to bring the parties closer
together; they actually work to push the two sides apart.
The United States firmly believes that peace is possible
between Israel and the Palestinians, and we are actively
working towards that goal. Peace will only come
from direct negotiations, not from one-sided Security
Council meetings and one-sided resolutions.

These biased discussions on the Middle East also
impose a real cost. Threats are evolving and do not fit
neatly within borders. By limiting itself, the Council
ignores the pressing rights that are right in front of us.
We should be asking these monthly Middle East sessions
to talk about the factors that cause conflict across the
region. I thank Mr. Mladenov for his remarks today and
for the fact that he went beyond the usual Israel-bashing
and touched on the border issues plaguing the region.
I will do the same and I encourage other countries to
do the same as well. By breaking out of old, familiar,
counterproductive patterns, we might actually achieve
something valuable.

If we are speaking honestly about conflict in the
Middle East, we need to start with the chief culprit,
Iran, and its partner militia Hizbullah. Iran and
Hizbullah conspire together to destabilize the Middle
East and their actions are expanding. For decades, they
have committed terrorist acts across the region. Today,
they prop up Bashar Al-Assad's brutality, fighting
alongside his forces, adding to the killing of thousands
of civilians and the misery of millions ofrefugees. They
train deadly militias in Iraq and arm Houthi militants
in Yemen. While the Council has paid too little attention
to this growing menace, the United States will not. We
are going to speak up about Iran and Hizbullah, and we
are going to act against their lawlessness.
In Lebanon, Hizbullah, a terrorist organization,
uses towns to shield its arsenals of tens of thousands
of illegal rockets. In Syria, Hizbullah controls territory
on the ground. With Iran's instructions, its militias
stand side by side with Syrian troops as they slaughter
the Syrian people. Sometimes, Hizbullah is the one
giving orders to Al-Assad's fighters. Hizbullah helped
Al-Assad starve and destroy Aleppo. According
to press reports, when supporters of the Syrian
regime die in battle, they sometimes come back with
Hizbullah flags on their coffins. As one activist said
recently, "Hizbullah designs it, and the Syrian regime
wears it". They are reportedly even recruiting Syrian
children to join pro-Hizbullah youth groups so they can
indoctrinate a new generation, in a new country, with
its toxic ideology.

Hizbullah is a terrorist group spreading its
influence across the Middle East with the backing of
a State sponsor. Iran is using Hizbullah to advance
its regional aspirations. They are working together to
expand extremist ideologies in the Middle East. That is
a threat that should be dominating our discussion at the
Security Council.

The United States is not waiting to respond. We
have imposed targeted sanctions on Iran's Islamic
Revolutionary Guard and its Ministry of Intelligence
for their support of the Al-Assad regime. We recently
designated for sanctions members of Iranian-backed
terrorist organizations in Bahrain. Iran remains a
designated State sponsor of terror, and we continue
to enforce all sanctions related to Iran's support for
terrorism and destabilizing activities in the region. The
United States will work even harder with its partners
and allies to disrupt Iran's support for militant and
terrorist groups.

All States Members of the United Nations must live
up to their obligations. Iran's ballistic missile tests defy
Security Council resolutions and further undermine
the stability of the region. We call on all States to
fully implement resolution 2231 (2015), which bans
the transfer of weapons to and from Iran, as well as
the arms embargoes against the Houthis in resolution
2216 (2015) and for Lebanon in resolution 1701 (2006).
The United States will work closely with our partners
to document and address any actions that violate these
resolutions. We must take a stand against Iran and
Hizbullah's illegal and dangerous behaviour.

How one chooses to spend one's time is an
indication of one's priorities. The same is true for the
Security Council. The Israeli-Palestinian issue is an
important one, deserving of attention, but that is one
issue that surely has no lack of attention by the Security
Council. The incredibly destructive nature of Iranian
and Hizbullah activities throughout the Middle East
demands much more of our attention. It should become
the Council's priority in the region.

I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.

I want to remind everyone to please respect the
speakers and take conversations outside so that they
can say what they need to say.

I now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.

