Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): My delegation would like to wish His Excellency
Ambassador Merimee every success in his new post in
Rome. Through various contacts, we have been able to see
and appreciate his outstanding human qualities and his
diplomatic abilities. My delegation wishes him Godspeed.

My delegation would first of all like to thank the
Secretary-General for his twelfth report on the Observer
Mission in Liberia. We find its contents to be positive and
very encouraging with regard to current developments in
Liberia. My delegation welcomes the success of
negotiations in Abuja which led to the signing by all
parties of an agreement and the setting up a new Council
of State for a period of one year until the holding of
elections. In this regard, we should like to commend the
Heads of State of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) who were able to bring the
various factions to the same table in order to establish this
Council of State.

My delegation would also like to congratulate the
cease-fire Monitoring Group of ECOWAS (ECOMOG),
which succeeded in maintaining peace in spite of the
scope of the conflict and the meagre means made
available to it. The conflict in Liberia and the steps taken
to set up a Council of State are further proof of the ability
of regional and sub-regional African organizations to put
an end to conflicts in the region.

My delegation is convinced that the United Nations,
and the Security Council in particular, are not able to put
an end to conflict in the region without the participation
of regional and sub-regional African organizations. That
is why we most earnestly recommend cooperation
between the Security Council and the Secretariat and the
African regional organizations.

Even though the United Nations functions within a
system with a Western bent, Africa remains a continent
which has been characterized for many centuries as one
of dialogue, and it is important for the Security Council
to deal with it as such. It is important that time be given
to adversaries to get together to negotiate and solve their
own problems. That is why the Heads of State of the
Economic Community of West African States and
ECOMOG were able to start - and have just
achieved - something which seemed impossible, in spite
of meagre logistical resources and economic difficulties.
The United Nations and the international community have
a moral obligation to help ECOMOG to carry out its task
successfully. We are delighted that the Security Council
has agreed to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) so that it may
continue to participate in the peace process in Liberia.

We cannot speak of peace in Liberia without talking
about development. The demobilization of some tens of
thousands of combatants, including children, requires an

 

enormous economic effort in order to involve these active
forces in the economy and ensure schooling for children.
This demobilization should be funded by the international
community so as to avoid new recruitment of demobilized
individuals in other military adventures.

We agree with the recommendations of the Secretary-
General regarding UNOMIL's participation in
demobilization and disarmament, and also in defining socio-
economic areas in which the demobilized combatants might
be involved. We fully agree with his recommendation
regarding the national police force in order to maintain
public order and peace and create a law-abiding State.

We most earnestly call for financial support for
ECOMOG, so that it may maintain peace throughout the
country and ensure respect for the Abuja Agreement and
the proper functioning of the new Council of State which
has just been set up.

We would like to conclude by requesting you, Sir, as
current President, and all your successors between now and
December to fulfil the wish of one member of the Security
Council: that African countries no longer appear on the
agenda of the Council by the end of 1995. With the help
of all, it is possible.

