Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): It is
my honour to address the Security Council today in the
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. I thank the presidency for
convening an open debate on this matter, which has
been the focus of attention and concern on the part of
the international community for decades. I also thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his briefing.

Chile associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

My country has consistently supported the right of
the Palestinian people to form an independent State
coexisting in peace with the State of Israel. Similarly,
we have fully supported the right of the State of Israel to
exist within secure and internationally recognized
borders. In order to achieve those aims, the Government
of Chile considers imperative and resolutely supports
the relaunching of the negotiation process between the
two parties, with the support of the international
community, in order to achieve a comprehensive,
definitive and satisfactory peace agreement in
accordance with the resolutions of the United Nations.

The continuation of the Israeli Government's
policy of settlement construction is a serious obstacle
to this process, and we call for its immediate
suspension, as stated in the draft resolution submitted
to the Council, of which my delegation is a sponsor.

The Government of Chile, on the seventh of this
month, recognized the existence of Palestine as a free,
independent and sovereign State. In that recognition,
the Government of Chile made particular mention of
the Jewish and Palestinian communities in Chile
because of their valuable support for the country's
social, cultural, political and economic development
over many decades, and for their full integration into
our society. Their fraternal coexistence has been a clear
example of good relations, which we hope will serve as
an inspiration to the States of Israel and Palestine, a
point that I reiterate that today in this Chamber.

