Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Allow me to
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for scheduling
yet another public meeting on the situation in East
Timor. We are particularly happy to have with us once
again Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We are
grateful to him for the informative and useful briefing
on the latest developments. I would like to add that we
are happy to see Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta among us
today.

We always find the opportunity to meet and
exchange views on East Timor very useful. The reason
for this is that the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) has a
distinctive character. While most of the United Nations
missions are passing through difficult stages, we look
up to UNTAET as one which, despite known
constraints and the enormity of the task, has been able
to achieve a lot. We once again commend Mr. Vieira de
Mello for his leadership and perseverance.

We believe the United Nations and all the
Member States have a great stake in the success of
UNTAET. The need to remind us about this lies in the
fact that the period since Mr. Vieira de Mello's last
visit to the Council has been a difficult one, both for
UNTAET and for the Council. Last June we were
looking ahead, speaking about the issues relating to the
independence of East Timor, the launching of
consultations for developing a constitution, security
requirements and capacity-building in vital areas.
There also had been with us for some time the thought
of whether the military component of UNTAET could
be gradually reduced.

We were, of course, quite concerned by the
continuing violence and intimidation perpetrated by the
armed militia against the refugees and aid workers and
incidents of cross border incursions, all of which,
cumulatively, translated into a halting of the
repatriation process.

More than all that, today we are confronted with a
problem of a larger dimension. The burning down of
the office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR)in Atambua and the killing of
three of its personnel have radically changed the
situation in West Timor, jeopardizing, as never before,
the safety and security of the refugees and the
prospects for their repatriation to East Timor. The
Council took serious note of this and unanimously
adopted resolution 1319 (2000).

Today we are talking about the violent mindset of
a group of people who have crossed all limits of
humane behaviour. This raises legitimate questions
about our commitment to protecting the innocent,
justice, peace and security. The perpetrators of these
violent acts cannot be allowed to derail the positive
progress made by UNTAET in East Timor.

The Council is resolute in condemning the
outrageous and contemptible acts committed by the
armed militia against the United Nations personnel.
Such crimes should not go unpunished, as that, in our
view, would weaken the very basis of relations between
the United Nations and its Member States.
We believe that the Government of Indonesia is
conscious of its responsibility in this matter. We see
this reflected in President Wahid's recent
pronouncements. We welcome his resolve to take steps
in the context of the implementation of resolution 1319
(2000). Special Envoy Yudhoyono's meeting with the
Council, the four-point plan that he elaborated before
the Council and the steps that have since been taken by
the Government demonstrate that resolve. We also
recognize the need for high visibility results of these
steps.

We are very much concerned at the plight of the
refugees still living in camps in West Timor,
unprotected, insecure and under the looming threat of
further violence and penury. With the complete
withdrawal of the international aid agencies, they are
like a ticking humanitarian time bomb. We understand
that UNHCR cannot return to West Timor until there is
a credible security guarantee. In this situation, the
Government of Indonesia needs to act quickly and
firmly to be able to provide the security, sooner rather
than later. In the interim, the refugees must be fed,
sheltered and protected.

We feel strongly the need to maintain a line of
communication between the Council and the
Government of Indonesia. The Council should be taken
into confidence and consulted. Its role consists, not in
undermining the Government, which has the task of
implementing resolution 1319 (2000), but in assisting
and advising the Government. An eventual Council
mission should be viewed in that context, as a useful
instrument that could bring positive opportunity and
support for the Government. There is no scope for a
role any different. In this regard, we look forward to
the early October visit to New York by Foreign
Minister Shihab, or a high-level special envoy of the
Indonesian Government if the Minister is not available.

