Ms. Bensouda: At the outset, I would like to
congratulate the People's Republic of China on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of November. I wish you, Sir, every success in
steering the essential work conducted by the Council.

I welcome the opportunity to engage with the
Council once again in relation to the Libya situation
and to provide updates regarding ongoing cases and
investigations, outstanding warrants of arrest and
cooperation with States, the organs of the United
Nations and other organizations.

As members of the Council will recall, in June 2011
the Pre-Trial Chamber of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) issued the first warrants of arrest in
the situation in Libya. Over seven years later, Libya
remains a high-priority situation for my Office. Three
additional ICC warrants of arrest have been issued
following applications brought by my Office during
this period, and my team continues to make significant
progress in investigations related to other alleged
crimes in Libya. Since my last report (see S/PV.8250),
we have also piloted new models of cooperation with
interested States and organizations in relation to alleged
crimes committed against migrants transiting through
Libya. My Office hopes to replicate these models for
cooperation in other situations before the Court and
thereby further contribute to the fight against impunity.

I now turn to recent developments in the case
against Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi. As members
of the Council are aware, in June 2011 the Pre-Trial
Chamber of the Court issued a warrant of arrest against
Mr. Al-Qadhafi for the crimes against humanity of
murder and persecution. This warrant of arrest was
issued in relation to Mr. Al-Qadhafi's contribution, as
de facto Prime Minister of Libya, to a common plan
to deter and quell, by any means, the demonstrations
against the rule of Muammar Al-Qadhafi in 2011.

On 5 June earlier this year, Mr. Gaddafi filed an
admissibility challenge, submitting that his case is
inadmissible before the ICC. Significantly, in his
challenge, Mr. Al-Qadhafi states that on or around
12 April 2016, he was released from the custody of the
Abu-Bakr Al-Siddiq Battalion in Zintan, pursuant to
an amnesty law. Mr. Al-Qadhafi also argues that as a
consequence of the domestic proceedings conducted
against him in Libya, he cannot be tried at the ICC.

For the reasons set out in my written response
to this admissibility challenge, which was filed on
28 September, I argued that Mr. Al-Qadhafi's case
remains admissible before the Court. My sixteenth
report, transmitted to the Council two weeks ago,
briefly outlines my submissions. My Office maintains
that Mr. Al-Qadhafi must be arrested and surrendered
to the Court. This admissibility challenge is currently
sub judice and the Pre-Trial Chamber will render a
decision in due course. I will therefore not delve any
deeper into the factual and legal arguments in relation
to this specific matter.

Turning to our ongoing investigations, my Office
continues to make considerable progress on the Libya
situation. We continue to monitor criminal conduct
carried out by members of armed groups in Libya whose
alleged criminal acts could fall within the jurisdiction
of the Court. Armed groups use violence to exert
control over State institutions, commit serious human
rights violations, and abuse and exploit detainees in
unregulated prisons and places of detention throughout
the country. These armed groups represent a major
threat to long-term peace and stability in Libya. We
do not confine our investigations to any one group;
we look at alleged Rome Statute crimes committed by
actors across the territory of Libya. More information
regarding the nature of these investigations cannot be
divulged at the present due to the confidential nature
of investigations. Based on the progress made, my
Office hopes to be in a position to apply for new arrest
warrants in connection with the Libya situation.

I also remain focused on the alleged Rome Statute
crimes committed against migrants transiting through
Libya. The journeys these people embark upon can
quickly turn into true nightmare scenarios in which
they become victims of the darkest side of human
nature and they are preyed upon mercilessly and their
vulnerabilities exploited with no regard for decency or
the rule of law. My Office continues to receive evidence
of serious crimes committed against migrants in Libya.
These alleged crimes include killings, sexual violence,
torture and enslavement. In line with my June 2014
policy paper on sexual and gender-based crimes, my
Office integrates a gender perspective and analysis into
these and all other investigations.

My Office recognizes that to effectively respond to
these serious crimes, not only must they be addressed
in Libya, but the criminal networks that facilitate
such activities operating outside of Libya must also
face justice. A multi-layered and multi-party strategy
is therefore required to tackle the web of crimes that
thrive in the context of migration through Libya. To that
end, my Office continues to work collaboratively with
various States, including Libya, as well as international
law-enforcement organizations. Information on crimes
committed against migrants in Libya and on the
business model used to perpetuate these horrific crimes
is gathered, shared and analysed. We engage in this
coordinated effort in the spirit of complementarity and
in line with goal 9 of my Office's strategic plan.

Pursuant to that cooperation model, efforts are
being made to identify which entities are best placed to
investigate or prosecute alleged crimes and determine
what further support other partners can provide. The aim
is to close the impunity gap at national, transnational
and international levels and to hold accountable all
those who commit those alleged crimes. I am pleased
to inform the Council that the cooperation strategy is
proving effective. My Office also continues to benefit
from, and is grateful for, the excellent cooperation it
receives from the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya and the Libyan Prosecutor-General's Office.

As members are aware, within the Rome Statute
system of international criminal justice, the arrest and
surrender of ICC suspects remains one of the most
challenging issues for my Office and the ICC as a
whole. There can be no justice for the victims, and the
aims of prevention and deterrence are hindered, unless
ICC suspects are arrested and transferred to the Court
to stand trial. Contrary to the urging of members of
the Council, and despite concerted efforts by my Office
and the Registry of the Court, not one suspect in the
Libya situation has been surrendered to the ICC.

Mr. Al-Qadhafi is at large and, despite his self-
claimed release from custody over two years ago, he
has shown no intention of surrendering himself to the
Court or to the competent authorities in Libya.

In relation to Mr. Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled,
former head of the Libyan Internal Security Agency,
the Council will recall that, in April 2017, upon my
request, the Pre-Trial Chamber made public a warrant
originally issued under seal in April 2013. While under
seal, the warrant remained unexecuted for more than
four years, despite diligent efforts by the Registry and
my Office. I hoped that unsealing the warrant of arrest
could facilitate Mr. Al-Tuhamy's arrest and surrender to
the Court. It is deeply regrettable that Mr. Al-Tuhamy
remains at large.

Concerning the case of Mr. Mahmoud Mustafa
Busayf Al-Werfalli, a commander in the Al-Saiqa
Brigade operating in and around Benghazi, the Council
will recall that, on 15 August 2017, the Pre-Trial
Chamber of the Court issued an arrest warrant against
him, having found reasonable grounds to believe
that he is criminally responsible for seven execution
incidents resulting in the murder of 33 individuals.
Mr. Al-Werfalli is yet another ICC suspect not yet
arrested and surrendered to the Court.

Furthermore, despite repeated claims by the Libyan

National Army that Mr. Al-Werfalli had been arrested
and is being investigated, he is alleged to have murdered
an additional 10 people earlier this year, on 24 January,
in Benghazi, I reacted by filing a second application
under seal for a warrant of arrest for Mr. Al-Werfalli
in connection with that alleged execution. On 4 July,
the Pre-Trial Chamber issued a second public warrant
of arrest for Mr. Al-Werfalli for the alleged war crime
of murder.

Mr. Al-Werfalli is alleged to have committed war
crimes. He must be apprehended and surrendered to
the Court to answer those serious charges. The Court's
legal proceedings will afford him, as for every ICC
suspect, all due process rights guaranteed under the
Rome Statute.

Information obtained through our ongoing
investigations indicates that Mr. Al-Qadhafi and
Mr. Al-Werfalli are in Libya, while Mr. Al-Tuhamy
is outside Libya. If ICC fugitives are permitted to
remain at large, the mandate of the Court to hold those
responsible for the most serious crimes of concern
to the international community will continue to be
frustrated and the Council's referral of the situation in
Libya to the ICC will be rendered ineffective. My Office
will continue to do its part pursuant to its obligations
under the Rome Statute. The Council also bears a
responsibility to support such work following its referral
of the situation to the ICC. Moreover, States parties and
non-States parties should take all the necessary steps
to effect the arrest and surrender of those fugitives
to the ICC. In the absence of effective accountability
for atrocity crimes, impunity will continue to reign in
Libya, causing greater suffering and instability.

Allow me to observe that I very much welcomed
the convening of the first Arria Formula meeting on
relations between the Council and the ICC, which was
held in July on the eve of the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of the Rome Statute. Co-sponsored
by the Kingdom of the Netherlands and other ICC
State parties on the Council, the meeting provided
a unique opportunity to reflect on the important
relationship between my Office - and, more broadly,
the Court - and the Council and to make proposals on
ways to strengthen that relationship. I wish to reiterate
my gratitude to all co-sponsoring States, the Council
and all who contributed to those productive discussions.

The ICC seeks independent and impartial justice
through individual criminal accountability for grave
crimes that threaten the peace, security and well-being
of the world, in an effort to end impunity and contribute
to the prevention of such crimes. The primary
responsibility of the Council is the maintenance of
international peace and security. Our two institutions
must therefore work together if we are to achieve our
different, yet mutually reinforcing, mandates.

I conclude by expressing my appreciation for the
continued support members of the Council offer in
relation to the difficult but essential work my Office
carries out in connection with the Libya situation.
During my previous briefing, in May, many here
today recognized the ICC's important work in tackling
impunity for serious crimes of international concern
and contributing to the maintenance of peace and
security. A number of Council members offered their
support and cooperation in relation to the arrest and
surrender of individuals subject to ICC warrants of
arrest. Those genuine expressions of support are very
welcome. However, I respectfully submit that those
words must be complemented by real action in support
of the ICC.

Approximately twenty years have passed since
the Rome Statute was adopted. I continue to believe
that the creation of the ICC must surely be one of
humankind's proudest moments. Yet we have much
work to do, and tangible support by that Council is vital
to the realization of the ICC's full potential to address
impunity for the world's most serious crimes. I look
forward to effective support and concrete action from
the Council to ensure that our separate, yet interlinked,
mandates can positively contribute to the cause of
peace, stability and justice in Libya.

