Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): Allow me to convey
Nigeria's appreciation to the French presidency for
convening this timely discussion on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as the country enters the critical
stabilization phase. I join other delegations in thanking
the Secretary-General for his informative briefing. My
delegation welcomes the presence of Mr. Raymond
Tshibanda, Minister for International and Regional
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
for enriching our discussion with the perspectives of
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We also welcome the presence of the
representatives of the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Bank and the European Union.

Nigeria welcomes the steady progress being
achieved in the major sectors of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Most of the country is now
conflict-free, relations with neighbours have
normalized, and economic and social reconstruction
efforts are under way. That progress, however, is taking
place in a fragile environment fraught with serious
challenges. Insecurity is still rife in the eastern part of
the country, with persistent threats from the Forces
de'mocratiques de liberation du Rwanda and the Lord's
Resistance Army, and violations of human rights,
including sexual violence, are still evident in North and
South Kivu provinces. The limited capacity of the
Government to maintain nationwide security also
remains an issue of great concern.

Considering the magnitude of those challenges, it
is fitting that this debate was convened not least to
demonstrate our shared belief that the challenges are
surmountable if the right combination of military,
political and institutional solutions are found. Nigeria
therefore welcomes the Government's determination.
We share its vision for consolidating its efforts,
exercising full sovereignty within its territory and
empowering national institutions.

With presidential and legislative elections on the
horizon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
poised to enter an era of credible governance. In order
not to lose the momentum that has gathered, it is
important to ensure strict adherence to the electoral
calendar. If executed well, the elections will pave the
way for genuine national reconciliation and
reintegration. We are certain that this goal can be
realized with the unwavering support of the
international community.

Without durable institutions, particularly in the
security and judicial sectors, the fight against
insecurity, impunity and human rights violations will
be difficult to achieve in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We therefore call on the international
community, including the donor community and other
development partners, to redouble their efforts in
assisting the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the
areas of capacity-building, security sector reform,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
judicial sector reform. Such reforms are indispensable
to strengthening the capacity of the Government to
extend security across the county and to create a fertile
economic environment for building the future of the
country.

Recent economic achievements, including
improved economic growth, reaching the completion
point of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt
Initiative and increased Government revenue, are solid
foundations for sustained peacebuilding.

The continued illegal exploitation of natural
resources by armed groups and elements of the
Congolese army, despite agreements on the
establishment of a regional certification mechanism to
curb it, remains a worrisome trend. Those activities
exacerbate conflict and deprive the Government of
valuable revenues that are critical to supporting the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's development
priorities. The need to put an end to those activities
cannot be overemphasized.

At the regional level, building on the
rapprochement between the Congo, Rwanda and
Uganda, the opportunity exists for greater interaction
and cooperation to tackle residual security problems.

As the Council discusses the future of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, it is our hope that
due cognizance will be taken of two tensions inherent
in the country, namely, a long history of resentment of
external involvement in what are regarded as the
internal affairs of the country, on the one hand, and a
dogged determination to remain united as a single
country despite all odds, on the other. The lesson we
draw from this is that there is a need for national
ownership of development priorities and strategies, the
coordination of aid and the need to respond to national
priorities.

Let me conclude by expressing Nigeria's
appreciation to the personnel of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for their
continuing support to the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The proactive and
robust nature of its activities, despite the reduction in
troop strength, is particularly commendable. In this
important phase in the life of the country, it is
inevitable that MONUSCO aligns itself with the
changes taking place and responds to the areas of
greatest need in the country, including security, the
protection of civilians, targeted support for the armed
forces and the forthcoming elections. We must do all
we can to support them in their efforts.

