Mr. Diab (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me the floor once again
and for giving me the opportunity to respond to what
was mentioned in the statement by Israel, containing
lies and false claims.

The Israeli representative claimed that his
Government has implemented resolution 425 (1978) in
compliance with international legitimacy. Everyone
knows that Israel has continued to occupy southern
Lebanon for 22 years in flagrant defiance of that
resolution and would not have withdrawn had it not
been for the heroic Lebanese resistance and the
complete support of the Government of Lebanon.

Lebanese resistance of Israel would never have
arisen had it not been for Israel's refusal to implement
resolution 425 (1978) throughout the 22 years of its
occupation of southern Lebanon. On the basis of the
narrow political interests of one member of the
Security Council, the Security Council failed to compel
Israel to implement a single one of its resolutions
through those 22 years, leading to the death of
thousands of Lebanese civilians and to widespread
destruction of our infrastructure, from which we
continue to suffer to this day.

We should like to remind the representative of
Israel that his Government continues to hold many
Lebanese in Israeli prisons. Some have been detained
for over 25 years without trial, in contravention of all
the fundamental principles of international
humanitarian law, particularly the 1949 Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Times of War. We also wish to remind him
that his Government remains in contravention of
resolution 425 (1978) through the daily violations by
the occupying Israeli forces of Lebanon's sovereign
airspace and waters. These violations have been
described by the Secretary-General as provocations
that have become a routine fact of life. In any case, the
Security Council still considers Israel to be the only
occupying Power in the world. Israel also continues to
occupy Arab territories, including the Lebanese
Sheba'a Farms, destabilizing the entire region.

The Arab peoples are peace-loving peoples, as
amply demonstrated by the peace initiative of the
Beirut Summit, which offered Israel total peace in
return for its implementation of the resolutions of
international legitimacy and its withdrawal from all
occupied Arab territories. Israel's response to that
initiative was its reoccupation of the West Bank. If
Israel truly desires peace, it must now implement the
scores of resolutions of international legitimacy
adopted by the General Assembly and the Security
Council. The Security Council must also shoulder its
responsibilities, in accordance with the United Nations
Charter, by compelling Israel to implement its
resolutions in the interests of peace and security in the
region and to eschew any double standards in the
implementation of its resolutions that allow Israel to
shirk its obligations.

