Mr. Miller (United States of America): We are
pleased to join members today to welcome the adoption
of resolution 2421 (2018), on the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). The United States has greatly appreciated
the support of the Iraqi Mission and of our fellow
Security Council members, as well as the collegial
and collaborative manner in which this renewal was
negotiated. This renewal marks the first overhaul of
the UNAMI mandate since resolution 1770 (2007) was
adopted, 11 years ago. It differs from its predecessors
in several important ways.

To begin with, Council members decided, on a
one-time basis, to extend this year's mandate for a period
of 10 months so as to better align mandate renewals
with the budget cycle, in keeping with the findings
of the UNAMI independent external assessment. It is
a seemingly small change but one that will promote
better accountability of United Nations funds and a
more efficient budget process.

The mandate was also streamlined: the document
itself was trimmed down for from nearly seven
pages of text to just two, while preserving the core
responsibilities and functions of UNAMI at this critical
juncture in Iraq's history. However, it is important to
know the complexity of the challenges UNAMI and
Iraq will face moving forward.

The mandate underscores the importance of
supporting Iraq in meeting the needs of all Iraqis,
including women, youth and members of religious and
ethnic minority groups. That is an area of particular
interest to the United States. We expect UNAMI to work
more closely with the Government of Iraq to address
the unique needs of those groups and individuals, as
part and parcel of the broader national- and community-
level reconciliation effort needed to be undertaken. In
March, Special Representative Jan Kubis issued a press
release that echoed that call:

"Iraq draws its strength from its cultural and
religious diversity and its rich history. This
treasure should be protected and nurtured by the
Government and the people of Iraq."

We strongly support that call.

We also encourage UNAMI to coordinate closely
with other United Nations agencies in Iraq, including
the United Nations Development Programme and
the United Nations Human Settlements Programme,
to ensure continuity of effort and progress on
humanitarian, reconstruction and development efforts
at the community, Government and national levels.

Iraq faces diverse challenges, some of which
are unrelated to the scourge of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham and the path of destruction it left
in its wake. The World Bank is already doing great
work to help Iraq stabilize its financial footing. As
the mandate notes, work also remains to be done on
sustainable development and regional cooperation, to
include addressing broader water-management issues
and mitigating the dust storms that persistently plague
Iraq's people.

We recognize the importance of regional and civil
society organizations in addressing those challenges.
This morning's mandate renewal is reminder of the
constructive role the United Nations can play around
the world, especially in the Middle East. We look
forward to Iraq continuing to lead the way forward and
playing a positive role. We extend our thanks to Special
Representative Kubis and the entire UNAMI team for
their continued excellent work.

