Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): The links between
transnational organized crime and terrorism have been
recognized by the General Assembly in the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocols, among others. The Security
Council has also acknowledged that complex nexus
by adopting relevant resolutions, including resolution
1373 (2001). Enhancing cooperation with relevant
actors at all levels and strengthening the capacities
of law enforcement and counter-terrorism agencies is
indispensable for our ability to effectively prevent and
combat the numerous forms of transnational organized
crimes that are linked with international terrorism.

A particularly cruel crime is modern slavery and
human trafficking. Worldwide, over 40 million people
live in conditions of slavery, the majority of whom are
women and girls. An estimated $150 billion in revenue
are generated every year by forced labour alone. A
recent report of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Committee highlights how human trafficking has
increasingly become a tool for terrorist groups.

Human trafficking can be both a tactic of terrorism
and a source of terrorism financing. It can be used to
spread terror, intimidate populations, institutionalize
sexual slavery and incentivize recruitment, and it can
be used as a source of revenue - for instance, when
captives are sold in open markets or online auctions
and used as an instrument to secure ransom or
rescue payments.

The Council has recognized that human trafficking
can constitute a war crime and has listed human
traffickers under the Libya sanctions regime. We
continue to support a more consistent practice in that
regard and encourage further discussions within the
Council, including on a possible thematic sanctions
regime. We further applaud the adoption of resolution
2331 (2016), which calls upon Member States to
increase cooperation among law enforcement and
regulatory actors, as well as with the private sector, to
help identify and detect suspicious financial activity
related to trafficking in persons that finances terrorism.

Responding to that call, Liechtenstein, together
with Australia and the Netherlands, and with secretariat
support from United Nations University, launched a
financial sector commission against modern slavery
and human trafficking, also known as the Liechtenstein
initiative. The commission consists of stakeholders
from retail banks, hedge funds, global regulators,
institutional investors, survivors, United Nations
agencies and the anti-slavery movement. It has been
designing measures in the areas of sustainability and
innovation, responsible lending and investment, as
well as compliance and regulation to equip the global
financial sector in addressing modern slavery and
human trafficking. We thank the Government of the
Netherlands for hosting the fourth and last thematic
consultation of the financial sector commission at the
end of June on topics including sanctions, financial
sector cooperation and responsible business, which will
further inform our response to modern slavery.

The final product of the commission will be
presented in the margins of the high-level week,
on 27 September in New York. The effective
implementation of the measures identified by the
commission will be essential in contributing to the
fight against modern slavery and human trafficking,
including when committed by terrorist groups. The
United Nations, and the Council in particular, in
addition to other international organizations, bodies
and entities, will be crucial platforms to that end.

Curtailing the link between international terrorism
and organized crime also means addressing corruption
in all its forms. Both petty and large-scale corruption
hinder millions ofpeople every day from fully enjoying
their human rights in areas such as health care, social
services and justice. They deprive young people of
economic opportunities, fuel irregular migration, offer
fertile ground for crimes and foment the grievances and
conflicts that give rise to terrorist groups.

With its comprehensive approach, the United
Nations Convention against Corruption provides a
legal basis to address corruption in its many facets.
The United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime further calls upon States parties to
adopt legislative, administrative or other effective
measures to promote integrity and prevent, detect and
punish the corruption of public officials.

Liechtenstein is committed to fully implementing
relevant conventions and promoting the rule of law
at the national and international levels, as contained
in Sustainable Development Goal 16. We cannot
underline enough that the achievement of peaceful,
just and inclusive societies depends on the successful
eradication of corruption.

