Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, let me express our condolences
to the Government and people of the Islamic Republic
of Pakistan with respect to the heavy human loss
arising from the destructive earthquake in the province
of Beluchistan. We ask the representative of Pakistan to
convey our condolences and our support to the bereaved
families and we wish the victims a speedy recovery.

We thank the Australian presidency for bringing to
the consideration of the Security Council the important
topic as small arms and light weapons. However, we
cannot support the draft resolution prepared on this
subject since it lacks an important and urgent provision
advanced by Russia on the unacceptable nature of the
supply of small arms and light weapons to non-State
actors. We believe that the root of the problem of small
arms and light weapons is illicit trafficking. Russia has
consistently advocated the adoption of measures aimed
at preventing illicit weapons trafficking.
In this context, ofparticular importance is the issue
of imposing universal prohibitions on the transfer of
small arms and light weapons to non-State actors and
unauthorized State recipients and users. Weapons in
the hands of illegal militias most frequently become
instruments for the violation of the fundamental human
rights and the source of suffering for the civilian
population. A salient example of that is the recent events
in Mali, where weapons were used that had initially
been transferred to Libyan groups for humanitarian
reasons.

The black and grey markets for small and light
weapons fuel terrorists, extremists, illegal militias,
organized and street crime, and varying kinds of
conflicts. Therefore, any document devoted to this
subject must address such a critical aspect as preventing
the illicit traficking of small arms and light weapons. It
is far easier to prevent the flow of weapons into the
wrong hands and much more complex to later take them
out of those bands.

In advancing our proposal, we took into account the
current lack of any universal agreement establishing a
ban on the transfer of small arms and light weapons to
non-State actors. This lacuna must be removed as soon
as possible We are certain that a universal ban on the
delivery of small arms and light weapons to non-State
actors would shut off one of the channels through which
weapons are illicitly trafficked and as a result would
be in the interest of the national security of essentially
any State.

The negotiating process on the draft text for the
international Arms Trade Treaty demonstrated that the
Russian approach to non-State actors is supported by a
considerable number of States. It was opposed only by
those countries that believe that it is justified to arm
non-State militias, rebel movements and groups that use
violent force to seize power under the banner of fighting
totalitarian regimes, tyranny, and so on. Depending
on the region or the relation to the Government of the
country on whose territories militias are operating, they
may be seen as terrorist or extremists, while others,
similar in most respects, are provided with weapons to
carry out their so-calledjust struggle. This sounds as if
there were bad terrorists and extremists and good ones,
which in our view is something unacceptable.

Banning the delivery of small arms and light
weapons to non-authorized State structures is one way
to counter the uncontrolled disssemination of weapons,
which Russia has for many years consistently advanced
in many multilateral formats, including when drafting
the recently Arms Trade Treaty. Among other similar
measures is a ban on the unauthorized re-export of
weapons, enhanced State control over the end use
of supplied weapons, controls over the activities of
arms brokers, and preventing the transfer of weapons
and piracy - that is, activities without appropriate
licensing. These measures are not financially costly
and do not require additional financial support.

We believe that the draft resolution could have
focused greater attention on the limitations of the
United Nations Programme of Action on the Prevention
and the Eradication of the Illicit Trafficking of Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All its Aspects. That is
only existing global document in the area of fighting
the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons. It
provides for a broad complex range of meaures that
States must adopt at the global, regional and national
levels in order to fight illicit trafficking in small arms
and light weapons and to prevent them from falling into
the illicit hands of terrorist organizations, organized
crime and States that are subject to sanctions of the
Security Council.

The support of the members of the Security Council
for the implementation of the Programme of Action is
extremely useful in strenghtening its authority. The
potential of the Programme has not yet been exhausted.
Much remains to be done to implement it, above all at
the national and regional levels. We are certain that
the practical implementation of the comprehensive
approach proposed by Russia to enhance national
controls over transfers of small arms and light weapons
would make it possible to strengthen the security of
individual countries and regions that face the difficult
consequences of the use of ilicit small arms and light
weapons. In light of all this, the Russian Federation will
abstain in the voting on the draft resolution.

