Mr. Bamba: I am delivering this statement on
behalf of the Chairman of the Authority of Heads of
State and Government of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS).

I would like at the outset to welcome Ambassador
Joseph Mutaboba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), and to congratulate him on his
comprehensive presentation. I would also like to
welcome Ambassador Antonio Gumende and to
congratulate him on assuming the chair of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP).
I would like to thank my dear friend and colleague
Ambassador Viotti for her endeavours to bring about
a lasting solution in Guinea-Bissau. Last but not
least, I welcome my friend Ambassador Da Gama of
Guinea-Bissau, who is joining forces with us to bring
about a solution to the ongoing crisis there.

The transitional process in Guinea-Bissau is being
hindered by the pro-Carlos Gomes Junior faction of the
African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape
Verde (PAIGC), with the active support and assistance
of its external supporters. Notwithstanding several
diplomatic initiatives taken to undermine the process
by supporters of the faction at international forums,
the Transitional Government, which includes other
PAIGC members, has maintained its focus on reaching
out to that very faction within the party to achieve the
inclusiveness and consensus called for in resolution
2048 (2012), the final communique's of the ECOWAS
summits of Dakar and Yamoussoukro, as well as the
African Union Peace and Security Council resolution
of 14 July 2012.

The population in Guinea-Bissau is witnessing
a new environment of political peace, security and
stability prevailing in the country, instead of the recent
chaos and anarchy and despite misinformation being
served up in some media. The dialogue between the
Carlos Gomes Junior faction of the PAIGC and the
Transitional Government is ongoing. Efforts are also
under way to ensure the normal functioning of the
National Assembly, which is expected to become a
reality shortly.

Those developments have occurred as a result of
the unrelenting efforts made by the ECOWAS office in
encouraging dialogue among the principal protagonists.
Members of the Transitional Government, in particular
the Transitional President himself, the Prime Minister
and the Minister of Defence - all PAIGC members, it
is worth noting - have been very active in promoting
dialogue among the different parties in the country.
In that respect, it is necessary for the international
community not to rush decisions but to allow the
internal stakeholders the space to dialogue among
themselves, within the framework of resolution 2048
(2012) and the Dakar and Yamoussoukro ECOWAS
final communiques, to resolve whatever difficulties
they face in advancing the transitional process.

The ECOWAS office in Bissau, in compliance with
resolution 2048 (2012), has facilitated the holding of
fortnightly meetings with the country's development
partners at the premises of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau. It is regrettable,
however, that some countries persist in their refusal to
recognize and deal with the Transitional Government as
a matter of national policy. It is also regrettable that the
hard-line faction of the PAIGC and other international
figures continue to support the Carlos Gomes Junior
faction against the Transitional Government at such
meetings, and insist on the impossible demand of
reinstating the overthrown Government.

In that regard, ECOWAS regrets that the CPLP
invited Mr. Raimundo Pereira and Carlos Gomes
Junior to its Maputo summit of 20 July as official
representatives of the Guinea-Bissau Government. That
group, in furtherance of its objective, has also declined
to participate in a forum that the international partners
themselves mandated the Special Representative of the
ECOWAS Commission President to arrange between
them and the Government to serve as the platform for
engaging the latter in frank and purposeful discussions
on issues of concern to all partners. The inaugural
meeting, held on 12 July and declared open by the
Prime Minister, was attended by only the ambassadors
of ECOWAS member States, the representative of
the African Union and a handful of other partners,
including the World Bank representative. The Forum
will continue nonetheless to be held fortnightly
between the willing partners and the leadership of the
Transitional Government to help to keep it focused on
the implementation of the priority programmes for the
transition.

The urgent priority tasks currently are the following:
the maintenance of peace, security and stability in the
country, biometric registration of eligible voters and
other requisite activities in preparation for presidential
and legislative elections at the end of the transition,
social and economic development activities, and the
defence and security sector reform programme. Right
now, elements of the formed police units (FPUs) of
the ECOWAS Mission Force in Guinea-Bissau mount
regularjoint patrols at night in Bissau with their Guinean
counterparts to secure the peace. Military personnel
have remained confined to the barracks and do not
participate in those night patrols. The FPUs have also
been deployed together with their local counterparts
to protect selected Government ministries, public
institutions and establishments.

Regarding the elections, the legal bases for the
biometric registration and demarcation of electoral
constituencies already exist. Therefore, the need for
new legislation for carrying on with the process to cover
the remaining three regions - the Autonomous Region
of Bissau, Cacheu and Biombo - will not arise. It is
to be noted that the demarcation of six of the country's
nine regions was completed by the National Electoral
Commission for the March 2012 presidential elections.
ECOWAS is working hard to ensure the holding of the
presidential election, and possibly legislative elections
as well, within the transitional period.

On the defence and security sector reform
programme, ECOWAS will shortly reactivate
discussions with the Government of Guinea-Bissau
in Abuja on the memorandum of understanding on
the implementation of that programme. It is also the
intention of ECOWAS to review the road map document
to give priority to new developments and needs,
including quick-impact projects.

The greater the cohesion within the international
community regarding structural matters, the quicker
and more effectively urgent initiatives can be carried
out, including the security sector reform programme,
the fight against drug trafficking and the investigations
into past acts of impunity, all of which should be
undertaken. In line with resolution 2048 (2012) and
the decisions of the African Union Peace and Security
Council, ECOWAS is working hard to agree a new date
with all concerned partners, particularly the CPLP, for
holding the next meeting of the International Contact
Group on Guinea-Bissau, possibly in September in the
margins of the sixty-seventh session of the General
Assembly.

In any case, ECOWAS stands ready to make a trip to
Lisbon, Portugal, at any time the CPLP is available, to
meet with CPLP with a View to holding open and frank
discussions and making it possible for the international
community to speak with one voice.

