Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to express our gratitude to the delegation of Morocco
for the holding of this open debate. We welcome the
adoption of the draft presidential statement later during
this meeting as an outcome of today's debate.

I also thank the Secretary-General and Ambassador
Abulkalam Abdul Momen of Bangladesh, in his capacity
as Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission,
for their briefings and insights. Azerbaijan strongly
supports United Nations efforts to build sustainable
peace in war-torn countries.

Drawing conclusions from the Secretary-General's
detailed report (S/2012/746), I would like to focus on
the following aspects of post-conflict peacebuilding.

First, the report outlines the progress achieved
in the implementation of the 2009 Agenda for Action
and enunciates the need for further action, especially
in the areas critical to averting a relapse into violence
and to building sustainable peace. We believe that the
significant progress in some areas should not obviate
the need to place more emphasis on others, including
governance, economic recovery, enhanced financial
support and capacity-building assistance.

Secondly, the sense of national ownership in
peacebuilding is critical. The Governments of countries
emerging from conflict bear the primary responsibility
for peacebuilding, including for identifying their own
needs and setting up national development agendas.
In certain situations, when some parts of a national
territory are conflict-affected, strategic planning and
long-term preparation are required in order to launch
an immediate and smooth recovery process once peace
is reached. The international community should fully
respect the sovereignty and independence of States and
their national development choices.

Thirdly, international assistance efforts can yield
true results only if they strive to build and develop
the national institutional capacities of post-conflict
countries. Solid and self-sustainable national capacities
are key prerequisites that underpin the effectiveness
of peacebuilding. Rebuilding them requires consistent
and predictable financial support commensurate with
the expectations placed on the United Nations and
recipient Governments.

That approach brings us to the widely used
concept of mutual accountability that aims to ensure
the consistency of international assistance to national
plans and priorities based on a balanced partnership
between donors and recipient countries. Given the
various challenges posed by post-conflict situations,
that concept might not be applicable to and workable
in all cases. We concur with the Secretary-General's
recognition of the need to elaborate risk assessments
and analyses in post-conflict environments and to
employ risk-tolerant approaches.

Fourthly, peacebuilding is an integrated system
and a web of different complementary and mutually
reinforcing components. It is a complex process
with a number of actors and spheres of engagement.
Therefore, effective and efficient peacebuilding
requires more coordinated and coherent actions among
all organizations and donors. In that regard, we would
like to stress the particular role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in coordinating the activities of all
relevant actors within and outside the United Nations.
Its strategy of promoting improved coherence and
aligning donors with national peacebuilding priorities
should be further strengthened.

Post-conflict peacebuilding is inextricably linked
to the preceding peace process and its outcomes.
An effective process of recovery, reconstruction
and development in the aftermath of conflict can
take root and succeed only if a genuine peace based
on the generally accepted norms and principles of
international law, in particular those pertaining to
respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
States, is established on the ground. The legality and
ethics of actions taken to achieve peace determine the
success ofpeacebuilding agendas.

Peacebuilding must not be directed at sustaining
and legitimizing a status quo created as the result
of violations of international law, in particular its
peremptory norms such those prohibiting the threat or
use of force, genocide and racial discrimination. Nor
should it be used as a tool to consolidate a priori illegal
and fait accompli-based solutions. The imposition of
solutions incompatible with international law and with
the principles and purposes of the United Nations will
fail to provide the necessary foundations for enduring
peace and long-term stability, such as those aimed
at establishing a secure post-conflict environment,
inclusivity, national unity, societal cohesion, national
ownership and responsibility.

To conclude, Mr. President, I would like to
congratulate the five outgoing members of the Security
Council - the Ambassadors of Colombia, Germany,
India, Portugal and South Africa and their respective
teams - on the successful completion of their two-year
terms. I thank them for their significant contribution to
the work ofthe Council during this period of increasing
threats and challenges, as well as for their leadership in
managing the activities of the relevant subsidiary bodies
and their effective penholdership on other issues. I wish
my colleagues and friends every success in their future
endeavours.

