Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to welcome you today, Mr. President. I also wish to
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Timor-
Leste, Mr. Zacarias Albano da Costa, and the Vice-
Minister for Political Affairs of the Ministry of
External Relations of Brazil, Mrs. Vera Lucia Barrouin
Crivano Machado. My delegation would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/641) and
Special Representative Ms. Ameerah Haq for her
briefing today.

Bosnia and Herzegovina commends the
significant progress that has been made in many
important areas in Timor-Leste during the reporting
period. As a young nation, Timor-Leste unquestionably
faces many challenges, and every achievement
demonstrates the continued commitment of Timorese
leaders, political parties, civil society and the Timorese
people in their quest for long-term peace, stability and
development.

We reaffirm our appreciation for the vital and
continued commitment of the United Nations in Timor-
Leste. The United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) has continued its important
work, with a view to assisting the people and the
Timorese Government in achieving self-sufficiency.

We believe that the resumption by the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) of primary
responsibilities for the conduct and command of all
police operations represents a major step in ensuring
sustainable security in Timor-Leste.

With regard to the presidential and parliamentary
elections to be organized in 2012, we take positive note
of the progress made by the national electoral
management bodies, particularly in the area of
enhancing participation of women and youth in the
electoral process.

As democratic transition gathers momentum, the
successful organization and conduct of credible and
peaceful elections will be of paramount importance.
We believe that free and fair elections, as an outcome
of serious preparation, will confirm that the Timorese
people are moving forward in establishing a new
democratic political environment and culture. For that
reason, the United Nations must continue to support
the electoral process, including by providing technical
and logistical support as requested by the Government.

Now that the Timorese Government has fully
assumed its control over all policing operations, it is
imperative to ensure that the PNTL has the ability to
respond to potential security challenges in the electoral
period and beyond. We commend UNMIT's readiness
to provide operational support to the PNTL, if required
and requested during this crucial period.

As conditions improve and political stability
continues, it is quite rational to start planning the
transition period and the Mission's eventual departure.
We endorse the Secretary-General's emphasis on the
need to optimize UNMIT's effort and to focus on
priority needs and activities identified jointly with the
Government.

Lasting peace and stability in Timor-Leste
ultimately require the full trust of the Timorese people
in their politicians and confidence in the ability of the
State to uphold the rule of law. In this regard, we are
pleased to learn that notable progress has been made
towards meeting the objectives and benchmarks of the
medium-term strategy in the area of the rule of law,
justice and human rights.

In order to support overall political and social
transition processes, there must be sustainable
development in the country. In particular, additional
efforts are needed to sustain the envisaged growth by
promoting rural development, infrastructure
development and the role of the private sector, which
should provide more employment opportunities, in
particular for the young.

In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina is
confident that Timorese stability and social and
political harmony will grow stronger in the future. The
implementation of the process requires the determined
commitment and cooperation of the Timorese people,
Government and political parties. Bosnia and
Herzegovina will support their efforts as long as is
required.

