Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Madam President, for convening today's
meeting. It is being held against a backdrop of major
developments and challenges in our region.

The Kingdom of Bahrain underscores that
achieving just, comprehensive and lasting peace will
remain directly related to restoring the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people. That will be achieved through
the establishment of a Palestinian State, based on the
June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem at its capital, as
outlined by the relevant international resolutions, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the two-State solution, and by
ending the occupation of Palestinian territory and the
settlement activities that Israel continues to conduct, in
blatant violation of Security Council resolutions. In that
regard, we welcome the recent important steps taken
by the Palestinian factions to end divisions, renounce
violence and work together peacefully.

The Kingdom of Bahrain stresses the importance
of undertaking efforts to achieve a political solution
that preserves the political independence and territorial
integrity of Syria, prevents interference in its domestic
affairs, eliminates all terrorist organizations and
secures peace for all Syrians. The Kingdom of Bahrain
reiterates its long-standing position of support for the
legitimate Government in Yemen, under the presidency
of Mr. Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, through our
participation in the Arab coalition forces to restore
legitimacy in Yemen, end the control of foreign-backed
militia groups and reach a comprehensive political
solution, based on reparations documents, the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and the Implementation
Mechanism, international dialogue outcomes and
resolution 2216 (2015). The goal is to end all external
intervention and ease the humanitarian crisis suffered
by the Yemeni people. We thank the Special Envoy for
Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, for his efforts.

Combating terrorism and extremism in all
their forms and manifestations, regardless of their
motivations and wherever they occur in the Middle East,
is one of the most important elements to achieve peace
and stability in the region and the world. Therefore,
the Kingdom of Bahrain applauds the policies of His
Excellency Mr. Donald Trump in an attempt to end
chaos and combat terrorism.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain reaffirms
its commitment to working with the international
community to address and overcome all challenges in
the Middle East. We are eager to eliminate the threats
posed to the region and to achieve a peaceful and stable
future for all people of the region.

