The President: At the outset of the meeting, I
should like to acknowledge the presence at the Council
table of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional
Cooperation of Mauritius, The Honourable Anil
Kumarsingh Gayan. On behalf of the Council, I extend
a warm welcome to him.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Central African Republic

Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic and
on the activities of the United Nations Peace-
building Support Office in the Central African
Republic (8/2001/35)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Central African Republic, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the Minister
for the Promotion of Civic Responsibility in charge of
Relations with the Parliament of the Central African
Republic, Mr. Agba Otikpo Mezode.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mezode
(Central African Republic) took a seat at the
Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Cheikh Tidiane Sy, Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in the Central African
Republic.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Sy to take a seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Frederick Lyons,
Acting Deputy Director of the Regional Bureau for
Africa of the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), and to Mr. Mats Karlsson, Vice-President for
External Affairs and United Nations Affairs of the
World Bank.

Before I announce a decision on this, let me
mention that I had informed the members of the
Council at the consultations ofthe whole yesterday that
UNDP would be represented by Mr. Diabre. When I
returned to my office yesterday evening I got a new
message saying that, instead, Mr. Frederick Lyons
would represent UNDP. I thought I should explain this
to members ofthe Council.

There being no objection to the participation of
these two individuals, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Lyons and Mr. Karlsson to take the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

I would like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 22 January 2001 from the
Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request you to extend
an invitation to Mr. Ridha Bouabid, Permanent
Observer for the International Organization of la
Francophonie to the United Nations, in
connection with the Security Council debate on
the situation in the Central African Republic,
scheduled for 23 January 2001, in accordance
with rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure
ofthe Council."

That letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2001/67.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Bouabid.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Bouabid to take the seat reserved for
him at the side ofthe Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Central African Republic and on the activities of the
United Nations Peace-building Support Office in the
Central African Republic, document S/2001/35.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Cheikh Tidiane Sy, Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in the Central African
Republic. I give him the floor.


