Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I have the honour
to report to the Security Council pursuant to
paragraph 19 (e) of resolution 2140 (2014) on the
work of the Committee since its establishment on
26 February to date. With the agreement of Council
members, the report comes later than the 60-day time
frame stipulated in resolution 2140 (2014) in order to
allow the Committee to inform the Council on the more
recent and substantive activities undertaken by the
Committee.

Council members will recall that, by resolution
2140 (2014), expressing support for a peaceful,
inclusive, orderly and Yemeni-led political transition
process that would meet the legitimate demands and
aspirations of the Yemeni people for peaceful change
and meaningful political, economic and social reform,
as set out in the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and Implementation Mechanism and the outcomes of
the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference,
the Security Council, inter alia, imposed measures on
individuals or entities designated by the Committee
as engaging in or providing support for acts that
threaten the peace, security or stability of Yemen.
These measures consist of the freezing of assets owned
or controlled by individuals or entities designated by
the Committee, or by individuals or entities acting on
their behalf or at their direction, or by entities owned
or controlled by them, and a travel ban on individuals
designated by the Committee.

On 25 March, I was elected Chair ofthe Committee,
with the representative of Jordan serving as Vice-Chair.
I would like to thank Council members for the trust and
confidence they have placed in me and my delegation

as leaders of this important subsidiary body of the
Security Council. As I said at the first meeting of the
Committee, I intend to cooperate very closely and on an
ongoing basis with all of its members.

The first order of business for any new committee
is the adoption of guidelines for conducting its work.
Ours were adopted on 4 April, after which they were
announced to all Member States through a note verbale
and a press release. On the same day, the Committee
received a letter from the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs proposing the names of four individuals
to serve on the Panel of Experts established by
resolution 2140 (2014). As Council members will recall,
one of the Panel's tasks is assisting the Committee in
carrying out its mandate, including by providing, at any
time, information relevant to the potential designation
of individuals and entities as subject to the travel
ban and/or the assets freeze. The Panel is also tasked
with gathering, examining and analysing information
from States, relevant United Nations bodies, regional
organizations and other interested parties regarding
implementation of the measures set out in resolution
2140 (2014), particularly incidents where the political
transition in Yemen is undermined.

The Committee had no objection to the slate
proposed by the Under-Secretary-General, and the
experts were appointed to the Panel by the Secretary-
General on 16 April. Since that time, however, one has
withdrawn from the Panel, citing pre-existing academic
and professional commitments that would prevent him
from participating fully in the operational work plan
envisaged for the Panel. The Secretariat is working to
identify a replacement as soon as possible, while the
other three Panel members are in New York and have
begun their work.

In a letter dated 4 April addressed to this and other
committees, the Chair of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities
proposed that a recommendation of its Monitoring
Team, pertaining to biometric data on listed individuals,
be implemented as standard practice for all committees
that have concluded an agreement with INTERPOL
for the dissemination of Security Council-INTERPOL
Special Notices. In my reply, I informed the Chair of
the 1267/1989 Committee of my Committee's intention,
in the coming days, to consider adopting the procedures
on the issuing of Special Notices and to revert to it
thereafter.
The first Committee meeting was held on
30 April, specifically to initiate a dialogue among
the Committee, Yemen and member countries
of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) and to
discuss implementation of the measures imposed by
resolution 2140 (2014). A representative of the GCC
also participated. The convening of this meeting, in
accordance with sub-paragraph (f) of paragraph 19 of
the resolution, shows how important the Committee
considers interaction and consultation with Yemen and
its regional partners to be. During the meeting, the
Permanent Representative of Yemen thanked the GCC
member countries for their support for the transition
and underlined the importance of taking economic and
humanitarian factors into account when addressing his
country's challenges. All participants who spoke agreed
that the dialogue was useful and should continue. It is
my intention to maintain an inclusive and participatory
approach in steering the Committee.

On 5 May, the Committee met in informal
consultations with the three members of the Panel of
Experts. The experts shared their initial thoughts on
how they intended to proceed with the fulfilment of their
mandate and the challenges they foresaw. Committee
members welcomed the start of the Panel's work and
looked forward to receiving its continued, impartial
and independent analysis of the situation on the ground.
I was pleased to learn that while the Pnael was in New
York, it would be meeting with a wide range of actors
and stakeholders, including representatives of Yemen
and the member countries of the GCC. Committee
members also looked forward to a visit by the Panel to
Yemen in the near future and noted that such travel will
be critical for gethering first-hand information.

An update from the Panel is due to the Security
Council no later than 25 June. In accordance with
resolution 2140 (2014), this update will be discussed in
the Committee before being submitted to the Council.
Moreover, the Panel may at any time present relevant
information to the Committee. In accordance with
sub-paragraph (e) of paragraph 19 of resolution 2140
(2014), and as deemed necessary, I will thereafter report
to the Council on this and other Committee discussions
and activities.

