Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to welcome the initiative of the People's Republic
of China to hold this open debate. We wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his important briefing, as well
as the representative of the President of the General
Assembly and the Presidents of the Economic and
Social Council and the International Court of Justice.

A country committed to multilateralism,
international law and the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, Peru underlines the importance
and the need to strengthen and renew the United Nations
system in order to deal with the serious challenges that
today's world poses for the international community.

We see with deep concern the proliferation
of conflicts and the emergence of new threats to
international peace and security, the root causes of
which are in many cases global phenomena such as
the growing inequality, the effects of climate change,
armament and transnational organized crime.

Today we have an interconnected and
interdependent world. It is therefore clear that the
poverty and vulnerability of large sectors of the
world population have an increasingly direct impact
on the security and well-being of all and undermine
the pledge to liberate future generations from the
scourge of war. Since the end of the Second World War,
humanity has significantly evolved and progressed.
This Organization has without a doubt served to build
a better world. However, in many cases, the progress
has been uneven and the international order has shown
its limitations in responding effectively to the new and
changing realities. Far from weakening multilateralism,
the inability of the international community to address
such realities should lead us to strengthening the
international cooperation required to achieve the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. We wish to emphasize the relevance of
those purposes and principles and of the Organization
in resolving the serious problems facing us and in
upholding and developing the collective security
system and a rules-based international order, thereby
preventing the emergence of greater threats to peace
and security.

To that end, we believe it necessary to continue to
build on the political, legal and institutional acquis of
the Organization. Among other measures, that means
moving ahead with the reform of the Security Council
in order to adapt it to the current realities and, in
accordance with the proposal of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group, to make it more
coherent, transparent and accountable. It also means
renewing our commitment to international law and its
continuing development, complying with its provisions,
including those issued by the Council, and constructively
participating in the respective negotiation and follow-
up processes.

The primary responsibility of the Security Council
for the maintenance of international peace and security
must be exercised with full respect for law and justice.
In that regard, we would like to point out the need
to promote a more systematic interaction between
that organ and the International Court of Justice and
the International Criminal Court. We underline the
responsibility of the Council to preserve the regimes for
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and counter-terrorism and the need for its members to
remain united in the face of such threats.

We also underscore the need to implement the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Paris Agreement and to commit to the global compact
for safe, orderly and regular migration. We believe
that those instruments are fundamental to preventing
conflicts and addressing their root causes.

We believe that the Organization should be reformed
in order to support Member States in a more coherent
and effective way in line to their priorities, needs and
national circumstances. In that regard, we would like
to express our support for the reforms promoted by the
Secretary-General and the emphasis on gender equality.

Multilateralism also means working proactively
and inclusively with specialized agencies and entities
such as the World Trade Organization, the international
financial institutions and regional and subregional
organizations, as well as with civil society, women's
and youth groups, the sector private and academia.

Our task is to redouble our efforts to strengthen the
United Nations in fulfilling the purposes and principles
enshrined in its Charter and as a catalyst for cooperation
and alliances at all levels, with a View to ensuring that
peace and prosperity are available to all.

In that order of ideas, I conclude by recalling
former Secretary-General Javier Pe'rez de Cuellar when
he pointed out that the role of a political institution
such as the United Nations is to draw the line between
efforts to build a better future and conflict and to make
it possible for nations to stay on the right side of that
line.

