Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to first express to you, Sir, our
appreciation for convening this meeting to discuss the
new crime perpetrated by Israel in assassinating
Mr. Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi and his companions.

The policy of assassinations that has become a
major method of the Israelis is disgusting. It shows the
Israeli leaders' real face to those who have yet to
discover it. Those leaders have made systematic terror
a policy, in a continuous manner, since the 1940s,
while defying international legitimacy and usurping the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
condemned the crime of assassinating Mr. Al-Rantisi.
It stressed the need to condemn the policy of terror
practised by Israel against the Palestinian people in its
occupied territory. Syria asserts that the killing and
destruction carried out by Israel in the occupied
Palestinian territories is an expression of its contempt
for international legitimacy and Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions. Such acts expose
aggressive Israeli settler policies that have hampered
the peace process and fomented conflict in the region.

When the Security Council met a month ago and
all speakers, including some of Israel's friends,
condemned extrajudicial killings, including the
assassination of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, some believed
that the Israeli Government would heed the call and
perhaps hesitate prior to committing another crime.
However, the assassination that Israeli has just carried
out demonstrates to us once again that the Israeli
leaders do not heed international humanitarian law,
particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention, nor do they
respect the will of the international community.
Furthermore, it proves that Israel continues to carry out
extrajudicial killings and daily massacres of the
Palestinian people and other crimes against them and
their inalienable rights.

Israel has also shown yet again that it does not
hesitate to use the senseless force of terrorism in order
to realize its goals. It lies when it says that it kills
women, children and other innocent Palestinians and
their leadership to fight terrorism. Israel is the party
that has brought terror to the region. Israel is the party
that pursues terror in full View of the world, whose
conscience has yet to be moved, for the sole purpose of
distracting attention that should have otherwise been
focused on its continued occupation of Arab territories
for decades, its annexation of Arab territories, its
building of settlements, its destruction of thousands of
homes and its construction of the racist separation wall.

Israel's promoting its actions as an exercise of the
right to self-defence is nothing more than the
promotion of a policy of killing, destruction,
occupation and expansion and is a violation of
international law.

Israel's recent attempts, as evidenced by the
dismissal of the Palestinian people's right to return to
their homeland and by the annexation of illegal
settlements in the West Bank, represent a grave
violation of the Security Council's resolutions
regarding the Arab-Israeli conflict and the Palestinian
question. These efforts will have grave repercussions
on the region and international peace and security.

The time has come for the Security Council to
adopt decisive resolutions that will put an end to Israeli
war crimes, including Israel's defiance of international
humanitarian law, international legitimacy and other
relevant United Nations resolutions. Is not the Council
duty-bound to say enough is enough, and to stop the
killing and destruction, after Israel has killed more than
3,000 children, women and elderly Palestinian
civilians? Is not the Council duty-bound to enforce its
resolutions, which have become an international term
of reference for the Middle East peace process,
particularly resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973)?
Israel, which is indebted to the United Nations for its
establishment, does not respect the United Nations or
its resolutions, while the Arab States believe in the
primary role this Organization should play in realizing
a just and comprehensive peace in the region.

In conclusion, I wish to recall that Syria takes the
realization of a just and comprehensive peace in the
region as a general policy matter. We believe that a just
and comprehensive peace cannot be realized without
respect for the Palestinian people's right of return and
of self-determination in their territories, through the
implementation of Security Council resolutions, the
principle of land for peace and the Arab initiative
adopted by the Beirut Summit in 2001, among other
initiatives.

