Mr. Aslov (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian): I have
the honour to make this statement on behalf of the of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC)
Group. First of all, I would like to thank you, Sir, for
organizing this debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine. I would also
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-

Taranco for the very important briefing he has given
us.

The stalemate in the Middle East process is very
worrying, especially as it came as a result of Israel's
attempts to dictate its own terms. The peace process
cannot achieve genuine progress under the prevailing
conditions. Israel should live up to its commitments
and obligations, especially those stipulated by the
agreements signed with the Palestinian side and
enshrined in the Road Map.

It is self-evident that building Israeli settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, jeopardizes the peace process. It also sends
signals about Israel's real intentions. Israel cannot
pretend to make peace with the Palestinians and at the
same time persist in stealing their lands for settlements.
It is therefore the responsibility of the international
community to compel Israel, the occupying Power, to
refrain from actions that would undermine peace
efforts. In order for the peace process to succeed, Israel
should halt all settlement activities - including so-
called natural growth - in all occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Also to be
successful, the peace process should have a clear
timeframe and clear implementation mechanisms.

The situation in East Jerusalem is a matter of
great concern for the OIC and its member States.
Israel's measures in occupied East Jerusalem are aimed
at forcefully altering the historical character of the city.
We consider Israel's decision to change the structure
and shape of the centuries-old walls of the city an
assault on its cultural heritage. Changing the
demographic fabric of East Jerusalem through the
expulsion of Palestinians from the city and
expropriating their properties is a grave violation of
international law.

The situation in Gaza is also very worrying. One
and a half million Palestinians are living in harsh
conditions as a result of the shameful, illegal and
unjustified Israeli blockade. Israel must lift the
blockade and allow the reconstruction of Gaza.

The OIC remains deeply concerned by Israel's
ongoing air and land violations of Lebanon's
sovereignty, in breach of resolution 1701 (2006). We
call on Israel to withdraw fully from the remaining
Lebanese occupied land in the Shebaa farm lands, the
Kfar Shouba Hills and the northern part of Al-Ghajar
village.

The OIC also joins the international community
in reaffirming that all measures and actions taken, or to
be taken, by Israel, the occupying Power, to alter the
legal, physical and demographic status of the occupied
Syrian Golan and its institutional structure, as well as
the Israeli measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, are null and void and have no
legal effect. The OIC demands that Israel abide fully
and immediately by resolution 497 (1981) and
withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
lines of 4 June 1967, in implementation of resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

The OIC Group would also like to stress that
peace in the Middle East can be achieved only by
ending the Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab
land occupied since 1967, establishing an independent
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital,
and achieving a comprehensive and just solution for
the plight of Palestinian refugees, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948.

The international community and the Security
Council in particular have a legal and moral
responsibility to take prompt and decisive actions to
ensure the implementation of relevant resolutions
based on international legitimacy and to meet the
challenges we face in maintaining international peace
and security.

