Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): As
this is the first time my country is speaking under your
presidency, I would like to extend to you, Sir, the
congratulations of Ecuador and our support in your
leadership of the work of the Council this month.

We would also like to thank Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his complete briefing on the
situation in Palestine and in the Middle East. My
delegation associates itself with the statement made by
the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The position of Ecuador on the Palestinian
question is well known to the entire international
community, but we cannot fail to speak out whenever
necessary to condemn the serious humanitarian and
security situation to which the Palestinian civilian
population continues to be subjected as a direct
consequence of Israel's aggression and its occupation
of the Palestinian territory.

It is regrettable to note that almost seven months
since the most recent massive Israeli intervention in
Gaza and despite the Security Council's adoption of
resolution 1860 (2009) and the subsequent adoption of
resolutions by the General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council, there still has not been "an immediate,

durable and fully respected ceasefire, leading to the
full withdrawal of Israeli forces from Gaza" (resolution I 860 ( 2009), para. 1) or "the unimpeded provision and
distribution of humanitarian assistance, including of
food, fuel and medical treatment" (para. 2). Nor have
there been any specific sanctions as a result of
investigations carried out by competent United Nations
bodies into "the grave human rights violations
committed in the occupied Palestine territories",
especially during last January's attacks.

More than half a year has passed, and yet there
continues to be a border blockade on the provision of
humanitarian assistance, food, medicine, fuel and
construction material. There is also an ongoing ban on
the free movement of civilians, many of them women
and children or sick people. There has also been
selective destruction of public and private property,
which has exacerbated the emergency humanitarian
situation which has never ceased in the Gaza Strip, as
recognized by specialized agencies and
non-governmental organizations present in the region.

That is why, on behalf of the President of the
Republic of Ecuador, Rafael Correa Delgado, I wish to
reiterate the solidarity of the Ecuadorian Government
and people with all the innocent victims of the ongoing
Israeli aggression and, at the same time, to urgently
appeal to Council members to immediately resolve the
humanitarian crisis and resume the search for an
enduring solution and a lasting peace in the region,
through the full implementation of all relevant Security
Council resolutions, including those I mentioned
earlier.

As a founding Member of the United Nations,
Ecuador advocates the peaceful solution of
international disputes and conflicts and emphatically
rejects the threat or the use of force as a mechanism to
resolve them. Therefore, Ecuador believes that any
comprehensive solution that will make it possible to
achieve and maintain a lasting peace in the Middle East
cannot be reached by military means, but only through
ongoing dialogue, the strictest respect for international
law, including international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, and, above all, a true
commitment to non-aggression and reconciliation that
includes Israel's withdrawal from the territories
occupied since 1967 and the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

Regrettably, in recent weeks, the world has seen
that the efforts of the Quartet on Middle East
negotiations, particularly during its most recent
meeting, held in Trieste on 26 June, in seeking a lasting
peace with the recognition of two independent States,
have in no way been echoed in the State of Israel. On
the contrary, we have heard the Israeli authorities insist
on their plans for settlements on Palestinian territory
and close the door to the possibility for a future space
for the establishment of a Palestinian State in their
customary arrogance towards and isolation from the
international community.

My country believes that, without prejudice to the
aforementioned efforts and the noteworthy initiatives
of Egypt and the League of Arab States and the
statements in other forums, such as the Group of Eight
it is primarily the responsibility of this Organization to
seek and implement all the measures provided for in
the United Nations Charter to pressure the occupying
Power, Israel, to stop violating existing international
law, human rights law and international humanitarian
law.

That responsibility must be shouldered by the
entire international community through coordinated
actions in different multilateral and bilateral organs and
bodies towards building a lasting peace not only for the
benefit of the peoples of Palestine and Israel, but for
the whole region. My country is ready to offer its
ongoing support for such actions.

On the broader issue, I would also like to say how
pleased my Government is with the progress in the
diplomatic negotiations with Syria and Lebanon and
with the progressive establishment of security in the
latter country. We trust that the timely formation of a
new Government that represents all the communities in
that country will strengthen it.

Lastly, I am pleased to express my Government's
support for the strengthening of the Arab Peace
Initiative and the appeal to all parties to the conflict to
respect their commitments under the Road Map, while
reiterating that any comprehensive solution must
sooner or later include dialogue and direct negotiation
between Israel and Palestine.

The victims of the serious humanitarian situation
in Palestine deserve that the United Nations and the
Security Council and all its members shoulder their
responsibility and take the action necessary to lay the
foundations for the creation of a Palestinian State with

East Jerusalem as its capital, the restoration of lasting
peace and security in the Middle East, and full
enjoyment by all inhabitants, irrespective of their
nationality, of their fundamental rights.

