Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We express our condolences to our Egyptian
colleagues in connection with the terrorist attack on
9 April. The masterminds ofthese attacks demonstrated
both their lack of humanity and cruelty in carrying them
out. We support the measures that are being undertaken
by the Government of Egypt in its unrelenting fight
against terrorism. We express our condolences to the
bereaved families and hope that the injured will recover
as quickly as possible.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Honore, for her briefing on the
results of the strategic review of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and on
the situation in the country. We are pleased to note
the conclusion of the long electoral process, with the
conduct in November of last year of the presidential
elections and then in January of this year the
parliamentary elections, which clearly served to ease
social and political unrest in the country.

We welcome the intention of the new Government
of Haiti to strengthen national unity, peace and
democratic order as well as its demonstrated readiness
to engage in constructive dialogue with a wide variety
of political forces to resolve problems of import for
the whole country. One of the key items on the Haiti
agenda is shoring up the system of governance at all
levels in the interest of overcoming still highly relevant
social and economic problems and ensuring long-term
stability. In this regard, we consider the approval by the
National Assembly of the newly-formed Government
as a positive step towards establishing a viable and
effective chain of executive power, which will ensure
the reformation planned for by the Government of Haiti.

With respect to international support, we note the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend the
mandate of the United Nations mission for the next six-
month period and its gradual drawdown of the military
component, which is fully staffed at present. We see
a reason to reconfigure MINUSTAH according to
the new situation, but that has to be done in the most
cautious manner. It is important to prevent a security
void. It would be unacceptable to repeat the negative
experience of the drawdown of the predecessor mission
in 2000. More generally speaking, we would like to call
attention to the following rather important aspect.

In spite of the fact that the relevant recommendations
of the Secretary-General reflect the positive trends on
the ground, we are convinced that the situation remains
quite tenuous. The Haitian Government and Haitian
society have a number of daunting tasks to fulfil and
which need to be urgently resolved. I do not think that
we could call the post-conflict stage a simple one.

As has many times been stated in this Chamber,
including at the Security Council meeting with the
Secretary-General on 6 April (S/PV.7918), which is
the most recent example, increasing the effectiveness
of how peacekeepers carry out their mandates means
that the mandates have to be well defined, clear and
realistic. We are guided by the idea that the Secretary-
General's proposed new mission in Haiti will continue
to act under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.
However, the provisions of this Chapter must be applied
only with respect to those tasks where it is absolutely
necessary. I am referring first and foremost to security
and the maintenance of law and order.

For its part, in the framework of international
efforts, Russia will continue to make its contribution
to undertaking a host of tasks to ensure stability and
security, with a view to rebuilding the country in line
with MINUSTAH's mandate.

