Judge Mose: It is a great honour for me to
address the members of the Security Council. The
Council has received the updated version of the
completion strategy of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), dated 23 May 2005. It
includes the developments during the past six months,
in conformity with Security Council resolution 1534
(2004). In this oral intervention, I will briefly highlight
the most important aspects.

The number of accused in completed and ongoing
cases is now 50. They include one Prime Minister, 11
Government ministers, four prefects, seven
bourgmestres and many other high-ranking individuals.
That illustrates the importance of the ICTR in
establishing the guilt or the innocence of alleged
leaders of 1994 who would probably not have been
brought before a court had it not been for the ICTR.
We appreciate the cooperation of Member States in
transferring them to Arusha.

Since the meeting of the Security Council last
November (see S/PV.5086), two single accused
judgements have been delivered, bringing the total
number of accused having received judgement from 23
to 25. The Muhimana judgement of April this year is a
significant contribution to the ICTR's contribution to
jurisprudence on sexual offences. The Rutaganira
judgement, rendered in March this year, was the fourth
time an accused at the ICTR pleaded guilty. As the
Council knows, the number of guilty pleas at the ICTR
is low compared to those at the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. It will be
interesting to see whether the number at the ICTR
increases further.

In addition to those 25 persons, trials involving
25 accused are in progress. Five of those trials are
voluminous multi-accused cases. As mentioned in our
completion strategy (S/2005/336, enclosure), three of
them have now reached an advanced stage. In the
Butare trial, involving six accused, the defence case
commenced on 31 January 2005 and is proceeding
well. The Military I case, with four accused, faced
some unforeseen problems because the assignment of
lead counsel for one of the accused was withdrawn.
That could have had far-reaching consequences for the
progress of the trial. Fortunately, a solution was found
which made it possible to commence the defence case
in April 2005. The trial is now progressing well. In the
Government trial, which involves four Government
ministers, the Chamber is now hearing the last
prosecution witness. The defence case is therefore
approaching.

Our strategy is to prioritize the completion of
those three important multi-accused trials involving a
total of 14 accused. We estimate that they will be
completed in 2006.
The other two multi-accused cases are at an
earlier stage. The Military II trial, which involves four
accused, commenced in September 2004 and is
progressing steadily. With respect to the Karemera et
al. case, the Council will recall that the Appeals
Chamber decided that the trial of those four accused
should start de novo before a different Trial Chamber.
The new Chamber decided to sever one of the accused,
Rwamakuba, from the other three accused. His trial,
which is now one of our four single accused cases,
recommenced on 9 June 2005. The prosecution case is
expected to conclude in a few weeks time. The trial of
the other three accused will commence de novo in
September this year. Let me add that the Karemera and
Rwamakuba trials will be twin-tracked and prioritized
so as to make up for lost time.

The remaining three single-accused cases are all
approaching their end. The Simba trial is virtually
completed, with closing arguments to be heard in early
July. The defence case in the Seromba trial has been
delayed because of unforeseen problems in the defence
team but is expected to commence soon. Finally, the
prosecution case in the Muvunyi trial will be
completed in a few weeks. Scheduling of new single-
accused trials for the second half of 2005 is under way.

In order to ensure maximum judicial output, it is
important to find the right balance between the steady
progress of the multi-accused trials and the completion
of single-accused trials. That is not an easy task, in
particular because the multi-accused trials require a lot
of time in the courtroom. Our November 2004
completion strategy (S/2004/92l, annex) mentioned
that it would facilitate our work if a fourth courtroom
could be constructed, based on voluntary contributions.
Following contributions from the Governments of
Norway and the United Kingdom and the necessary
approval at United Nations Headquarters, the
construction of the fourth courtroom was completed in
record time: only four weeks. The costs were about
half of the constructions costs of any of the first three
courtrooms.

The fourth courtroom was inaugurated in the
morning of 1 March 2005, and it was already in use in
the afternoon of the same day. It is an important
element of our completion strategy. With nine trials
and only three courtrooms, the cases were slowed
down. The solution was to sit in morning and afternoon
shifts. Each shift allows for about four hours efficient
time in the courtroom, whereas a full day session
allows a Chamber to sit for about six hours. That had,
in particular, an impact on our multi-accused trials,
which require a lot of time in the courtroom. The
construction of the fourth courtroom has facilitated
their steady progress.

The Council will recall that, in addition to the 50
accused whose trials have been completed or are in
progress, 16 detainees are awaiting trial in the
detention facility in Arusha. No new detainees have
arrived in Arusha since our November 2004 report. The
trials of those detainees will commence as soon as
courtroom space allows. Two of them will commence
in the second half of 2005.

In his oral presentation, the Prosecutor will deal
with the issue of transfer of trials. He will also
comment on the 14 indictees at large and the
investigation of 16 persons, which resulted in requests
for confirmation of indictments of eight persons. I want
to commend the Prosecutor for having completed that
task four months ahead of the schedule indicated in our
November 2004 completion strategy. The Chambers
are now considering those requests. Let me also
emphasize that States must cooperate in order to
transfer indictees at large to Arusha.

The overview I have just given shows that there
is steady progress in Arusha. This week, 16 accused
are being transported to and from the courtroom every
day. That number will increase to 20 next week. All
four courtrooms are being used at maximum capacity.
Activities at the ICTR are at an all-time high. There
have been some unforeseen problems, but we have
addressed them. I am therefore in a position to confirm
that the ICTR is on schedule to complete its trials by
the end of 2008.

That being said, it is essential that the necessary
resources be made available to allow us to complete
our task. For instance, the negative effects of the
recruitment freeze last year illustrated the importance
of States paying their contributions to the ICTR
budget.

The completion strategy of the Appeals Chamber
is discussed briefly in paragraph 8 of our report. It is
premature to go into details at this stage. Let me
simply say that the Presidents of the two Tribunals are
in contact about this issue.

I should seize this opportunity to reiterate that the
work of the Coordination Council, composed of the
President, the Prosecutor and the Registrar, continues
to be very useful. It is also important to state that the
contribution of the defence teams to the work of the
Tribunal is highly appreciated.
The Tribunal continues to appreciate the
cooperation of the Rwandan authorities. There is still a
steady flow of witnesses from Kigali to Arusha. It is
essential that both parties, the prosecution and the
defence, receive the necessary assistance in terms of
witnesses and documents from Rwanda. That
contributes to the integrity and efficiency of the
proceedings in Arusha.

There are, from time to time, allegations
concerning intimidation of prosecution or defence
witnesses. Such allegations are taken very seriously by
the Tribunal and are subject to investigations in order
to get to the truth of the matter.

These are the most important aspects of the
progress made since November 2004. The report
provides further details. Comments or questions by the
members of the Security Council will be highly
appreciated.

