Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate your delegation,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month, and to wish you and your
delegation every success. I also wish to thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her comprehensive briefing.

Following the fall of the dictatorship in Libya on
20 October 2011, successive Libyan Governments have
declared their commitment to establishing justice and
fighting impunity and their determination to work
to ensure respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Although Libya is not a party to the Rome
Statute, it has voluntarily chosen to work with the ICC.
It has requested assistance from the United Nations in
the field of capacity-building, security sector reform
and reform of the judiciary in order to implement the
stated policies and to fully break with the practices of
the previous regime.

Libya has established genuine partnerships with
the International Criminal Court and the Human Rights
Council. Those partnerships are best illustrated by the
memorandum of understanding that was signed in 2013
by the Libyan Prosecutor General and the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, and by Human Rights
Council resolution 25/37, of 28 March 2014, concerning
the provision of technical assistance for Libya. The
memorandum of understanding signed with the ICC is
based on the realization of positive complementarity
between the Libyan judiciary and the ICC through
burden-sharing in regard to further investigations and

prosecutions of the perpetrators of serious crimes to
bring them before the courts of justice. It is expected
that both parties will agree on the political measures to
implement the memorandum of understanding during
the expected visit of the Prosecutor General to Libya.
It is worth noting that the Registrar of the Court and
Libyan representatives are now communicating on
drawing up a final agreement on the privileges and
immunities of ICC personnel in Libya.

Within the context of efforts to improve the situation
of detainees, the Minister of Justice has conducted
a census of all those detainees in rehabilitative
institutions, who number 6,186, including 646 who have
been tried and are currently serving their sentences.
Libya's judicial authorities are doing their best to
expedite the trials of the remaining detainees, but they
are meeting with serious challenges in getting this done
at a rate they would like. In order to deal with some of
those challenges, on 26 March our National Congress
enacted a law amending the criminal procedural code
so as to enable courts, in cases where there may be fear
for the safety of the accused or that the accused may
escape, to use modern communications technology to
connect the accused to the courtroom by video link.
These procedures can also be applied with respect to
witnesses, experts, prosecutors and those responsible
for civil rights if the conditions are suitable to the court.

This amendment to criminal procedure has
enabled the Tripoli Court of Appeals to use a video
link to conduct open trials of 31 officials from the
former regime, including Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi,
Abdullah Al-Senussi and Al-Baghdadi Al-Mahmoudi.
The trials were broadcast on several TV channels from
the chambers of the courts of appeals in three cities,
Tripoli, Misrata and Zintan, since 22 of the accused
were in Tripoli, eight in Misrata and one - Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi - in Zintan. In commitment to
the principle of transparency, the proceedings were
attended by representatives of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, representatives from human
rights and civil society organizations, and mass media
correspondents. In an effort to provide all those on trial
with due process and the right to a defence, the lawyers'
association recruited the lawyer Samiha Al-Kasseh to
defend Mr. Al-Qadhafi, and she has begun her defence
before the Court. The Court allowed Al-Senussi to
hire his own private counsel to defend him after his
previous lawyer declined to continue. Libya's judicial
authorities hope that the ICC will recognize their
jurisdiction in the case and their right to try Mr. Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, and that it will affirm their right
to try Mr. Al-Senussi as well.

The Security Council is no doubt aware of the
complicated internal situation in Libya and of the
difficulties and challenges the Libyan authorities are
facing during this transitional period. Nonetheless, the
process of transition to democracy is making progress,
albeit slowly. But Libya is determined to succeed, and
indeed it has no option but to succeed, even if that
takes some time, particularly since all the conditions
for eventual success are there. The international
community should not doubt the Libyan people's ability
to get through this critical stage successfully, and it
should not hesitate to provide assistance whenever the
Libyan authorities need it.

I am very happy that today all the members of the
Council have reaffirmed the importance of ensuring
that the international community continues to assist
Libya. I would like to assure the Council that the Libyan
authorities are committed to pursuing accountability for
every crime, to fighting impunity, to achieving justice
for the victims, and to protecting their citizens and all
who live in our country. They are working to develop a
comprehensive, integrated strategy for bringing to trial
every perpetrator of a crime and all those who have
violated human rights in Libya since 15 February 2011,
regardless of the identities of the perpetrators or the
victims. The transitional justice mechanisms stipulated
in the transitional justice law will constitute a principal
component of that strategy, which, in the final analysis,
seeks not only to see justice done but also to achieve
national reconciliation, as well as to end disputes and
to return the half-million or so refugees and displaced
persons to their homes. The situation of the inhabitants
of the Tawergha region is certainly one of the priorities
of those efforts.

The Government of Libya is working to establish
a balance between achieving justice and maintaining
a secure political process. It seeks to prevent
disagreements in political situations between the
authorities and other political actors that could affect
judicial proceedings, destabilize security and put more
obstacles in the way of the democratic transition.

In conclusion, I would like to commend the
cooperation between the Office of the Prosecutor of
the ICC, under the leadership of Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
and the Office of Libya's Prosecutor-General. I am
confident that justice and our international obligations
will never be abandoned, given the cooperation that
exists between them both.

I also wish to take this opportunity to reiterate our
deep gratitude to the members of the Security Council
for their support to the Lybian authorities at this critical
juncture in my country's history. The Libyan people
hope to receive more support and urge all Member
States to respect the Security Council's resolutions
on Libya, assist the Libyan authorities to prosecute
all those responsible for committing crimes in Libya,
and transfer the perpetrators to the Libyan judicial
authorities. They should also investigate the finances
of all persons whose funds or assets have been frozen,
pursuant to the resolution 1970 (2011), and to report
their findings to the Council so that the necessary
measures can be taken to repatriate those assets to the
Libyan people.

I wish to thank the Republic of the Niger for
extraditing Mr. Saadi Al-Qadhafi and Mr. Abdullah
Mansour to the Libyan authorities. We hope that all
countries will pursue steps similar to those taken by
the Niger to extradite all those sought by the justice
system in Libya.

