Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia; the candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and
Montenegro; and the European Free Trade Association
countries members of the European Economic Area,
Iceland and Norway, align themselves with this
statement.

Madam President, we are again honoured by your
presence today, and we are grateful to Chile for
organizing this important debate. We also wish to
express our appreciation for the thoughtful and
informative briefings that Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Mark Malloch Brown, Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme and Ms. Carolyn
McAskie, Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, gave
the Council this morning. Our theme today - the role
of the United Nations in assisting national
reconciliation in post-conflict situations - deals, in
many ways, with the essence of our aspirations for
countries emerging from conflict: the healing of old
hurts and a fresh start based on collective
acknowledgement of the past and some sort of shared
vision for the future.

National reconciliation is both a process and the
goal. On many of the issues already or currently being
addressed by the Security Council - peace-building,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR),
economic reconstruction, establishment of the rule of
law, creation of institutions to promote and protect
human rights and fundamental freedoms, and
addressing the issue of impunity - we must keep in
mind that end goal of a new dispensation by which a
once divided people can feel that their concerns and
their needs are acknowledged and addressed. The
Council has addressed a number of these interlocking
issues, including most recently in September 2003
under the United Kingdom presidency, when it
examined the issue of justice and the rule of law and
the role of the United Nations. The then presidency of
the Council described that meeting as the start of a
process. Today the Council continues that process. We
believe that in the future, it could also engage in a
dialogue with the Economic and Social Council in
furthering this agenda.

Post-conflict situations pose numerous and
formidable challenges. The European Union believes
that only by the adoption of a comprehensive and
concerted approach to all peace-building challenges
can the process towards longer-term political stability
and societal well-being be confidently begun. The
United Nations is in a unique position to deliver an
integrated approach bridging political, peacekeeping,
humanitarian, human rights, judicial and development
actors.

As far back as April 2001, in his report to the
Security Council entitled "No exit without strategy:
Security Council decision-making and the closure or
transition of United Nations peacekeeping operations"
(S/200l/394), the Secretary-General remarked that
reconciliation cannot be imposed. Lasting national
reconciliation will always prove elusive without
sustained national commitment at the governmental
and institutional levels.

Experience suggests that some broad principles to
underpin national reconciliation can be developed,
even though their application will have to be tailored to
each situation. Among these are, first, inclusiveness.
National reconciliation will not take root if some
groups or sections of the population are excluded from
the process of nation-building. In this regard, greater
attention should continue to be paid to the role of
women.

The second principle is transparent equality of
treatment. It is important that all sections of the
population be treated equally before the law, as well as
in access to services such as education and
employment, and that the rights of minorities are
adequately protected.

The third principle is social and economic
integration. For peace to be sustainable, warring
factions must be brought together, clear understandings
must be reached and integration or reintegration must
take place. The focus of DDR programmes is on former
combatants. This is painstaking but vitally important
work. For the reintegration of former combatants to be
successful, it is important that measures be taken to
stimulate local and national economic activity in order
to avoid the creation of a vacuum in which illicit
activity becomes attractive. It is equally important, in
this regard, that attention is paid to the legitimate
economic and social needs of civilian populations,
whose lives and livelihoods have often been destroyed
as a result of conflict. The equitable sharing of
resources between communities may also be mentioned
in this context.

The fourth is reform of institutions. This is
necessary to ensure that inequalities of the past are not
repeated.

The fifth principle is constitutional reform. In
many cases, a new beginning will require the
fundamental rewriting of an existing constitution or the
elaboration of a new constitution.

The sixth is healing. Fully normalized
circumstances cannot be realized in the absence of a
firm resolve to heal the psychological wounds inflicted
during times of conflict. Crucially, transitional justice
mechanisms, as the Secretary-General observed last
September "need to concentrate not only on individual
responsibility for serious crimes but also on the need to
achieve national reconciliation". (S/PV.4833, p. 3)

The seventh principle is the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The provision of human rights education and the
raising of public awareness should be considered.

The eighth is parity of esteem. In many cases, it
may be necessary to adopt measures to ensure that
differences of ethnicity, culture or religious tradition
are acknowledged and respected.

The ninth is reconciliation programmes which
acknowledge and address the suffering of the victims
of violence as a necessary element of reconciliation.
Naturally, these may take various forms, and the
particular circumstances in the affected country need to
be taken into account.

The tenth principle is post-conflict environmental
assessment. Analysing the environmental effects of
conflicts is also important for national reconciliation,
and its neglect could cause delay in the reconstruction
process. In that context, the European Union
recognizes the important role played by the United
Nations Environment Programme.

In concrete terms, two aspects of the continued
dedication of the United Nations to the cause of
national reconciliation might be mentioned. First,
national reconciliation is a primary objective in United
Nations peacekeeping and peace-building operations in
post-conflict States. Many peacekeeping or peace-
building operations may be mentioned in this context.
They include Angola, Afghanistan, East Timor, Kosovo
and Burundi; the engagement of the Security Council
in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire are further
examples in this regard. There are still challenges of
enhanced cooperation and coordination among the
relevant United Nations actors at the field level, in
particular between the political and the development
actors. We therefore urge the various entities of the
United Nations to continue their efforts of enhanced
collaboration. We also urge that aspects of national
reconciliation become integral parts of collective
United Nations country strategies. In this regard, we
would also highlight the need for enhanced cooperation
with the Bretton Woods institutions. For the donor
community, a particular challenge is the provision of
adequate financial resources during the transition
phase.

Secondly, genuine national reconciliation is often
beyond reach unless those responsible for egregious
crimes are held to account. The ongoing work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, the Special Court for Sierra Leone, the
initiative to prosecute former members of the Khmer
Rouge in Cambodia and the judicial mechanisms put in
place in post-conflict East Timor and Kosovo are
testimony to the United Nations firm belief in and
commitment to this aspect of fostering national
reconciliation.

However, it is worth bearing in mind the note of
caution expressed last September by the Secretary-
General to the effect that, at times, attempts to balance
the demands of peace and justice can pose a difficult
dilemma. Ultimately, each society needs to form its
own view about how to strike the right balance
between the goals of penal justice and reconciliation.

While a balance must be struck, the European
Union also agrees with the Secretary-General that there
should be no granting of amnesties for war crimes,
genocide, crimes against humanity or other serious
violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law.

Many member States of the European Union have
actively contributed to the establishment and proper
functioning of the International Criminal Tribunals in
The Hague and Arusha from the time of their inception.
Recognizing its importance, the European Commission
has recently made a contribution to the Special Court
for Sierra Leone. A number of European Union
member States have also contributed significant
amounts in their own right to the Special Court. The
European Union has, in addition, offered both political
and financial support to national truth and
reconciliation commissions and initiatives in a number
of United Nations Member States.

The European Union also strongly believes that
the International Criminal Court provides a powerful,
permanent instrument of deterrence against genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. The European
Union remains firmly committed to the Court's
effective functioning, being of the view that, in
addition to providing a powerful deterrent to would-be
tyrants, it is also an essential means of promoting
respect for international humanitarian law and human
rights law, thus contributing to freedom, security,
justice and the rule of law and to the preservation of
peace and strengthening of international security.

The main burden, however, for prosecuting those
responsible for atrocities will have to be carried by
domestic legal systems. The restoration of domestic
legal systems and support for domestic legal
prosecutions is therefore a crucial task for the
international community in post-conflict situations and
in countries at risk.

Because of its nature, reconciliation relates
closely to, or includes, the issue of justice. It is also
difficult to address reconciliation without taking into
account the rule of law, not least from a preventative
perspective. The European Union therefore believes
that the report being prepared by the Secretary-General
as a follow-up to the Security Council debate in
September onjustice and the rule of law and the role of
the United Nations, could benefit from taking into
account some of the observations articulated today.

Finally, in an address to the Commissioners of
East Timor's Truth, Reception and Reconciliation
Commission in May 2002, the late Sergio Vieira de
Mello stated:

"You have been called to help reconcile the
divisions and hurt amongst your people. No task
is more crucial if a society split by terror and
politics is to regenerate and become a place
where human dignity is respected."

By its very nature, national reconciliation is one
of the more tortuous and protracted challenges
confronting post-conflict States. If painful political
experience has taught us one thing, however, it is that
the cathartic process of national reconciliation is a sine
qua non for achieving lasting stability.

