Mr. Zhukov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Allow me to welcome you, Madam, as
President of the Security Council at today's meeting.
We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General Pascoe and
Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner for the Peace and
Security of the African Union, for their briefings on the
situation in Somalia. We listened carefully to the
statements of Mr. Wetangula, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kenya, Mr. Kiyonga, Minister of Defence of
Uganda, and Mr. Mammadyarov, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Azerbaij an.

The year that is beginning should be critical in
the history of Somalia, both in terms of moving the
peace process forward and of nation-building. The
implementation of the road map and dealing with
Al-Shabaab should be coordinated and dynamic. That
requires the robust political will of Somalis and the due
support of the international community. Next, we need
to strengthen those positive trends. In that context, we
welcome the holding of the national consultative
conference on the future constitution.

Against that backdrop, unfortunately, there have
been tensions over the attempt to oust the speaker of
the Parliament. That kind of incident could impede the
unifying of political forces at the current critically
important stage. The criteria for consolidating the
Transitional Federal Institutions would be the timely
completion of the transitional period and laying the
basis for the further development of the country.
Success in tackling Al-Shabaab is a necessary
precondition for advancing the political process.
Despite the clear military progress in southern and
central Somalia, the recent clashes in Mogadishu show
that Al-Shabaab's military capacity still exists. Efforts
need to be stepped up in that area.

We welcome the agreement by the African Union
on steps to extend the mandate, to strengthen the
military capacity and to work out the concept of future
operations of the African Union Mission in Somalia.
We welcome the readiness of Djibouti and Kenya to
provide troops to the African Union Mission, which
continue to be a key factor in solving the Somali crisis.

Such steps are in line with the work of the
international community and the African Union
towards normalizing the situation in Somalia, including
tackling extremism and piracy. Russia will continue to
support the African Union in its efforts to normalize
the situation in Somalia. Our position is that military
measures can be used only to complement the political
process. That therefore continues to be a challenge,
primarily for Somalis themselves.
