Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to thank
the high-level judicial authorities who addressed the
Security Council this morning and early this afternoon
for their valuable presentations. Both the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) are part of a large effort to ensure that those
most responsible for the most heinous crimes answer to
them in public trials that meet the highest standards of
international justice and due process.

As a member of the Security Council at the time,
Brazil voted in favour of resolutions 827 (1993) and
955 (1994), which created the ICTY and the ICTR,
respectively. We stressed, on those occasions, our
preference for the creation of a permanent tribunal
competent to judge potential perpetrators of genocide,
war crimes and other serious Violations against
international humanitarian law in an independent
manner. Thus we thought to respond to possible
allegations that such tribunals were selective.

The Security Council has before it the challenge
of adapting the inherent limitations of ad hoc judicial
arrangements to the principle of due process and the
rights of both Victims and accused, as well as the
overall objective of bringing an end to impunity.

It is necessary that the Tribunals remain attached
to the goals set forth in resolution 1534 (2004), while
concentrating resources and efforts so as to make sure
that the most senior leaders suspected of being
responsible for crimes within the jurisdiction of the
courts are prosecuted. Given the difficulties presented
by the presidency of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in its latest
assessment, Brazil believes that insisting on rigid
deadlines, as set out in the completion strategy, may
frustrate justice, rather than assist the international
community to end impunity. The Council may
eventually need to adjust those timetables in order to
allow the Tribunals to fulfil their mandates.

Brazil received with serious concern the letter
dated 4 May 2004 from the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia regarding substantial lack of cooperation
with the Tribunal. Obligations under the Charter, the
Tribunal statute and the rules of procedure and
evidence, as well as the relevant Security Council
resolutions, must not be disregarded. We urge States
directly involved in the Tribunal's work to cooperate or
to continue to cooperate fully with it, ensuring the
speedy surrender of fugitives and of documents.

It is essential that the Tribunals continue to have
adequate resources and personnel to perform their
functions. Financial difficulties present a threat to the
accomplishment of their duties and the ability to meet
the completion strategies. Brazil has been making
efforts to pay outstanding contributions to the
Tribunals. A payment was made in December last year
and another will be made shortly.

Brazil is concerned about the possibility that
trials in cases continuing beyond the end of the term of
current permanent judges might be slowed or disrupted
due to the non-re-election of judges acting in those
cases. Given the General Assembly's prerogatives in
this matter, it is our View that any legitimate solution
should be approved by it. In that regard, we favour
consulting regional groups in order to seek the
reconduction of judges acting in cases deemed
essential to the completion strategy.

