Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The acceding
country Croatia; the candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and
Iceland; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Albania;
the European Free Trade Association country Norway,
member of the European Economic Area; as well as
Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova align themselves
with this statement.
I would like to join other speakers in welcoming
High Representative Valentin Inzko back to the
Council.

We welcome the recent positive developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and reaffirm our strong
support for the country on its path towards European
integration. We commend the relevant authorities and
political leaders for their concrete efforts to take
decisions in a spirit of compromise. After a prolonged
period of stagnation, the European Union perspective
has finally begun to dominate the political agenda. The
European Union welcomes the formation of the State-
level Government, as well as the adoption of the State
Aid Law and the Census Law. The timely and proper
implementation of those laws will not only facilitate
further progress towards European Union membership,
but also contribute to the peace, stability and prosperity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The momentum in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
positive and must be maintained. In particular, Bosnia
and Herzegovina needs to urgently bring its
Constitution into compliance with the European
Convention on Human Rights. The implementation of
the ruling by the European Court of Human Rights in
the Sejdic-Finci case would be a key element for the
European Union to consider a membership application
credible in the foreseeable future.

Among other goals, socio-economic reforms are
also urgently needed. In that regard, we look forward
to the adoption of the 2012 State budget and the 2012-
2014 global fiscal framework, which are essential to
the country's ability to develop growth-oriented
policies, as well as to receive and utilize international
economic and financial assistance, including the
sizeable support provided by the European Union.

The European Union also welcomes and supports
further progress in the implementation of the five
objectives and two conditions, in line with the
agreement, in principle, among the political leaders on
defence and State property. The European Union
expects the Peace Implementation Council Steering
Board to take a decision on ending supervision of the
Brcko district at its meeting next week. It is important
to underline that it is the prime responsibility of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's political leaders to achieve concrete
and tangible progress, and thus allow for the further
transformation of the international presence, including
the Office of the High Representative.
The European Union looks forward to continuing
discussion with the international community on the
reconfiguration of the international presence, including
its downsizing and the possible relocation of the Office
of the High Representative, in the appropriate forum.
In that regard, it notes the ongoing discussions on
overlapping tasks between the Office of the High
Representative and the European Union.

The European Union has recently strengthened its
engagement and political presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina so as to facilitate its progress towards
European integration. The new single European Union
Special Representative and head of delegation, Peter
Sorensen, who leads the support for Bosnia and
Herzegovina in EU-related matters, has increasingly
engaged with its authorities and political leaders.

The two crisis management missions on the
ground are also an expression of the European Union's
commitment. First is the European Union Police
Mission, which will be closed by the end of next month
and whose remaining strategic tasks will be transferred
to the European Union Special Representative and a
technical assistance programme. The second mission is
the EU-led force (EUFOR) Operation Althea, which
remains an important element of the European Union's
overall strategy for the country. Operation Althea
continues to focus on capacity-building and training,
while maintaining situational awareness and a credible
reserve, in case it is called upon to support efforts to
maintain or restore the safe and secure environment, as
stipulated by resolution 2019 (2011).

The overall security situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains stable. Security and political
stability need to be maintained during the upcoming
electoral period. In that regard, the European Union
encourages Bosnia and Herzegovina's political
representatives to continue to act in a spirit of
compromise, to work for the long-term interests of the
country, and to refrain from divisive rhetoric and
actions that harm the interests of the citizens.

We stand fully behind the authority of the High
Representative and welcome the close cooperation with
the European Union Special Representative. Moreover,
we reiterate our unequivocal commitment to the
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
sovereign and united country.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has travelled far since
the end of the war in the 1990s. Its ongoing
transformation away from reliance on an international
presence into a position of being a responsible and
contributing member of the international community,
as represented by its 2010-2011 participation in the
work of the Council, is primarily a Bosnia and
Herzegovina-owned and -led process. The European
Union will proactively continue to support progress
towards a stable, viable, peaceful, multi-ethnic and
united Bosnia and Herzegovina cooperating peacefully
with its neighbours and irreversibly on track towards
membership of the European Union.

