Mr. Ehouzou (Benin) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Benin delegation, Mr. Minister, allow me
to offer you my heartfelt congratulations on
Indonesia's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and to welcome your initiative to
convene this public debate. Your presence among us
and your personal contribution enhance the level of
this debate. I would also like to pay a well-deserved
tribute to the delegation of Ghana, which held the
presidency of the Security Council in October.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Republic of Angola
on behalf of the African Group.

The theme of this public debate is extremely
relevant. Regional and subregional organizations have
a major role to play in the collective security system
established by the United Nations Charter. Here, the
provisions of Chapter VIII are explicit.

In that regard, remarkable progress has been
made in the process of restructuring mechanism for
conflict prevention and settlement in Africa. The
international community, which, through the Security
Council, has the core responsibility for world peace
and security, can rely upon a continent-wide machinery
that continues to be honed through the establishment
and articulation of mechanisms which are often
established spontaneously, but which have become
relevant within the integration process embodied by the
African Union and by its development programme, the
New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD).
This trend towards pooling energies and resources is
part of the Charter vision for a collective security
system that harmoniously encompasses the regional
and international levels.

We welcome the recognition of the importance of
the capacities of regional and subregional
organizations, particularly with respect to the
establishment of mechanisms and rules of conduct that
make it possible to better manage critical situations
through more effective action on the ground based on a
rapid response to warning signs in order to contain the
tensions and the risks of rapid escalation, while
benefiting from complementarities.

This evolution calls for a review of the doctrine
of peacekeeping operations as it has been understood
until now. The international community has had to
make up for the absence or weakness of intervention
capacities at the regional level. Henceforth, the
primary responsibility of the Security Council for
international peace and security will need to be carried
out with the involvement of existing local capacities,
through standby force arrangements, and this was
clearly reaffirmed in Security Council resolution 1631
and was stipulated by the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union (AU).
In that connection, the establishment of hybrid
operations represents a transitional phase prior to
setting up fully operational regional capacities. In that
regard, the international community has a duty to
strengthen the process of setting up regional capacities
in order to fully delegate its operational responsibilities
to regions while maintaining the overall authority to
mandate operations, so as to avoid fragmentation of the
rules governing the exercise of that authority.

It is therefore important that the United Nations
follows the processes under way very closely to ensure
that they are carried out in strict compliance with the
Charter and that they can produce synergies to meet the
challenges confronting regions in the maintenance of
international peace and security, especially with regard
to the root causes of conflict, and to mobilize human
resources and the means necessary to ensure the
functioning of regional mechanisms as an integral part
of the collective system of security.

Having said that, development is another name
for peace - something that is especially true for the
African continent. From that point of view, support for
regional and subregional organizations should also be
aimed at promoting their mission of economic
integration. Thus they could increase their contribution
to sustainable development in countries where they are
active. That entails providing assistance in establishing
major agglomerations of States that are capable of
mobilizing efforts to ensure prosperity based on
economics of scale, as well as full inclusion of
individuals and State bodies set up to bring an end to
widespread poverty among entire groups of the
population who have been plunged into extreme
poverty by the distortions of the global economic
system.

In that connection, my delegation calls for better
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council, so as to ensure greater
effectiveness in conflict prevention and peacebuilding
efforts through existing mechanisms or those to be
established.

Regional and subregional organizations must
assume their full place in the system of collective
security established by the Charter, without
encroaching upon or diminishing the primary
responsibilities of the Security Council. We must
continually differentiate between the Council's
decision-making power to define mandates and
exercise oversight over their implementation, on the
one hand, and the greatest possible operational

capacities that regional organizations are able to
assume, on the other. The goal is to ensure greater
effectiveness by the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security. That goal should be
pursued through a holistic approach that encompasses
all aspects with a specific impact on that area. The full
integration of regional mechanisms should include
better structuring of the global economy, in order to
provide all countries with an opportunity to achieve
peaceful development within an international system
that operates in the interests of humankind and for the
betterment of its capacities.

