Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate. I should
also like to thank the representative of Sweden for his
briefing as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
and of course, Ms. Bouchamaoui for her very inspiring
statement this morning.

I express my condolences to the Government of
France, to Lebanon and its people, and to Russia for
the downing of its plane. These are all acts that we
condemn vigorously.

This debate could not be taking place at a more
appropriate time. At the Sustainable Agenda Summit
our leaders afirmed that peace and security would be
in danger without sustainable development. We have
also reviewed the reports on peacekeeping operations
and the peacebuilding architecture, as well as that
on the women and peace and security agenda, which
appeals for a strengthened role for women in the
maintenance and building of peace, not only as a party
affected by the war but also as a fundamental part in the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts and
the achievement of lasting peace, which will allow us to
think of peacebuilding as a cross-cutting process that
takes place before, during and after conflict.

The concept note before us (S/2015/845, annex)
makes it clear that the Council recognizes that this
is a complex and multifaceted relationship that is
specific to each case. Allow me to cite the example of
my own country, Colombia, where we have identified
the convergence between the sustainable development
targets and some ofthe points that have seen the greatest
progress in our negotiations in Havana on the cessation
of hostilities and the building of a stable and lasting
peace. Forty-seven of the seventy points agreed upon
are consistent with the 47 sustainable development
targets, the accomplishment of which will, I am sure,
allow us to close the gaps between rural and urban
Colombia towards a lasting and sustainable peace.

Through its tools, the Council should create a
solid basis to prevent relapse into conflict and generate
sustainable peace, whose inclusive processes must
always be based on national ownership. Peacekeeping
operations and special political missions are instruments
whereby we can restore conditions of basic security and
trust in the political process, and strengthen national
capacities in the long term, facilitating the path towards
peacebuilding and, at the same time, sustainable
development.

Cooperation between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, of which we are a member,
has yielded important results and must be strengthened
with a View to overcoming fragmentation. The advisory
role of the Commission, the diversity of its membership,
its nature as a bridge between the Security Council and
the General Assembly and among the three pillars of
development, human rights and security, make it the
appropriate mechanism to coordinate processes leading
to sustainable peace.

Finally, when missions are established they must
be structured on the existing capacities of the countries
concerned and the activities of country teams must be
integrated into peacebuilding activities. In this way
and at the time of transition or the conclusion of the
mission, the country will be left with strengthened
support to enable it to continue in its peacebuilding
process towards lasting peace.
