Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I commend your initiative, Mr. President,
to convene an open debate on developments in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his presentation.

A founding principle of the Organization's
establishment was the maintenance of international
peace and security. Peacekeeping operations are
therefore are a crucial part of United Nations activities.
Aware of that, Peru has actively participated in such
operations since 1958, the year in which we deployed a
contingent to the United Nations Observation Group in
Lebanon. Since that date, my country has contributed
more than 6,700 uniformed personnel, three of whom
have made the ultimate sacrifice in the defence of
international peace and security.

The nature and characteristics of the conflicts that
the Organization has had to face in recent decades have
substantially changed. Likewise, in recent years we
have witnessed a necessary change in the scope of the
mandates of peacekeeping operations. Currently, such
operations are therefore multidimensional in nature,
since their mandates include various interrelated factors,
such as peace and security, development, post-conflict
capacity-building and State institution-building, among
other elements.

The establishment of operations with multidimensional
mandates implies a greater complexity not only on
the ground but also in terms of the planning and
implementation of those operations. Therefore, when
establishing such operations, strict attention must be
paid not only to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations but also to the guiding
principles of such operations, namely, the consent of
the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except
in legitimate self-defence or in defence of the mandate.
In that regard, we reiterate that the perception of
the impartiality of peacekeeping missions is essential
to their legitimacy in the field, the safety of their staff
and their long-term effectiveness. In that connection,
while we recognize the achievements of the Force
Intervention Brigade of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in protecting civilians, my delegation believes
that, in accordance with resolution 2098 (2013), the
offensive activities of that Brigade should in no way be
a precedent to justify similar mandates in the future.
In that regard, the future scope of the activities of such
operations must be discussed in the competent body of
the Organization, namely, the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations of the General Assembly.

The increasing complexity of the mandates of
peacekeeping operations requires greater coordination
among the Security Council, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and troop-contributing
countries so as to ensure that their perspectives and
views with regard to the development, implementation
and renewal of mandates are properly heard, given
that their troops will be responsible for effectively
implementing the mandate on the ground. In that
context, uniformed personnel should have access to
better training and policy-awareness facilities and to
new technologies. Such operations must also enjoy
adequate financial resources. It is therefore essential
to review the scale of the cost of contingents, given
that there is currently a large gap between the real
cost of the troops in the field and the sums received
by States. That jeopardizes the proper functioning of
peacekeeping operations.

Peru believes that peace is not limited to the absence
of conflict. That is why we support peacekeeping
operations undertaking not only law enforcement
activities but also comprehensive actions that
contribute to building national structures and processes
to bring about a lasting and sustainable peace. It is
therefore essential to reaffirm the principle of national
ownership in the understanding that peacebuilding
should be an inherently national process, in which
peacekeeping operations are limited to supporting the
national authorities in coordinating their peacebuilding
and development priorities.

Finally, my country would like to underscore the
important role of women in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts. That highlights the need to promote their
full participation in maintaining and promoting peace
and security. Peru has therefore been increasing the
participation of female staff, who currently account
for 8 per cent of our personnel deployed in eight
peacekeeping operations.

I wish to reiterate Peru's steadfast commitment
to peacekeeping operations, which is reflected,
inter alia, in our ongoing participation in the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti for a decade.
We are ready to maintain that commitment until the
mission completes its task of Haiti's stabilization and
reconstruction.

