Mr. Haydar (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Based on the constitutional responsibilities
of the Syrian Government vis-a-vis its citizens and its
firm position in confronting the terrorist war afflicting
Syria, since 2011 the Government has devoted every
national capacity to ensuring that the necessary
assistance, shelter, food and medication is provided to
all citizens affected by the crimes perpetrated by armed
terrorist groups.

The Syrian Government would like to stress its
desire to continue to cooperate with the United Nations
to ensure that assistance reaches all citizens in every
part of Syria without discrimination. Therefore,
on 17 December 2014, following consultations and
an agreement with the United Nations, the Syrian
Government adopted the Syria emergency response
plan for 2015, which complemented the national efforts
that have been made since the start ofthe crisis to lessen
the suffering of our people and confront the terrorist
attacks and the negative impact the foreign intervention
in Syria's internal affairs has had.

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
would like to express its regret at the fact that those
preparing the texts of the relevant draft resolutions
have taken unconstructive position vis-a-vis the
humanitarian situation in Syria. They have insisted on
politicizing this issue and have ignored all the facts and
developments on the ground. They have used the same
stereotypical language in the report (S/2015/48) and
ignored the fact that the humanitarian situation and its
deterioration are the result of terrorist attacks by armed
terrorist groups.

The Syrian Government would like to stress once
again that, without its efforts and cooperation with
United Nations agencies and specialized entities, as
well as its direct coordination between the parties, and
without the support and protection it has provided to
United Nations convoys and staff, the Organization
would not have been able to deliver any humanitarian
assistance at all. To set the record straight, I should
stress that since December 2014, as documented by
United Nations entities, 6 million people have benefited
from food aid, and approximately half a million from
medical assistance, from inside Syria. The facts on
the ground show that cross-border delivery has been
ineffective when it comes to achieving the humanitarian
goals that resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) claim
to want to achieve, particularly considering the fact
that Syria has repeatedly emphasized its readiness to
deliver assistance from inside Syria.

We are all now aware that any measures designed to
improve the humanitarian situation without consultation
and close cooperation with the Government of Syria
will not succeed. Those attempting to politicize the

humanitarian situation must cease immediately.
Such efforts are desperate attempts to violate our
Government's sovereignty. We have read the eleventh
report of the Secretary-General and our comments
on it have been officially submitted to the Security
Council. The Government would like to emphasize the
incontrovertible truth that the humanitarian situation in
Syria cannot be improved without giving priority to the
following issues.

First, serious work must be done, in coordination
with the Syrian Government, to deal with the
fundamental reason for the humanitarian crisis in some
regions of Syria, that is, the crimes committed by armed
terrorist groups being supported in the region and
internationally, including groups related to Al-Qaida
and those that are either overtly or covertly connected
to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the
Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist groups.

Secondly, we stress the importance of - indeed,
the need for - ensuring that the Secretariat's policies
are in line with the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the norms governing humanitarian
activities, as well as with the provisions of resolutions
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014), which prioritize the fight
against terrorism and terrorist groups, such as ISIL,
the Al-Nusra Front and other related organizations.
What is needed now is cooperation and coordination
with the Syrian Government in combating terrorism,
with a particular view to ending the humanitarian crisis
in Syria. Various parties, particularly Saudi Arabia,
Turkey and Qatar, must end their support, financing
and incitement of terrorism and drain the terrorist
pond. The United Nations must improve its cooperation
and coordination with the Syrian Government instead
of repeatedly casting doubt on its efforts to reach those
affected within Syrian territory, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 46/182.

It is also important to address the lack of financing,
one of the fundamental obstacles to implementing the
2014 humanitarian response plan. In that context, I
should emphasize that the Syrian Government has been
working intensely to meet the needs of its citizens. The
coercive, unilateral, illegitimate measures imposed
by some countries on Syria, which have had a direct
negative effect on Syrian livelihoods, must stop. They
have affected many basic, vital sectors, such as health
care, education and water and sanitation. In that regard,
I refer to the report of the Department of Economic and
Social Affairs entitled World Economic Situation and
Prospects 2015, which mentions the negative effects of
such measures on the livelihoods of Syrian citizens.

The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) should provide detailed lists of the
items and various types of aid that are being sent across
borders to various regions in Syria. It should also identify
the parties who are receiving that aid, because we have
information that aid such as this is reaching terrorist
organizations. The Secretary-General's reports must
be credible and transparent concerning mechanisms
for monitoring cross-border assistance. The facts on
the ground show that the United Nations does not have
an effective mechanism for ensuring that aid reaches
those who genuinely need it in areas controlled by
terrorist groups. Turkey must stop using unofficial
border crossings for delivering weapons and other
lethal equipment and terrorists to Syria. Furthermore,
Saudi Arabia must stop using border crossings used by
OCHA to send weapons and assistance to the Al-Nusra
Front and other terrorist groups. The United Nations
has a moral and political responsibility to ensure this.
Its officials must stop making statements and producing
reports with random, inaccurate and undocumented
information on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
That is politicization.

The fact that those who prepared today's report
insist on using the terms "armed opposition", "non-State
armed groups" or just "armed groups" in describing
armed terrorist groups is reprehensible and runs counter
to the statement in paragraph 10 of the report that Ahrar
Al-Sham and J aish Al-Islam have reached an agreement
with the Al-Nusra Front, which is an organization on the

Security Council's list. The Council itselfhas described
such groups as terrorist organizations in the past. They
use the area of separation as a haven, with clear cover
by Israel. We all know now that whenever such terrorist
groups fail to put their terrorist crimes into action or
are pushed back by the Syrian army, Israel moves in
and takes on that role with repeated acts of aggression
against our country.

The Government of Syria would like to point
out that the number of civilian victims of attacks by
armed terrorist groups using various types of explosive
ammunition in every governorate of Syria during the
period from 21 November to 21 December 2014 totalled
238 dead and 377 injured, including 45 and 82 children,
respectively. Those responsible for those acts of
terrorism and other heinous crimes are armed terrorist
groups, Wahabists trying to cloak themselves under the
guise of terms such as "moderate armed opposition", in
a desperate attempt to justify their terrorist acts.
My Government continues to take a responsible,
effective role in supporting the United Nations in
dealing with the humanitarian situation in Syria. That
must be based on respect for Syrian sovereignty and
full cooperation with my Government in combating
terrorism and delivering humanitarian relief assistance.

