Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to express my deep gratitude to the President of the
Council for agreeing to organize this special meeting.

Jordan called for this urgent meeting, in light of
the pressing need to address the latest developments
in the Palestinian territories, and in particular in
occupied Jerusalem. This is the result of the unlawful
and arbitrary practices of Israel against the Palestinian
people, its incursion into the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the
Haram Al-Sharif, its attempt to impose a situation that
would change the status quo in the city of Jerusalem,
and the provocation of Palestinians by Israeli
extremists in Jerusalem and its holy sites, which have
reached unprecedented and escalated levels that cross
all possible lines. What Israel is doing in occupied
Palestinian territories, in systematic violation of the
rights of defenceless Palestinian people, requires the
Council to shoulder its responsibilities, put an end to
these attacks, take adequate and effective measures to
protect the Palestinian people, stop these reprehensible
acts and prevent them from happening again.

The Israeli occupation and the injustice endured by
the Palestinian people held hostage by it have lasted too
long - over seven decades. The rights ofthe Palestinian
people to life, dignity, security over their land and self-
determination are being violated. Every day, the Israeli
occupation devises a new set of coercive measures
against the Palestinian people. The Palestinians have
lost hope that the international community will free
them from the yoke of occupation and from daily Israeli
aggressions, which do not spare women, children or the
elderly.

The security of Israel and its citizens cannot be
achieved with an iron fist, by indulging in various types
of collective and individual punishment, by excessive
use of armed force or by killing the vulnerable and the
innocent. The Israeli authorities should realize that
the lives of the Palestinian people are not cheaper than
those of its own citizens and that shedding Palestinian
blood will not bring about peace and security.

The spiral of violence in the occupied Palestinian
territories will lead to further tensions and extremism
in the Middle East and have a negative impact on
international peace and security. The Council should
therefore spare no effort to put an end to Israeli
violations in Palestinian territory and to stop Israel's
systematic breaches of its commitments under
international humanitarian law, in particular the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949. We call on the Security
Council to explore appropriate options to provide legal
protection to the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian territories, commensurate with the serious
nature of the situation, which might pave the way for a
just and comprehensive peace following the end of the
occupation.

The bloody attacks being committed every day by
Israel against the Palestinian people, along with the
violation of the sanctity of holy sites and the incursions
into Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Haram Al-Sharif,
preventing its imams, staff and worshippers from
entering the Mosque, are violations of the rights not
only of the Palestinian people, but of over a 1.5 billion
Muslims throughout the the world, as well as a
provocation. Jordan therefore calls for an immediate
end to the ongoing and escalating aggressions ofIsraeli
authorities. It also calls for the historic status of the
holy city of Jerusalem to be respected and for an end to
measures aimed at dividing the Haram Al-Shareef into
physical sections and time slots.

Jordan rejects any attempt to infringe upon cultural
heritage and religious sites, and we support the decision
by President Abbas to investigate the latest torching of
Joseph's Tomb. We call for self-restraint and the need
to refrain from irresponsible and religiously offensive
acts. We condemn in the strongest terms what Israel
is doing against the Palestinian people. We consider it
fully responsible for the latest escalation.

Jordan will spare no effort in discharging its
responsibility in terms of supporting the Palestinian
people, putting an end to the Israeli occupation of
Palestine and establishing a viable, free and independent
Palestinian State, based on the pre-l967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. We stress that Christian
and Muslim holy sites in East Jerusalem, at the forefront
of which is Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Haram Al-Sharif,
are a red line that cannot be crossed. We will not allow
their desecration or profanation.

We therefore reiterate Jordan's total rejection and
condemnation of the provocative violations committed
by Israel in Al-Aqsa Mosque and on the Haram
Al-Sharif, and our full solidarity with the Palestinian
people and our absolute commitment to their legal and
historic rights in the protection of Al-Aqsa Mosque and
the Haram Al-Sharif. Based on the historic Hashemite
guardianship of His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn
Al Hussein over Islamic and Christian holy sites in
Jerusalem and Jordan's right to look after them. We
preserve all possible legal and diplomatic options to
defend those sites.

