Mr. Sidikou: First, let me apologize, Mr. President,
for speaking to the Security Council by video-
teleconference. I would have preferred to attend this
important Security Council meeting in person, but, as
my colleague and good friend Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Nicholas Kay has just stated,
there is a critical political activity in progress, namely
the constitution ofa Cabinet of Ministers, which entails
real-time diplomatic and political facilitation on our
part. Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Kay and I therefore thought it prudent that, in the spirit
of our growing partnership and collaboration, there
was the need for one of us to remain in Mogadishu to
support our Somali brothers and sisters as they seek to
have the list of Cabinet Ministers-designates endorsed
by the Federal Parliament.

As the Council is well aware, in 2014, the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
National Army launched two successful offensives,
Operation Eagle and Operation Indian Ocean, resulting
in the recovery of 16 towns from Al-Shabaab. Beyond
recovering those towns and liberating the population
from Al-Shabaab's tyranny, our joint AMISOM. and
Somali National Army military campaigns have
also opened up space for political activities outside
Mogadishu. The regional States-formation process is
progressing well, as Mr. Kay just mentioned. Dialogue
and local reconciliation efforts are under way in many of
those recovered areas despite some intermittent violent
inter-clan conflict. The need, therefore, to support
the Somali political and traditional leadership at both
the federal and regional levels as the political process
enters an even more sensitive stage, which includes the
constitution-making process and the elections, cannot
be overemphasized.

While we anticipate that the conventional phase
of military operations against Al-Shabaab will be
largely completed by the end of this year, we cannot
claim that Al-Shabaab will thus have been defeated. As
predicted, Al-Shabaab has and will continue to resort
to asymmetric attacks. They will continue to seek to
disrupt our main supply routes and step up attacks
in the subregion. The Al-Shabaab of today is not the
Al-Shabaab of yesterday. We must therefore respond to
this new reality accordingly. We simply cannot continue
to do business as usual. Yes, we have achieved a lot, but
we can do better and achieve even more.

It is in that regard that, early this year, AMISOM
and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
held a retreat in Kampala with the Federal Government
of Somalia and our partners to reconsider how we are
doing business. At the end of the retreat, we prioritized
the following actions in addition to continued efforts to
degrade the capabilities ofAl-Shabaab: first, the urgent
need to support the rebuilding of the Somali National
Army through the organization and integration of local
forces while taking into account their sustainability;
secondly, the need to enhance support for effective
defence and security services in Somalia and to
focus on community-centred approaches to safety
and security, including community policing; thirdly,
the need to focus on ensuring sustained access to the
recovered areas by securing the main supply routes as
a key priority; and, fourthly, the need to ensure that all
our operations are fully compliant with applicable and
relevant international human rights and humanitarian
law standards, in line with the Secretary-General's
human rights due diligence policy. We have also
realized that we need to reconfigure the Mission and
resource it appropriately to be able to achieve these
priorities.

Using our experience so far in the recovered
areas, we have been able to define the critically
required resources, including engineering, medical and
civilian-military cooperation capabilities. With these
capabilities, our military units will carry out basic
social service support to local government authorities
that will both facilitate the restoration of governance
and also win the population. I believe also that our
policing efforts have to now involve more community
policing. This is critical as we seek to support the
Government in realizing the Vision 2016 agenda and
the peacebuilding and State-building goals outlined in
the New Deal Compact.

In this phase, there is an extremely urgent need
for the accelerated development of the Somali security
forces to continue enabling stabilization efforts and to
avoid reversals of the gains that have been made to date.
The integration of militia and the standing up of the
Somali National Army requires the concerted efforts of
all partners rallying behind a Somali-led process. Let
me seize this opportunity to thank the Security Council
for the unprecedented support provided to the Somali
National Army. The provision of non-lethal support,
as authorized by the Security Council, has contributed
significantly to enhancing the operational effectiveness
of the Somali National Army.

In the eyes of ordinary Somalis, liberation from
Al-Shabaab will only translate into peace if and when
they begin to see its dividends. The Government, with
the support of the international community, has to
redouble its efforts to provide basic services to the areas
under its control. We need to provide food, sanitation
and clean drinking water. We need to rehabilitate
medical facilities and educational institutions. We need
to generate employment for the Somali youth in order
to wean them away from the conflict and divert their
energies towards more productive activities.

Clearly, our political or military approaches
can fully succeed only if they are underpinned by
a reconstruction and development plan to support
them. The Somali business community and diaspora
are vibrant, contributing at least $1 billion dollars to
Somalia in remittances. Their involvement and support
is critical as Somalia moves into a post-war economy.
That is why we are supporting the Government to
engage the Somali diaspora to help generate more
economic activities in Somalia and to contribute to
early recovery activities.

Please allow me to thank all stakeholders and
partners of Somalia, including the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the European Union, the
League ofArab States and individual Member States for
their continuing support to the Federal Government of
Somalia and to the African Union. I wish to encourage
all of us to continue in this partnership to achieve
peace, stability, recovery and development in Somalia.
As we continue to work more closely, we will become
more effective on the ground. This is what ultimately
will also enhance the integrity of the international
community as an honest broker in the peace process
for Somalia.

