Mr. Kasemsarn (Thailand): I join previous
speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. I express our appreciation for the German
presidency of the Council in February.

On 19 February, I made a statement to the
Security Council in which I emphasized the importance
of maintaining the sanctity and credibility of the
multilateral framework, particularly the United
Nations.

Last Friday, we heard the latest update given by
the two chief United Nations inspectors, Mr. Hans Blix
and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, on the results of
inspections by the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
We are pleased to hear that Iraq has extended further
cooperation to UNMOVIC and IAEA, enabling them to
make further progress in their inspections. However,
we also noted that in Mr. Blix's update, while he
welcomed the new initiatives by Iraq, he observed that

"they cannot be said to constitute immediate
cooperation, nor do they necessarily cover all
areas of relevance". (S/PV.47]4, p. 5)

Mr. Blix also stated that

"after a period of somewhat reluctant
cooperation, there has been an acceleration of
initiatives from the Iraqi side since the end of
January", [but] "the value of these measures is
not yet clear." (ibid.)

Resolution 1441 (2002) demands that Iraq
comply fully with that resolution and cooperate
immediately, unconditionally and actively with
UNMOVIC and IAEA. Time is running short for the
implementation of these demands of the resolution. We
therefore urge Iraq to immediately fulfil the demands
of the resolution by providing complete and
unconditional cooperation to UNMOVIC and IAEA. In
doing so, Iraq would demonstrate to the international
community that it is faithfully fulfilling its obligations
under resolution 1441 (2002) as a good United Nations
Member, thereby helping to strengthen the United
Nations as mankind's last hope for a just and peaceful
world.

We, the Members of the United Nations, stand at
a critical juncture in the history of this world body,
which embodies the hope of humankind for a world
free of war and want. What we do here at this point in
time will mean either the gradual disintegration of that
hope or its renewal. Thailand wishes to call on all
Members of the United Nations to exert their utmost
collective efforts to ensure that the will of the United
Nations, as expressed in resolution 1441 (2002), is
fully respected and implemented so as to preserve the
viability and sanctity of this universal institution.

