Mr. Perez Otermin (Uruguay) (interpretation from Spanish): I should like to begin by expressing thanks and
congratulations to you, Sir, on your initiative for having
convened this open meeting of the Security Council today
in order to hear the views of the Member States of the
United Nations that are not members of the Security
Council on an issue of such vital importance as the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, an issue which
involves and affects all of us.

Allow me also to congratulate the Permanent
Representative of Brazil, Ambassador Celso Amorim, for
having convened during his tenure as President last month
the meeting on 21 January, when we heard the excellent
statement of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.

That meeting, together with the one held on 12
February during the Canadian presidency, in the person of
the Canadian Foreign Minister, Mr. Axworthy, which
showed the importance which your country attaches to
this issue, allowed sufficient elements of judgement and
suggestions to be voiced so that our intervention will be
very brief to the extent that we fully agree with the
contents and suggestions of the speakers invited to make
statements during those meetings.

We would also like to congratulate Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello, Mr. Cornelio Sommaruga, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Ms. Carol
Bellamy, Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund, and Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict. My country's position fully coincides
with all the content of their statements and suggestions.
We also emphatically support the statement of the
President of the Council of 12 February of this year,
contained in document S/PRST/1999/6.

My country, Uruguay, is attending this meeting of
the Security Council with the authority conferred on it as
one of the founding Members of the United Nations and
one of the principal contributors to peacekeeping
operations in relative terms to its population and the size

 

of its armed forces, and it has made such contributions
from the very beginning.

Having looked carefully at the records of the two
meetings of the Security Council to which we have
referred, which contain not only the statements of those
mentioned above who were invited to speak, but also the
wise statements of representatives of the member States of
the Security Council, it would seem that nothing remains to
be said, for these statements seem to be enough for the
Secretary-General to prepare the document requested of him
through the presidential statement, a request we fully agree
with as well.

It is clear that the time to continue formulating
international norms in this area has passed, and the time has
now come to ensure that these norms are fully
implemented. We therefore View the presence of States
non-members of the Security Council here as one more
indication of the Council's policy of having an ongoing
exchange of views between the Council and all of the
Member States, which contributes to greater transparency
in its activities.

Therefore, Uruguay today offers all its political
support to the Security Council so that it can exercise its
authority in accordance with the letter of the Charter of the
Organization and so that it can demand and affirm in armed
conflict, the defence of civilians and in fulfilment of
international norms of humanitarian law and human rights,
for this is part of its international responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security. In this connection, we
must not forget the clear provision contained in Article 24
of the Charter whereby we, the Member States, conferred
on the Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
acknowledged that in carrying out its duties under this
responsibility the Security Council would act on behalf of
all of us.

Therefore, in this interplay of those who decide and
those who carry out the decisions, we understand that it is
our responsibility to renew our full support to the Security
Council in its effort to uphold the rights of civilians in
times of war.

As a contributor to peacekeeping operations, Uruguay
has suffered the loss of human lives among its citizens.
Thus, we support all of the proposals made in these
Security Council meetings because we believe that they can
make a decisive contribution to preventing action against
civilians in armed conflicts and to defending the legitimate

 

rights of those who so generously and disinterestedly do
humanitarian work.

We have on many occasions noted that the primary
purpose of the United Nations is the maintenance of
international peace and security, as clearly stated in
Article 1, paragraph 1, of the Charter. This proposition is
the foundation on which all the others must be
established. Without peace it is not possible to establish
a democratic system of government, and without
democracy it is not possible to maintain a mechanism that
will ensure genuine protection of human rights. A strong
and independent judiciary is unthinkable in any political
system other than a genuine democracy in which there is
a clear separation of the three state powers: the executive,
the legislative and the judicial.

Allow me once again to express our full support for
the clear proposals made by speakers. Without attempting
to establish priorities among these proposals, let us state
that to build peace, once it has been re-established, there
must be at least a minimum of the necessary economic
and social development.

Thus we would like to reiterate here what Uruguay
has stated on other occasions: the best way to prevent
conflict, and internal conflict in particular, is by
contributing to the economic development of peoples,
including such essential social components as education
and health.

The defence of the rights of children is one of
Uruguay's domestic and international priorities. We will
continue to be a passionate proponent of establishing age
18 as the universal minimum age for the recruitment. We
also believe that humanitarian assistance must be
protected, and we strongly support all demining activities
as well as the full and transparent elimination of all arms-
trafficking.

In the light of the documents mentioned, words are
not enough. Therefore, Uruguay, without overloading its
own responsibilities in this regard, renews its full political
support for the efforts of the Security Council and the
Secretary-General to protect the rights of civilians in
armed conflicts, as these efforts will undoubtedly
contribute to the maintenance of international peace and
security.

