The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of the United Kingdom for his
assessment of the work of the Council and, in
particular, of the Colombian delegation's contribution.

I will now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Colombia.

I would like to thank the members of the Council
for their constructive contributions and the positive
attitude with which they participated in the debate on
the agenda for the month of August. I also extend my
thanks to the Secretariat team for their continued
support throughout the month and for their
professionalism.

I can also say that, thanks to the cooperation of
the Council members, Colombia has achieved the four
main objectives that it set for itself during its exercise
of the presidency.

First, we have taken an important step in our
consideration of the question of small arms in the
Security Council. Following upon the open debate held
on 2 August, we have adopted a presidential statement
that incorporates the viewpoints of Council members
and of the other Members of the United Nations who
enthusiastically participated in the debate and made
constructive proposals. This statement will guide the
course of future positions which the Security Council
will adopt on this topic.

Secondly, through the Princeton Club meeting, to
which most of you referred, we promoted a debate on
possibilities for and difficulties in a regional approach
to conflict management in Africa, with special
emphasis on West Africa and the Great Lakes region.
Today it is my great pleasure to give all the members of
the Council, as promised, a final report that sets out the
main aspects of the discussion. We have, of course,
made enough copies for the countries that are with us
today that are not members of the Council. We trust
that this exercise will enhance the action of the Council
and, in general, be a contribution to all United Nations
bodies.

Thirdly, we have taken a first step towards a
comprehensive approach by the Security Council to the
situation of Afghanistan. Ambassador Valdivieso has
told me that a very rich and closely focussed discussion
was held during the informal consultations on 29
August. The discussions dealt with the elements of a
comprehensive approach to the subject that will
contribute to the non-paper being prepared by the
Secretariat for October. We trust that this process will
further a lasting political solution.

Fourthly, I would like to record my satisfaction at
yesterday's interesting discussion on the report on the
dialogue with the Open-ended Working Group on
Security Council reform, which was presented by the
ambassadors of Bangladesh, the United Kingdom and
Colombia. Colombia believes in the relations between
this Council and the General Assembly, particularly
regarding this topic to which the Members of the
United Nations attach so much importance. We, of
course, agree that it is important to move forward in
keeping with the dates and the programme that have
been described here.

I would also like to say that we have made a
genuine effort here in favour of transparency of the
Council's work. We have achieved this through
detailed briefings to countries that are not members of
the Council, by continually updating our Web page and
through the willingness of all our delegates to offer
replies to and cooperate with any Member of the
Organization making a request. This open meeting is
undoubtedly also a contribution to the goal of
transparency, as many of you have indicated.

Let me further point out that one of the concerns
which has motivated Colombia from the outset - and
this was very aptly highlighted by the United
Kingdom - has been a concern for managing the time
of the Council and administering its work well. Hence
the importance of being rigorous in keeping to the
agenda but also flexible enough to cope with
unexpected situations as they arise.

This, for instance, is what happened with regard
to the situation in the Middle East. No provision had
been made for it in the agenda, but it was taken up with
the appropriate sense of urgency dictated by the
magnitude of the crisis in the Middle East, which is of
concern to all of us. Throughout the Council's open
debate and the individual statements by members, there
were opportunities for each country to express its
position. There were also many non-members taking
the floor. I think about 37 statements were made on this
topic. We agree that the lack of any outcome points
ultimately to the complexity of the issue and the
particulars of the situation in the Middle East. But we
do hope that the Council will be able to make a unified
and strong contribution to this topic of great concern
for the international community.

Responding to what most delegations have said
here, I believe this wrap-up exercise has also met the
goals that we had set for ourselves. The comments and
suggestions for the work of the Council are
undoubtedly very constructive contributions. They will
enhance the rigorous nature of the Council's work. We
hope that these recommendations will be used to bring
about a general improvement in the Council's working
methods, a topic that has been of concern not only to
the Council, but to the membership of our Organization
as a whole.

Since we anticipate no further unexpected events
in the remainder of today, the last day of August, I
would like to thank all of you for your cooperation and
your work. I welcome France, in particular its
Permanent Representative, Ambassador Levitte, and
wish them all the best in the exercise of the presidency
of the Council during the month of September.

I remember that when I first had the honour of
presiding over the Council at the beginning of the
month, we did not expect the work to be quite so
intense. The weather in New York during this time was
rather hot. I think it was the most humid month of the
summer in New York. Today the weather is a little
nicer, the forecast says that an autumn-like climate is
on its way, and we hope that a more comfortable
climate will also prevail within the Security Council.

I am grateful to all members for their comments
relating to the Colombian Mission, headed by the
ambassador. I am very proud to say that our
delegation's entire team has worked hard, in close
cooperation with members and with the Secretariat. I

trust that whatever contribution Colombia may have The Council has thus concluded the present stage
made to the specific issues that have been under ofits consideration ofthe item on its agenda.
consideration will be of benefit to the cause of
international peace and security which is, Without
question, the principal mandate of this Council, as set
out in the Charter.

The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.
