As I speak, Afghans representing the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan are preparing to sit with representatives of the Taliban to discuss a political settlement to the conflict. This is truly a historic moment. After four decades of war, the people of Afghanistan have more reason than ever to hope that this devastating conflict may come to an end. This will be a long and challenging process. Already, the pre-talks phase has raised difficult issues related to prisoner releases, which have taken some time to resolve. Eventually, the negotiations will have to tackle a range of profound questions about the kind of country Afghans want. These can be addressed only by Afghans talking with other Afghans. Solutions cannot be found on the battlefield or imposed from the outside. At the same time, Afghans need and deserve our support to ensure that peace, when it arrives, can be sustained. I would like to spend some time today updating the Council on the efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to prepare the ground for peace and the role of the international community as the peace process unfolds. Despite the air of cautious optimism, the level of violence on the battlefield remains deeply worrying. The last few weeks have seen near-record numbers of security incidents, including egregious attacks by spoilers targeting civilians involved in the peace process. We must keep in mind the terrible consequences of that violence. The conflict continues to kill or injure hundreds of Afghans every week. It has displaced millions of people, most of whom have no immediate prospect of returning to their homes. It impedes humanitarian access, depriving many of life-saving assistance and hindering the response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. And, as we look towards peace talks, it creates an atmosphere of mistrust that risks derailing negotiations. Let us recall what four decades of war have brought to Afghanistan. Despite significant progress in the last two decades, Afghanistan remains one of the worst places in the world to be a woman and one of the worst to be a child. According to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Afghans constitute the largest protracted refugee population in Asia and the second-largest refugee population in the world. After two decades of substantial financial assistance from donors, millions of Afghans continue to live in conditions of extreme poverty. As we congratulate Africa on the eradication of polio in Africa, we face a sobering statistic: Afghanistan is now one of only two countries in the world where polio still threatens the health of the population. But it does not have to be this way. We continue to call on all parties to reduce the level of violence. Along with many Afghans, we hope that one of the first items on the agenda of intra-Afghan negotiations will be a humanitarian ceasefire. For Afghanistan's most vulnerable people, the stakes could not be higher. I urge all Member States to amplify this call as negotiations begin. The coming days will, hopefully, bring the formal launch of intra-Afghan negotiations. We thank those Member States, including Qatar, the United States and Pakistan, that have engaged in intensive diplomatic efforts to get us to this point. For our part, the United Nations will be working with international partners to support both parties and the host countries throughout the process. But a peace process, and even a peace agreement, does not peace make. All of us must each do our part to create a conducive environment for peace talks. In parallel, we must ensure that the ground is prepared for peace to flourish once an agreement is reached. One of the flagship issues for the United Nations will be the role of human rights in achieving a sustainable peace. We know from long experience that peace processes are more robust when they take into account the concerns of the victims of war. For that reason, we have initiated a dialogue with the conflict parties on the inclusion of victims' voices in peace negotiations and on mechanisms for incorporating victim- centred justice. This is a difficult topic but an essential one. Only when victims' grievances are acknowledged and addressed will true reconciliation be possible. We have also spoken a great deal in this forum about the necessity of including women in the process. Most recently, I was impressed by the strong declarations of support for Afghan women by Member States during the Arria Formula meeting in July. But talking will not be enough. Women's rights are already emerging as one of the most difficult issues confronting the conflict parties as they enter negotiations and one where any compromises could pose a difficult dilemma for Member States. This issue will be more central in the Afghan peace process than in any other peace negotiations in recent memory. In Kabul, I have initiated a series of meetings with a countrywide network of Afghan women on the peace process, which is giving us important insights into their concerns as well as possible avenues for greater engagement. But it is women's representation at the peace table that offers the best opportunity to ensure that their own rights are upheld and that their vision for a peaceful Afghanistan is reflected. I commend the women members of the Islamic Republic negotiating team and other peace structures for their energetic outreach and substantive preparations for intra-Afghan talks. We are not aware of any women's representation on the Taliban side, but we remain hopeful that they, too, will find a way of meaningfully including women in the negotiations. Afghanistan's vibrant media will also be crucial in fostering an inclusive and sustainable peace. I pay tribute to Mr. Mohseni for his leadership on this issue and to the many brave Afghan journalists who have taken considerable risks in the course of their work. Next week I will be having the first of what I hope will be many meetings with a consortium of national media to discuss how we can work, together with civil society, to stimulate an active dialogue on what peace looks like for them. Peace will truly take hold only if it delivers material benefits to the Afghan people. This, too, will require substantial preparation by all parties: by the Government of Afghanistan; by the countries of the region; and by the international community. Alongside the Government, we have been working with the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank and the private sector to identify the challenges to economic development and the great economic dividends of peace. Regional cooperation will be a vital element of this undertaking, both as a contributor to and a beneficiary of peace. By deepening its regional relationships in the areas of trade and transit, infrastructure connectivity, counter-narcotics, people movements and knowledge transfer, Afghanistan can begin to realize its enormous untapped potential and take full advantage of its strategic location at the heart of Asia. At the same time, a stable Afghanistan will bring about a more prosperous neighbourhood. In the spirit of the Tashkent conference, the Mission has initiated an ambassadors' working group in Kabul bringing together the six countries bordering Afghanistan to discuss concrete work in key thematic areas. I have been gratified at the response from the six border countries - China, Iran, Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan - and will continue to work with them, the Government and the many United Nations agencies to realize the dividends for all that peace in Afghanistan can bring. As this exercise develops, it will be linked into other regional formats such as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, among others. For peace to take hold, Afghanistan will need strong, trusted public institutions. I am pleased to note the Government's announcement of the formation of its cabinet as well as of appointments to the High Council for National Reconciliation. But there is still much work to be done. The most recent UNAMA anti-corruption report identified significant institutional gaps, which have stymied progress. We are working with the Government, civil society and donors to encourage concrete initiatives, including a comprehensive anti-corruption strategy and an independent anti-corruption commission. In the lead-up to the pledging conference in November, tackling corruption is essential to building donors' confidence. In preparation, we are working closely with the conference co-Chairs, Afghanistan and Finland, as well as line ministries and donors, to promote alignment between the Government's priorities and the expectations of the international community. This year we are facing the added complication of the global fiscal crisis caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which will likely constrain the financial commitments of key donors. But we are determined to help Afghanistan make the best case possible for ongoing donor support. Just as peace can pave the way for development, continued international support for development is needed to consolidate peace. It is noteworthy that the pledging conference will be taking place in parallel with intra-Afghan negotiations. Each process must reinforce the other. Combined, the two will set the course for Afghanistan's future. For that reason, we are engaging regularly with the Taliban to ensure that it is well-informed about Afghanistan's obligations as a member of the global community, including through expanded discussions on development and governance issues, as well as our ongoing human rights dialogue. This year, the COVID-19 pandemic has hit Afghanistan hard. More than 38,000 confirmed cases of COVID have been reported and more than 1,400 people have lost their lives to this disease, although the actual figures are probably many times higher. Millions of Afghans have suffered lost income and livelihoods. Children have missed crucial months of schooling. Anecdotally - and, sadly, as is the case in many countries around the world - women have suffered an increase in gender-based violence. Rebuilding those lives will be a painstaking task. I thank the members of the Council for their support for Afghanistan's national COVID-19 response and for the concern expressed by many of them for our staff here on the ground. Fortunately, the situation seems to have stabilized since my most recent briefing (S/2020/597, annex I), but the pandemic has affected our operations dramatically, and we do not know what the autumn has in store. Despite those challenges, it remains a privilege for us to execute the mandate given to us by the Security Council in service of the people of Afghanistan. I am confident that the next time we meet, we will discuss the progress that will have been made in the intra-Afghan negotiations. The Council's support and that of Afghanistan's neighbours and international donors will be essential for success. The people of Afghanistan have heard Council members' voices of support and appreciate the ongoing commitment of the United Nations to their future. We stand ready to assist them in any way we can.
