Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank Malaysia and the co-authors of the draft resolution
and to welcome the Ministers who are honouring us
with their presence today.

We deeply deplore the defeat of the draft resolution
on the establishment of an international tribunal to
prosecute persons responsible for the downing of Flight
MH-l7. France supported this major initiative from the
beginning.

The creation of the ad hoc tribunal formed a part of
the fight against impunity, one of the Security Council's
priorities. Today we are once again witnessing the
calling into question of one of the Council's major
areas of action, one that had until now found consensus
among its members. The initiative was also part of the
implementation of resolution 2166 (2014), adopted on
21 July 2014 by the Security Council, demanding that
those responsible for the tragedy be held accountable
for their actions.

Resolution 2166 (2014) marked the unity of the
Council in condemning that heinous act. It was also
a milestone in clarifying the tragedy, finding those
responsible and the demands ofjustice. The provisions
of the draft resolution are by no means revoked by
the fact that the draft was rejected today. Make no
mistake, the call will continue for the whole truth
behind this tragedy to be known, for those responsible
to be prosecuted and for justice to be done. The Joint
Investigation Team, with which the United Nations is
associated through the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) and whose impartiality the United
Nations recognizes, must continue its work. We owe it
to the victims, who are vividly remembered.

It is deeply shocking that one year after the
disaster, in which, let us recall, 298 innocent civilians
perished, the Council is unable to respond to the terrible
anguish and concerns of entire nations, as evidenced
by the presence here today of several Government
representatives of the countries concerned. We therefore
deeply regret Russia's veto.

Today's vote represents a serious failure for the
Council. We must take note of this, but we do not have
the right to stop working. We owe it to each of the
victims of this tragedy. We owe it to the quest for truth.
And we owe it to the values of the United Nations,
which must unite us. It is in that spirit that we will soon
be called on to continue our work on the follow-up to
the international inquiry, which will shortly submit its
findings.

