The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Honore for her briefing and for her leadership.
I also thank all the dedicated women and men serving
in the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), who are working with her to build
a more secure and stable Haiti. The troop and police
contributors to Haiti, many of whom we have heard
from and several of whom we will soon hear from, have
made a world of difference in the lives of the Haitian
people. The whole international community is grateful.

When the Security Council met to discuss Haiti in
March (see S/PV.7147), there was cautious optimism
that the signing of the El Rancho Accord and the
dialogue mediated by the Episcopal Conference
would help break the country's political stalemate and
lead to long-overdue elections. It is therefore deeply
disappointing, as other Council members have pointed
out, that five months later so little progress has been
made towards that goal. Haiti still does not even have
an electoral law, which led the country's provisional
Electoral Council to declare recently that Haiti would
not be able to hold elections on 26 October, the date the
Government had set. Many of Haiti's elected leaders
have worked tirelessly to seek a political compromise
and have offered meaningful concessions to that end,
including with regard to the composition of the Electoral
Council and the Cabinet. But a group of six Seantors
seems intent on holding elections hostage to partisan
concerns, even going so far as to prevent a debate on
the electoral law.

Legislators in a democracy have a responsibility
to defend their constituents' rights. But when elected
officials take advantage of democracy's checks and
balances to cynically block debates and elections
altogether, they stand in the way of addressing citizens'
real needs. And, as we all know, the needs of Haiti's
citizens are very real.

Massive progress has been made to find homes for
the 1.5 million people displaced by the 2010 earthquake,
but 70,000 people are still displaced and much work
remains to be done to provide for citizens' basic needs,
such as electricity, quality schools and access to
doctors. Haitians expect their Government to provide
for those needs, and are understandibly frustrated when
they are not met.

Therefore, our message to all of Haiti's politicians
is clear: come together to pass an electoral law and
hold free, fair and inclusive elections in respect of
constitutional deadlines. Every United Nations State
Member shouldjoin that call, and we are heartened that
so many have done so.

Despite the political deadlock in Haiti, there
has been encouraging progress on other fronts. We
welcome the onging expansion and professionalization
of the Haitian National Police. Police have shown
an increased capacity to maintain public order
while respecting people's rights. We also recognize
MINUSTAH's efforts to strengthen Haiti's justice
sector, such as seeking to imporve the capacity of
judges and prosecutors and increasing access to legal
aid. Haiti's prison system needs urgent fixing. Haiti's
prisons, which have a capacity of approximately 6,000
people, currently house more than 10,000, and nearly
80 per cent of those people are awaiting trial.

Let us be clear: our work in Haiti is not finished.
But just because significant development and political
challenges persist does not make MINUSTAH the
solution to all of them. Nor does it mean that the
Mission should be kept just as it is. We have to right-
size MINUSTAH to fit Haiti's evolving needs. We
agree with our colleagues that decisions about the size
and configuration of the force should be conditions-
based. Like our friends in the region who have given so
much to Haiti's recovery, we are a neighbour of Haiti's
and we have a deep and demonstrated interest in Haiti's
security and the growth and success of its democracy.

The United States agrees with the Secretary-
General's determination, based on a thorough
review, that conditions support further consolidating
MINUSTAH's military component in the upcoming
mandate. We agree with the Special Representative that
support for MINUSTAH's robust police component to
Haiti's National Police is still critically necessary. A
smaller military component must stand ready to assist
on short notice anywhere that unrest overwhelms the
combined capacity ofHaitian and United Nations police.
With continued robust MINUSTAH support, we look to
Haiti's Government to assume greater responsibility for
security, including for elections.

We are committed to discussing with partners
how MINUSTAH should be adjusted. We belive that
the Secretariat, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Force Commander have
taken the facts on the ground into account, and they
have concluded that conditions support the adjusted
force levels recommended by the Secretary-General.

In conclusion, Haiti has real needs. It has been
through so much and it faces tremendous challenges. We
as the international community continue to experiment
and to learn and to adjust around the most effective
ways to help the Haitian people address those very real
needs. We will continue to do so as Haiti continues to
move along the path to self-sufficiency.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.

