Mr. Koenders (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to address
the Security Council following the violent incidents that
have rocked Kidal over the past few days, particularly
on 16 and 17 May. We regret the loss of lives resulting
from these events, and we especially condemn the
acts of violence, including those committed by Malian
Government forces. In these difficult times for Mali,
I would like to reiterate our deepest condolences to
President Keita and the families of the victims executed
in Kidal. The perpetrators of this hateful crime must
be identified and brought to justice as soon as possible,
with the support of the international community. These
acts of violence by armed groups are a violation of
resolution 2100 (2013) and the Preliminary Agreement
of 18 June 2013.

The Security Council and the international
community, from which 43 countries are contributing
men and women peacekeepers to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), have not been spared. In the past
few days, two Blue Helmets and 21 police officers from
MINUSMA were wounded in Kidal as they supported
the Malian armed forces and gendarmerie in accordance
with their mandate in the days preceding and during the
visit of the Prime Minister and his delegation to the
northern region. We wish them a speedy recovery.

These serious incidents, occurring during an
important visit by the Malian Head of Government,
have highlighted the political and security challenges
in Mali that the United Nations has identified over the
past few months and again very recently in the context
of the strategic review of MINUSMA. In particular,
they reveal how complex and difficult it will be to
restore State institutions in the North of the country
and how urgent it is that progress be made at the level
of the political process.

In accordance with resolution 2100 (2013) and the
Ouagadougou Preliminary Agreement of June 2013, the
United Nations remains deeply committed to effectively
restoring the sovereignty and authority of the Malian
State over its entire territory, including - indeed,
above all - in Kidal. The restoration of the State in
northern Mali is essential to achieving a solution to the
underlying causes of the Malian conflict. The acts of
the armed groups in Kidal against the Governorate and
the Malian State forces are thus totally unacceptable.
Indifference is not an option; the people suffer when
the violence continues. In order to prevent any further
loss of life, particularly among the civilian population,
it is crucial that political initiatives be made an urgent
priority, as provided for in the Ouagadougou Agreement
and requested in resolution 2100 (2013).

(spoke in English)

The priority today is to pull Kidal back from the
brink of renewed confrontation. It is imperative that
every possible action be taken to avoid further violence.
That is essential to prevent northern Mali from slipping
into a spiral of violence that risks pulling the country
back into the state of crisis that put it on the Council's
agenda and that could destabilize the entire subregion.
We must call on all concerned to take concrete action
now to help to de-escalate tensions and avoid any
further provocation. The Mouvement national pour la
liberation de l'Azawad must hand over the Governorate
and the administrative buildings as soon as possible.
The cantonment process must move forward, and the
peace initiatives taken recently, including through the
appointment of a High Representative, Mr. Modibo
Keita, should proceed without delay. More violence
will breed only further violence and risk reversing the
progress made so far. The people of Mali will be the
first to suffer, as they have all too often been in the
past.

Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson called
President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita yesterday to
convey his extreme concern about the recent violence.
Mr. Eliasson stressed the importance of following
a political path in order to resolve the current crisis.
While he acknowledged that the recent fighting in
Kidal has unleashed a strong and understandable
emotional reaction among large parts of the population,
he appealed for calm and stressed the importance of
de-escalating tensions.

The priority for tomorrow is to revive the political
process. The international community should be
unanimous in impressing on the armed groups that are
signatories or adherents to the Preliminary Agreement
of 18 June 2013, particularly the Mouvement national
de liberation de l'Azawad, that their grievances can
be addressed and resolved only through peaceful and
political means.

(spoke in French)

The United Nations will continue to support the
parties concerned in their process of reconciliation
and political dialogue, and hopes that inclusive peace
talks will start as soon as possible, in order to repair
the damage to the social tissue inflicted by this
crisis, including during the past few days. We are
unreservedly committed to continuing our support for
this process and other key elements of our mandate in
Mali, including development, capacity-building and
institutional reforms.

