Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): We too welcome
the participation of Special Representative Riicker,
Prime Minister Ceku and Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic in
today's debate regarding the future status of Kosovo.

It is indeed the desire of the delegation of Ghana
to be a part of the consensus that will finally emerge in
the Security Council on the future of Kosovo.
Nonetheless, we recognize that this remains an
exceedingly complex issue, given the wide gulf that
persists between the parties. The dilemma is how to
resolve the claim to self-determination by the majority
Albanian population of Kosovo, on the one hand, and
the Serbian Government's anxiety to preserve the
territorial integrity of the Serbian State, on the other, as
reflected in the provisions of the new Constitution,
adopted in October this year.

In that regard, let me state that Ghana attaches
equal weight to the two conflicting claims, and
believes that all possibilities for a negotiated settlement
of the current impasse must be explored, in conformity
with the principles of international law. In addition, we
are mindful of the fact that there can be no lasting
peace and stability in Kosovo unless the final status
process results in an outcome that guarantees respect
for the rights of all ethnic groups in Kosovo and also
encourages their effective and meaningful participation
in public affairs within a democratic dispensation.

06-6573]

We believe the current strategy contains the right
elements, with its emphasis on the creation of
functioning democratic institutions that can effectively
entrench the rule of law, ensure the freedom of
movement in a safe and secure environment and
facilitate the return of displaced persons, not to
mention the creation of a vibrant economy for the well-
being of the people of Kosovo. We are encouraged in
that regard by the actions undertaken by UNMIK and
the Office of the Special Envoy during the reporting
period, both to meet the institutional needs of Kosovo
and to engage the parties on the issues of
decentralization, cultural and religious heritage and
community rights.

Although the progress made so far does not
measure up to expectations with respect to the 13
priorities for standards implementation, it is not for
want of trying. In the absence of a strong political will
to engage their Albanian counterparts, the Kosovo
Serbians have impeded progress.

In that connection, the continuing refusal of the
Serbian minority to participate in the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government - in spite of the
various overtures made by the Government, coupled
with the institutional mechanisms being put in place to
ensure accountability and respect for the rights of all
minorities - is a major challenge. We urge the Kosovo
Serbs and the authorities in Belgrade not to dismiss
those positive overtures as cynical manipulations of the
final status process without subjecting them to a
practical test. And the only way to do so is to become
involved in the process of institution-building that is
shaping the future of their homeland.

At the same time, we find the pattern of hostility
among Albanian youth towards the Serbs particularly
disturbing, as it does not augur well for harmonious
existence between the two communities in future. We
urge that conscious efforts be made to instil in the
youth of the various ethnic groups the values of
tolerance and unity. Otherwise, the current efforts will
indeed amount to nothing but token gestures.

For us, therefore, the critical question today is
whether at this point in time Kosovo has the internal
strength and resilience to withstand the pressures of the
conflicting claims on its future status. And closely
related to that is whether the authorities in Belgrade
and the Kosovo Serbs can be brought around to
accepting an independent and sovereign Kosovo with

the levers of power firmly in the hands of an Albanian
majority. Ghana does not have easy answers to those
questions.

