Mr. Aljarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Assistant Secretary-
General, Ms. Ursula Mueller, for her valuable briefing
on the latest developments relating to the humanitarian
situation in Syria.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the representative of Germany on behalf of the Syria
humanitarian co-penholders. I would like to make the
following points in my national capacity.

The co-penholders 4 Kuwait, Belgium and
Germany - have presented a draft resolution to renew
the work of the cross-border mechanism for the delivery
of humanitarian aid to Syria. There is currently no
alternative to the mechanism, which is relied upon by
4 million people in need of humanitarian aid, mostly
in northern Syria. Several rounds of negotiations
and consultations were held in recent weeks but,
unfortunately, the Security Council has yet to reach
an agreement to renew the work of the mechanism,
which has become the difference between survival and
death for those who desperately need that assistance
to continue. Alongside Belgium and Germany, we will
continue and intensify our efforts to renew the work
of the mechanism. We call on all parties and Security
Council members to cooperate with us in order to adopt
a draft resolution to that end, which is a key shared
humanitarian responsibility.

We have witnessed this year significant
humanitarian tragedies in Syria as a result of the
ongoing conflict in the country, which has caused
immense suffering since the outbreak of the Syrian
crisis in 2011. The crisis, which has affected the Middle
East and far beyond, poses a flagrant threat to regional
and international peace and security. The Syrian
crisis has resulted in one of the largest humanitarian
tragedies in modern history, claiming the lives of
hundreds of thousands of Syrians, displacing 6 million
Syrians internally and creating over 5 million Syrian
refugees. As we enter 2020, 11 million people will still
be in need of humanitarian assistance in Syria. All
of the horrific statistics issued by the United Nations
clearly show the extent of the human suffering faced by
this brotherly Arab people, who have for years been the
subject of flagrant violations of all the basic principles
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

In the light of the humanitarian catastrophe in
Syria, the State of Kuwait adopted over the past years
a policy underpinned by the humanitarian dimension
of the Syrian crisis and its repercussions, as we believe
in the importance of standing alongside the brotherly
Syrian people and alleviating their suffering. We have
been proactive in hosting three donor conferences and
co-chaired the subsequent conferences in London and
Brussels. During those conferences, Kuwait contributed
$1.9 billion, rendering it one of the largest donors to the
humanitarian response.

The Council was not able to adopt a draft resolution
(S/2019/756) submitted by Belgium, Kuwait and
Germany for a ceasefire in Idlib governorate, which is
home to nearly 3 million people (see S/PV.8623). The
United Nations has issued repeated warnings about
the potential occurrence of the largest humanitarian
catastrophe in the twenty-first century if the military
operations there continue on a massive scale.

In that connection, we renew our condemnation
of the targeting of civilians by any party and of
attacks that target hospitals and health and civilian
facilities. Terrorism is a serious scourge that threatens
international peace and security. We all agree on the
importance ofcombating terrorism anywhere, including
Idlib governorate. However, we also reiterate our earlier
statement, with which many Council members agree,
that counter-terrorism operations do not in any way
absolve parties of their obligations under international
humanitarian law, including their obligations to protect
civilians and civilian facilities and to comply with the
principles of proportionality, distinction and caution.
We reiterate the fact that there can be no lasting
peace in Syria withoutjustice, and we stress the need to
hold to account all those who have committed serious
violations of human rights law and international
humanitarian law and to eradicate impunity.

We therefore support the work of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since 2011, as
well as that of the board of inquiry established by the
Secretary-General to investigate incidents that targeted
medical and civilian facilities in north-western Syria.

We stress that the return of refugees and displaced
persons must be safe, voluntary and dignified. In
addition, we stress the need to make progress in the
dossier concerning detainees and missing persons and
to allow relevant international organizations to visit
detention centres and prisons in Syria in accordance
with the provisions of international humanitarian law
and resolution 2474 (2019).

In conclusion, as this is the last scheduled
meeting on the Syrian humanitarian dossier before
our membership of the Security Council expires, I
would like to extend many thanks to Belgium and
Germany for their cooperation with us in the course
of discharging our responsibility as co-penholders on
the Syrian humanitarian dossier. I would like to take
this opportunity to renew my thanks and deepest
appreciation to the United Nations and its specialized
agencies, funds and programmes, as well as to all
humanitarian workers for their noble efforts and
humanitarian work in Syria. I assure them that the State
of Kuwait is committed to continuing its support for
those humanitarian efforts aimed at alleviating human
suffering in Syria and strengthening the partnership
between my country and the United Nations in the
humanitarian field.

