Mr. Buallay (Bahrain)(spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council has voted on a draft resolution that can
truly be considered one of the most important resolutions
put before the Council in the past two years. My
delegation, which voted in favour of the draft resolution,
sincerely hopes that it will be implemented in a credible
and objective manner. We are aware that the Council has
made strenuous efforts and spent long hours, and you, Sir,
have chaired and steered these efforts, in preparation of
the draft resolution and in working to secure support for
it by the majority of its member States.

However, we also believe that its implementation
will require complicated and wide-scale efforts; that
would be the decisive factor in implementing it in a valid
and efficient manner. We say this because we truly hope
that the crises between Iraq and the Security Council will
not be repeated. We are keen to see constructive
cooperation prevail between the two parties in order to
allow for complete destruction of Iraqi weapons of mass
destruction, the release of Kuwaiti and other nationals
held as prisoners of war and the return of Kuwaiti
property.

We in the Gulf region do not favour non-peaceful
options that cause tremors in the region every time a
crisis looms in the relationship between the Council and
Iraq. Therefore, Iraq must continuously implement
Council resolutions, the most recent of which is the one
we adopted today. This would mean that Iraq should
carry out the demands requested of it so that it can devote
its efforts to economic and social development, along with
other countries of the region.

Our delegation has repeatedly called for the Security
Council to make known what has been achieved in the
field of weapons of mass destruction. This will be an
encouragement to finish the task. We also have called for
a declaration on the fate of prisoners and properties.
However, the prevailing thinking at the Council at that

 

time was the policy of "all or nothing". Now we find the
Council modifying its style and approach, as clarified in the
draft resolution, allowing for a partial recognition of what
has been realized so far.

The Council has shown readiness to suspend the
sanctions imposed on Iraq, provided that Iraq show
cooperation in the field of armaments. We call on Iraq to
cooperate further with the Council. The Council will
guarantee its interests and the interests of the countries
concerned, reminding Iraq of its commitments under the
relevant Council resolutions.

We have not heard any member of this Security
Council who has declined to say that Iraq must cooperate
with the Council in the implementation of the relevant
resolutions, including today's. In return, Iraq had already
declared its total rejection of the resolution, even before its
adoption. And here we are today, questioning the ability of
the Council to cooperate with the party primarily concerned
when this same party rejects any cooperation with it. This
party puts suspension of any sanctions previously imposed
on it by the Council as a condition for cooperation. How
can we suspend or cancel the sanctions while resolution 687
(1991), relative to the destruction of weapons of mass
destruction, has not been implemented? Or while the release
of Kuwaiti prisoners and other nationals and the return of
Kuwaiti property has not been secured?

Here, we must not say that the number of prisoners is
small in comparison with those who were taken prisoner in
other wars. A prisoner means the whole world for his
family; consequently, the problem of prisoners is primarily
a humanitarian one. Also, we should not hear that the
Kuwaiti properties are simply archives. They are the
identity and history of the State of Kuwait; they were stolen
so as to obliterate the existence of that country.

Therefore, are we really about to repeat the crises that
have loomed in the past between Iraq and the Security
Council? We have warned, and continue to warn, about the
unpeaceful consequences of such crises.

Today's resolution might not be the optimal one, and
its adoption was not unanimous. However, it represents a
serious attempt by the Security Council to deal with the
issue. Iraq must respond favourably so that the desired
results of both parties will be realized.

While waiting for an end to the fall-out from the crisis
brought about by the Iraqi aggression against Kuwait, the
Security Council adopted the oil-for-food programme so
that humanitarian supplies could become a major factor in
alleviating the suffering of the Iraqi people resulting from
the sanctions imposed against Iraq. It is an integrated
programme and is already in its eighth year. However, we
have not yet been able to put an end to the question of
weapons of mass destruction, nor has there been any
information on Kuwaiti prisoners of war or Kuwaiti

property.

We are delighted to see that in the draft resolution
adopted today, the Council showed readiness to evince
more flexibility on the issue of humanitarian supplies. It
also exempted the Hajj pilgrimage from the sanctions
provisions.

On the other hand, we would like to recall the fifth
preambular paragraph of the resolution, which recalls the
goal of establishing the Middle East as a zone free from
weapons of mass destruction. Here, we must emphasize
that Israel poses a great danger to the region, because it
possesses a huge nuclear arsenal. Israel must, therefore,
submit its nuclear installations to international inspection
by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), in
particular the Dimona reactor, which is considered the
most dangerous nuclear installation in the Middle East
region.

The Security Council must bring the Iraqi question
to an end. Iraq, on its part, must cooperate with the
Council by implementing its resolutions. Iraq must also
coexist peacefully with its neighbours. Then, and only
then, will peace and development have a viable chance of
spreading in our region. The first step is today's
resolution.

