Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
statement. We acknowledge, as stated in his briefing
that significant progress has been made recently in the
political process in Somalia. We have also witnessed
very proactive efforts by the new President, Prime
Minister and cabinet members in urging opposition
groups to participate in the peace process.

However, the prospects for realizing a more
inclusive peace process remain dim. Hostilities against
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
continued to be carried out by rebel groups. The
international community must continue to support the
efforts of the new Government to promote an inclusive
political process.

A major area of concern is the unstable security
situation. The attack on AMISOM. in February resulted
in the loss of 11 Burundian soldiers, and recently four
United Nations aid workers were abducted and
subsequently released. In these difficult circumstances,
AMISOM. continues to secure strategic installations in
cooperation with the joint security forces. Japan
appreciates and commends the troop-contributing
countries Burundi and Uganda for their important role
in the Mission.

The troop-contributing countries need every
support in terms of logistics, training and equipment. It
is important that the United Nations logistical package
for AMISOM, proposed in the letter by the Secretary-
General dated 19 December 2008 (S/2008/804), be
speedily approved in accordance with the relevant
United Nations rules and procedures, with adequate
oversight and transparency.

An international donors conference will be
organized to seek support for AMISOM. and for the
capacity-building of Somali institutions, in accordance
with resolution 1863 (2009). Building the capacity of

Somali security institutions, including the joint security
forces, is essential for stabilizing the security situation.
Given the difficult situation on the ground, it is
important for the international community to formulate
the best possible way to assist Somali people in
pursuing both a quick response and accountability at
the same time. Japan, for its part, has provided
assistance for humanitarian needs and security sector
enhancement in an amount totalling $64.5 million over
the past two years.

Acts of piracy off the coast of Somalia pose a
threat to the international community, seriously
affecting safe passage and therefore requiring urgent
action. In terms of the efforts of the international
community, just a week ago, on 13 March 2009, the
Japanese Government approved the deployment of
Japan Self-Defence Forces to take measures against
acts of piracy at sea off the coast of Somalia and in the
Gulf of Aden, in accordance with provisions of the
existing law allowing maritime security operations on
an emergency basis. Two destroyer ships have departed
from Japan on this mission. The Japanese Government
has also submitted a new draft law on the penalization
of acts of piracy and measures against acts of piracy
for approval by our Diet.

As was discussed in the series of meetings of the
Contact Group on Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia, it is
important to strengthen partnerships, including through
United Nations efforts for information sharing, in order
to improve coordination between the various activities
of Member States and the countries in the region. Japan
will continue its active participation in the coordinated
measures to address Somali piracy issues, drawing on
its experience in Asia, such as the Regional
Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and
Armed Robbery against ships in Asia.

Finally, we agree with the Secretary-General that
it is important to take a multi-faceted approach to
resolving the unstable situation in Somalia. The
members of the transitional parliament have been
moving back to the capital. The integrated approach
requires a truly inclusive political process that
incorporates various opposition groups, clan leaders,
civil society and other relevant stakeholders for nation-
building.

It will also be essential to assist institution-
building in Somalia, such as efforts to strengthen
governing capacity and infrastructure, for the sake of
long-term stability. The international community must
strengthen cooperation and interaction with Somalia,
and we should mobilize the necessary support and
resources.

As for the future transition of AMISOM. to a
United Nations peacekeeping operation, Japan looks
forward to examining the report of the Secretary-
General that is due by 15 April in order to determine
the most appropriate course of action. We hope to
receive a detailed and realistic assessment from the
Secretary-General on the security and political
situation on the ground.

