Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I want
to thank all three briefers for their presentations
today. We commend the continued hard work of
Special Representative Yamamoto on the ground
in Afghanistan.

The United States welcomed President Ghani's
announcement of an extension ofthe temporary ceasefire
with the Taliban after the Eid al-Fitr holiday. That was a
bold gesture. President Ghani's announcement showed
the Government's commitment to peace as both a
national and a religious responsibility. Once again, we
see that President Ghani is making serious efforts to
find a way to end the conflict. Sadly, the Taliban has
refused to extend the ceasefire further. We condemn
the Taliban's unwillingness to support that offer.

During Eid, we witnessed Afghan soldiers and
police sitting with Taliban fighters side by side in
prayer. If Afghans can pray together, their leaders can
talk together and, ultimately, resolve their differences.
The people of Afghanistan deserve a reprieve from the
Taliban's campaign of violence - one that lasts longer
than a weekend. We urge the Taliban to respond to the
call for peace from the Afghan people, reciprocate the
Government's ceasefire in full and enter into peace
talks without preconditions.

The United States stands ready to work with the
Afghan Government, the Taliban and the people of
Afghanistan to reach a peace agreement that brings a
permanent end to this war. It is also incumbent upon
those parties that maintain close ties with the Taliban to
use their influence to bring the group to the negotiating
table. Those who provide the Taliban and other armed
insurgents with weapons, money or political support
are fuelling the conflict. That must stop.
As we continue to support the peace process, we
have not lost sight of the critical work being done to
prepare for Afghanistan's upcoming elections. The
United States fully supports timely, credible and
transparent parliamentary elections this year, with
presidential elections in 2019. Preparations for those
elections are at a critical stage, and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan plays an essential
role in supporting Afghanistan's electoral commissions.
We urge the United Nations to ensure that it remains
fully staffed throughout the entire election cycle, in
order to continue this vital support. We also appeal to
all donors to make a concerted and generous effort in
support of those elections, with a view to preventing
further political instability that could frustrate efforts
to advance the peace process. We have contributed
tens of billions of dollars to Afghanistan, including
hundreds of millions in support of Afghan elections.
We would urge our international partners to do all they
can to join us in that effort.

These remain difficult times in Afghanistan. The
back-to-back terrorist attacks last week, which killed
more than 40 people, ShOW the challenges that the Afghan
people continue to face. But despite those obstacles, the
ceasefire during Eid gave us a small vision of how life
in Afghanistan could change for the better. One Taliban
fighter told a reporter that, during the ceasefire, "the
people were very happy with the peace. Nothing comes
of fighting. It is all loss." A police officer who was able
to visit his family in a Taliban-controlled village for
the first time in years recalled that "one of my cousins
pinched me. He said, 'ls this you, or am I dreaming?"'

Those stories, and many others like them, show
what is possible when the Afghan people come together
in support of peace. The all-too-brief ceasefire during
Eid should encourage all of us to think about what
could be within reach. The ceasefire shows that peace
is possible. The question is not if we can achieve peace,
but how. We must redouble our work to help the Afghan
people achieve a peace that can endure.

