Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom and Ambassador Tanin for their observations
today. On behalf of the United States, I would like to
thank Mr. Haysom and his team for their dedicated
and humane work to help the Afghan people improve
their lives, their institutions and their nation. Today's
unanimous renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
shows the Council's ongoing support for their efforts
and for Afghanistan.

As we mark the beginning of Afghanistan's
transformation decade, we have seen both encouraging
advances and enduring challenges. Last year we saw
Afghans take real risks and conquer fear to cast their
ballots in an election. We saw two candidates put the
country's future first, forming a unity Government
and sustaining it as they confront shared challenges,
including the formation of the Cabinet, electoral reform
and peace and reconciliation. The United States calls
on the leaders to put forward urgently a full slate of
Cabinet nominees who meet the rigorous requirements
that they establish and who can obtain parliamentary
approval.

We commend President Ghani and Chief Executive
Officer Abdullah's shared commitment to prioritizing
electoral reform. Last year's election exposed chronic
weaknesses in Afghanistan's electoral system. Promptly
identifying the necessary reforms and implementing
them urgently and in a manner consistent with
international standards is critical, including to ensure
successful parliamentary and district council elections.
Establishing the special electoral reform commission,
which the two leaders agreed upon last fall, would be
an important step towards that end.

Making fundamental changes to a country's
political and electoral system is challenging under
any circumstances. Yet Afghans are undertaking that
extraordinary task amid continued attacks by insurgents
who seek to destabilize the country. UNAMA's
exceptional reporting on the toll on civilians, which
is a model for other missions, testifies to the impact
of the violence on Afghan society, particularly on
some of its most vulnerable members. Compared to
2013, civilian casualties increased by 22 per cent in
2014, civilian deaths rose by 25 per cent, the number
of women casualties increased by 21 per cent and the
number of child casualties by 40 per cent. There were
714 children - kids - killed in 2014.

UNAMA's reporting attributes roughly 75 per cent
of all civilian casualties to the Taliban and affiliated
groups. What statistics cannot capture is the
immeasurable impact on the families of those wounded
or killed. For example, UNAMA's report tells us
that women, left as sole income providers after their
husbands were killed or maimed, experienced lasting
consequences,
"with poverty forcing many women to give their
daughters in marriage in exchange for debts or to
take their children out of school often to work".

That does not even capture the emotion and pain of all
the losses.

Afghanistan's leaders understand the far-reaching
impact of violence on the Afghan people, which is one
of the many reasons they have committed to bringing
peace to their country i a goal we strongly support. We
see tremendous bravery exhibited by many Afghans.
One unheralded group is the de-miners, who venture
out day after day to clear minefields so that their fellow
citizens are not maimed as they harvest their land or
walk to school. Last year 34 de-miners were killed,
including 11 killed by insurgents on 13 December while
they were clearing unexploded ordnance in Helmand
province. We see similar dedication in the legions of
Afghan teachers who show up in their classrooms every
day, despite threats and harassment, to give boys and
girls the education they need to build their future and
the future of their country.

We also honour Afghan security forces, who risk
their lives, and in far too many cases give their lives,
protecting their fellow citizens. Their resolve and
capabilities have improved a great deal. The continued
professionalization of the Afghan national defence and
security forces, with robust, sustained international
support, including through NATO's Resolute Support
Mission, is crucial both to improving effectiveness
and ensuring more faithful adherence to international
human-rights standards. The abusive tactics reported
to UNAMA and catalogued in its recent report on
the treatment of Afghan detainees have no place
in the pursuit of justice; nor does the complicity of
justice officials who, according to the same report,
overwhelmingly rely on confessions from defendants
in criminal prosecutions, even when credible evidence
suggests that such confessions may have been obtained
through abusive tactics. That is why we applaud the
Afghan Government's commitment to eliminating the
use of torture.

As everyone here knows, last week we marked
International Women's Day. It was a day for marking
a number of inspiring stories from around the world,
including Afghanistan, a country where under
Taliban rule women could not walk outside without
a male relative and a burqa. Last week, members of
the Afghanistan women's national cycling team were
not only walking outside, they were racing down the
country's roads on their bikes. Team members are
pinched for resources but big on courage. Some drivers
yell at them and threaten them, but they ride on. One
day a man on a motorcycle reached out and tried to grab
at the captain, causing her to crash and hurt her back.
But today she is back on her bike, leading more than
40 women training with the team. Imagine what it must
feel like to be a little girl sitting in a car and to suddenly
drive by those 40 women flying down the road in single
file. Imagine how inspiring that must be. One of the
team members, Malika Yousifi, wants to become the
first Afghan woman to complete the Tour de France.
She told a reporter, "Nothing will stop us." We believe
that if she is given the chance, and if her country stays
on the brave political path it has charted, Malika is
right. Nothing will stop them.

There is so much to lose and so much left to gain
in these difficult days. The United States will support
the Afghan people on every step of their journey to
take their place as a stable, peaceful, independent and
democratic nation.

