Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
his second report on the activity of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and to Assistant Secretary-General Mr. Annabi for his
statement at this meeting. The Russian delegation fully
shares the report's assessments and conclusions.

In preparing for today's meeting on East Timor,
we experienced mixed feelings. On the one hand, the
positive results of UNTAET activity to normalize life
in the territory have been obvious. On the other hand,
we have recently received a number of alarming
reports, the culmination of which was the news of the
death of a New Zealand peacekeeper serving in the
military component of UNTAET. The circumstances
which have come to light regarding the tragedy attest
to unceasing armed attacks by the opponents of the
independence of East Timor. We associate ourselves
with the demands of other States that decisive
measures be taken to prevent a repetition of such
incidents.

We are also alarmed by the conclusions of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
regarding the situation in the refugee camps and the
activity of members of the pro-integration militias in
West Timor. We hope that the Indonesian authorities on
site will take steps to right this situation.

At the same time, we also note the unquestioned
major successes of UNTAET activities and the
consistent manner in which it has been resolving
problems. I refer to efforts in such varied fields as the
establishment of an East Timorese judicial system, the
study of the prospects for providing for the security of
East Timor and even the training and equipping of
farmers engaged in cultivating coffee beans. Also
noteworthy are the positive examples of the training of
national personnel in various areas of State and
economic activity in East Timor. A source of
satisfaction is the policy of the UNTAET leadership on
expanding the involvement of the East Timorese
themselves in resolving the problems facing the
population. That in particular has been reflected in the
establishment of a representative National Council and
in the involvement of the East Timorese in the
leadership of various areas of UNTAET activity. We
see a great personal role in these successes by the head
of UNTAET, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello.
Everything that I have just said inspires us with
the hope that the transition of East Timor to
independence will be, while laborious, a successful
undertaking.

