The President: I wish to welcome the presence at
this meeting of the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, as well as that of ministers. Their
presence is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject being discussed.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chad, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, New Zealand, Norway,
Myanmar, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland,
the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Ukraine and Yemen to
participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and Mr. Anthony Lake,
Executive Director of UNICEF, to participate in this
meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the Acting Head of the delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, to participate in this
meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
2

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2011/425, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chad, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2011/250 and S/2011/409, containing,
respectively, the report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict and a letter dated 1 July
2011 from the Permanent Representative of Germany
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

With the Council's permission, I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Germany.

Let me seize this opportunity to warmly welcome
the cooperation of all present on this topic. The
protection of children in armed conflict is of great
importance to all of us. This was evident also during
the negotiations leading to the draft resolution before
us. We are honoured by the presence of the
Secretary-General today, and let me also thank
Mr. Lake and Ms. Coomaraswamy for their presence
here.

I am confident that I speak for all those present
here today in saying that we do not want to see
children being used in conflicts. We do not want them
to be forced to fight. We do not want them to be
injured, abused or killed. We want children to grow up
knowing that their schools are safe places. Schools
should be places of learning and playing where
children can grow and thrive. Attacks on schools and
hospitals are barbaric acts. We want children to feel
safe when they are in need of physical help, when they
are weak, sick or wounded. Hospitals should therefore
also be safe and protected places.
11-41067
Consequently, I am very hopeful that the Council
is about to take the important decision to expand the
triggers for listing parties that commit serious
violations against children. Attacks on schools and
hospitals will then be among those triggers. This is a
big step forward.

We are also convinced of the importance of
actions plans between the United Nations and parties to
conflict. Implementing action plans is the only way to
get off those lists. In future, actions plans can also
include countering attacks on schools and hospitals.

There has been progress, and this progress is
encouraging. But we all know that we have to do more.
Persistent perpetrators need to face credible
consequences. If they do not change their behaviour,
they should face measures through sanctions regimes.
That is why it is important that today's draft resolution
also increases the possibility of targeted sanctions
against perpetrators listed in the report of the
Secretary-General.

Societies should be judged by the way in which
they treat their children. Our attitude towards our
children is a testament to our attitude towards our
future. We will continue to try to protect children from
the effects of war and conflict. We will continue to
listen to their stories for as long as it takes.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.

I shall now put the draft resolution to the vote.
A vote was taken by Show of hands.

In favour:
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Gabon, Germany, India,
Lebanon, Nigeria, Portugal, Russian Federation,
South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1998 (2011).

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.


