Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to congratulate Guatemala on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the first
time, which is, as has been said, very auspicious.
I also thank Mr. Mariano Fernandez Amunategui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his presentation and to reiterate my Government's
appreciation of his leadership and consistent support of
political dialogue and the strengthening of democracy
in Haiti.

(spoke in English)

The very fact that we can now consider the
situation in Haiti with a more strategic and longer-term
perspective testifies to the progress so far achieved.
Two years ago, Haiti was grappling with the aftermath
of a devastating tragedy. Although the challenge
of alleviating the plight of the 400,000 people still
living in tents remains, we must not forget that there
were 1.5 million people on the streets just after the
earthquake. That shows that real progress has been
made. The removal of debris has progressed. Haiti and
its international partners showed preparedness when
tropical storm Isaac hit and lives were spared.

For the first time, a democratically elected
Government from the opposition succeeded another
democratically elected Government. The performance
of the Haitian National Police has improved. Some
key rule of law institutions have been established. We
know, however, that the consolidation of such security
and stability gains remains a challenge. Addressing
that will require a sustained and strong commitment
by Haitians themselves and our continued support. It
will also demand that Haitian political actors seize all
opportunities for dialogue and understanding.

Haiti is progressively consolidating a democratic
foundation for its society after so many hardships,
struggles and uncertainties. The active leadership of the
Government and the inclusive participation of Haitian
institutions are required. We encourage the earliest
establishment of the Permanent Electoral Council as a
result of a timely and negotiated solution that garners
wide political support.

The upcoming partial legislative, local and
municipal elections will constitute an important
landmark. Credible and timely elections will send
a powerful signal to the international community,
potential investors and, above all, the Haitian
population. We commend Haitian leaders for taking
the reforms forward and setting up key rule of law
institutions.
The improved conditions on the ground have
allowed for adjustments in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). A lighter
military presence should go hand in hand with the
assumption of ever greater responsibilities by national
institutions, especially the Haitian National Police.

Equally important, the consolidation plan for
MINUSTAH must be mindful of the Government's
priorities and must be truly owned by Haitians
themselves. In addition, it must be coupled with a truly
integrated strategy of the whole United Nations family
in support of socioeconomic development and the
strengthening of the Haitian State. Such an integrated
strategy is essential for the sustainability of the
considerable efforts made by Haitians in the past and
their continuation in the years ahead, with the strong
support of the international community.

As Haitian institutions consolidate further, it is
essential that the Mission help the process by providing
the indispensable support for them to adequately
discharge their responsibilities. As we devise a strategy
for the gradual, carefully planned and conditions-
based military drawdown of MINUSTAH, we must
ensure that the Mission is provided with the adequate
tools, including quick-impact and community violence
reduction projects and engineering resources, in order
to continue to help secure a stable environment with
concrete benefits for the population.

In line with the Mission's consolidation plan,
Brazil is taking steps, in close coordination with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the other
troop-contributing countries, towards the partial
withdrawal of one of our two battalions that were
deployed as part of the post-earthquake surge. We see
that as a measure of success of the efforts made by Haiti
and the international community. We also see it as an
expression of our shared confidence in the continued
strengthening of the Haitian National Police. We will
undertake the drawdown in constant dialogue with the
Secretariat.

Full stability in Haiti requires major economic
transformations. Job creation and income generation are
still greatly needed. The stabilization gains facilitated
by MINUSTAH will not be sustainable in the absence
of improvements in the situation of the poorer and most
vulnerable people. They constitute the large majority of
the Haitian population.

Brazil has consistently underscored the importance
of a strong and well-coordinated strategy, under the
effective lead of the Haitian Government, so as to
generate economic growth and reduce poverty. We
welcome President Martelly's designation of five
restructuring priorities for the country up to 2016,
and his push for universal basic education in Haiti.
We warmly welcome the development of a new aid
coordination structure and, above all, the enhanced role
of the Government in such a mechanism.

Brazil continues to rally behind the construction
of the Artibonite 4C hydroelectric plant. The Brazilian
army engineer corps has donated the construction
project to the Haitian Government. Its completion will
generate jobs and provide cheaper and cleaner energy,
and it will open avenues for further investment and
cooperation. In parallel, Brazil is proud to contribute
to Haiti's health-care system through the construction
of four health-care units in Haiti in partnership with
Cuba.

Brazil's solidarity towards our fellow Haitians is
long-standing, deep-rooted and unwavering. We will
continue to stand by Haiti as it redoubles its efforts
towards steady political stability, stronger institutions
and more effective development partnerships. We
see encouraging developments in all those areas. The
determination and strength of the Haitian people are
what make our optimism well founded.

