Mr. Al-Qahtani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
at the outset to thank Mr. Jan Pronk, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan,
for the efforts he and the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan (UNMIS) have made to bring about the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. We commend the parties to the Agreement
for their efforts to implement it, and the considerable
progress made in the sharing of power and wealth.
Still, some problems remain, which the parties should
deal with in order to achieve security and stability and
the welfare of their people. I encourage the United
Nations Mission, and we agree with what Mr. Pronk
said, that the redeployment of UNMIS to other regions
such as Darfur would have dire consequences for peace
in the south and for the fate of UNMIS.

As Mr. Pronk said, the presence of the African
Mission in Darfur is a main and crucial element and
cannot be disposed of. It could be strengthened by
other units and other forces, and, consequently, we
must keep that force to keep peace and security in
Darfur. We all hope that the African Union Peace and
Security Council will extend the mandate of AMIS in
Darfur until it accomplishes the mission and the tasks
for which it was set up. We reaffirm our support,
through the League of Arab States, by providing all the
necessary financial support and the support of the
League of Arab States and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference for the efforts of the African Union
in Darfur. However, those efforts will not achieve their
objectives without the United Nations, especially the
Security Council.

In brief, we should deal with the situation in
Darfur objectively and transparently, and we should
avoid political arrogance, racial and ethnic allegations,
political hypocrisy and double standards. We now
know that it is the rebel movements that present
obstacles to the peace efforts in Darfur. They should be
punished, in consonance with Security Council
resolutions, because this Council has not dealt firmly
with the violations committed by members of the rebel
movements. That encourages those who are against the
Agreement to escalate their violence in order to erode
the DPA. We therefore should deal with them firmly,
and not continue to blame the Sudanese Government
when it tries to repel aggression in the protection of its
national security and territorial integrity. We hope to
know Mr. Pronk's views with regard to that matter and
how we might tackle it.

We agree with the representative of the United
Kingdom that the Government of the Sudan must
provide security for its citizens in Darfur. However, the
protection of civilians, if performed by the Sudanese
Government, would be considered, as some said, a
violation of resolution 1590 (2005). Once again, what
solution could Mr. Pronk provide in answer to this
question and this contradiction?

We hope that we do not close the door to dialogue
with the Sudanese Government, and that we refrain
from taking impractical steps or do not stymie the
efforts being undertaken by other international actors,
especially the Secretary-General, with the Government
of the Sudan.
