Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, we would like to welcome Mr. Christian
Schwarz-Schilling, High Representative and European
Union Special Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and to renew the full commitment of my
delegation to his important function. We would also
like to welcome to the Council the Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Adnan Terzie.
The Council is ready to again consider a
reauthorization of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force (EUFOR) in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, enabling it to continue its operations in
line with its mandate to provide deterrence, to ensure
continued compliance in relation to the responsibilities
specified in the General Framework Agreement for
Peace and to contribute to a safe and secure

environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In particular,
we would like to emphasize EUFOR operations against
organized crime and the regular EUFOR contact with
the police and other law enforcement agencies, as well
as its weapons collection activities, which is being
done with the good cooperation on the part of the local
police.

We were informed that the European Union will
review EUFOR activities and will make
recommendations concerning the Office of the High
Representative early next year. We look forward to the
opportunity to analyse that assessment.

We note with appreciation the negotiations
between the European Union and Bosnia and
Herzegovina on a Stabilization and Association
Agreement. We are pleased to see that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is on its way towards Euro-Atlantic
integration, with a political and security situation that
is generally stable and progressing towards the
fulfilment of the conditions to advance to the level of
an autonomous national State that is actively integrated
in Europe. In that context, we want to point out the
elections that were held on 1 October 2006, as they
were the first elections fully administered by the
country's authorities.

However, those achievements must not allow us
to avoid consideration of pending issues. We deem it
imperative to achieve as much progress in the fight
against impunity as we have in other areas. We also
recall that two important requirements of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement that are
necessary for progress include cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the restructuring of the police.
In addition, it will be necessary to achieve progress in
practical terms with the agreed constitutional reform.

It is also useful to reiterate that the primary
responsibility for the further implementation of the
Peace Agreement lies with the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina themselves. We must also consider
that the continued participation of the international
community and major donor countries in its
implementation will be determined by the full and
effective implementation of the Agreement by all of the
authorities and the rebuilding of civil society. That also
requires a special emphasis on full cooperation with
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia - including, among other issues, the
surrender for trial or apprehension of all persons
indicted by the Tribunal - as well as the strengthening
of joint institutions to foster the building of a fully
functioning self-sustaining State that is able to
integrate itself into the European structures and also
the task of facilitating the returns of refugees and
displaced persons.

In conclusion, my delegation considers it
necessary to resolve the issue of the non-certification
ofpolice officers. We take note of the letter of the High
Representative dated 29 August 2006, and we thank
him for the information regarding the options that were
explored with the Department for Peacekeeping
Operations in the search for a pragmatic approach to
address the matter, in line with the recommendations of
the October 2005 Opinion of the European
Commission for Democracy through Law - the
Venice Commission.

As we have stated before on other occasions,
Argentina supports the unrestricted fulfilment of the
Dayton Agreement and the effective implementation of
its commitments, in particular, cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. We believe that only through our joint
efforts against impunity for serious human rights
violations will we foster the development of judicial
institutions, which will also strengthen justice and the
rule of law. We urge the parties to do their utmost in
that regard, which will make it possible to achieve the
reconciliation needed to build the foundations for a
truly sustainable society.

