Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to congratulate you, Madam President, and your
delegation on assuming the presidency of the Council
this month. We are confident that, with your wisdom,
you will lead the Council's work to a successful end.

I also wish to thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, and
the Executive Director of Gisha, Ms. Tania Hary, for
their comprehensive briefings and their assessments
of the current difficult situation in all its dimensions
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
East Jerusalem.

This meeting is being held today in the wake of
continued attacks by the United States Administration
on the inherent rights of the Palestinian people to
their territory. It continues to deny their right to self-
determination, to freedom and to independence. The
United States Administration has made yet another
unlawful declaration on illegitimate Israeli settlements
in order to kill any chance of achieving peace, security
and stability in our region and for its peoples. We
strongly reject and condemn such an unlawful and
irresponsible Declaration, which we consider to be
legally, politically, historically and morally null and
void, without any value whatsoever. It is to be added
to the series of provocative and irresponsible measures
taken by the United States Administration, beginning
with the claim that Jerusalem is "the capital of Israel",
ongoing attacks against Palestinian refugees and their
right to return to their homes, and attempts to put an
end to the work of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as well
as recognizing so-called Israeli sovereignty over the
occupied Syrian Golan.

The international community has confronted
and rejected all of these policies, which have also
been rejected here at the Council, including by some
Council members who spoke to the press before this
very meeting. We are confident that the position of
the international community, especially the Council,
is strong and firm in rejecting this latest declaration
by the United States, as it has done with regards to
previous ones. All such declarations run counter to
international law and the Charter of the United Nations
and its relevant resolutions. They will not affect the
legal and political situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, or accord any
legality to Israel's colonization policies on our territory,
including its annexation policy and its illegitimate
settlements. That will affect only the position, image
and credibility of the United States, or what is left of
them in the eyes of the international community. This
Administration continues to deepen its ineligibility as a
peace mediator, its use of double standards and its bias
regarding the Israeli occupation at the expense of our
right to self-determination.

Today it is impossible to believe that the voice
of the United States is a voice in support of peace. It
has become Clear that it is a voice that incites others
against the Palestinian people and encourages Israel
to continue with its illegal annexation of our territory
and systematic violations of our rights. Our land is not
a gift that the United States can offer to satisfy the
ambitions of Netanyahu, and the blood of our people
is not a currency to be used as a bargaining chip in
Israeli elections.

In its resolutions on this subject, from 242 (1967)
to 2334 (2016), the Security Council has reaffirmed the
inadmissibility of the seizure of other people's land by
force. That has been a basic principle of international
law, implemented since the end of the Second World
War. The Council has also affirmed the illegitimacy
of Israeli settlements in the occupied Arab territories,
including the Palestinian territory, and has stated that it
was illegal to annex Jerusalem. In its adoption of those
resolutions, it was working to achieve international
peace and security, in line with its mandate. We
reaffirm that settlements, as a form of colonialism, are
illegitimate according to United Nations resolutions
and the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the Legal Consequences ofthe Construction
ofa Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (see A/ES-10/273). They constitute a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, a blatant breach of the
Fourth Geneva Convention and a war crime under
the Rome Statute. Any attempt to change that reality
is therefore doomed to failure, and no one, no matter
how strong, can change international law according to
whims or illusions.

In that regard, I would like to take this opportunity
to thank all the States, Governments, organizations
and members of the Council that have expressed
their support for upholding international legitimacy
and committing to the international consensus on the
basis of the terms of reference for a just and peaceful
solution. They have reaffirmed that Israeli settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, are a blatant violation of international law
and a key impediment to ending the Israeli occupation
and achieving peace in line with a two-State solution
based on the 1967 borders.

Every country here at the United Nations can
contribute to achieving peace by supporting our
inalienable rights and by refusing to acknowledge
Israel's illegal practices and policies, including those
aimed at changing the status and character of Jerusalem
or at changing the pre-1967 borders. They can support
us by refraining from providing assistance and support
to illegal settlement activities, by differentiating
between Israel and the Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967 where relevant transactions are concerned,
and by ensuring accountability and ending impunity,
which is one of the major obstacles to the achievement
ofjustice, peace and security.

We warn against the logic of the United States
Administration, which holds that international law is
an obstacle to peace, seeks to justify Israeli crimes and
believes that it can impose its will on the international
community as a fact to be accepted. There cannot
be one international law that applies to all of us and
another that is invented and tailored by the United
States Administration to suit Israel's colonial greed
and forgive its crimes. The international law that we all
know does not permit double standards or bullying. It
should apply to everyone without exception, including
Israel and the United States.

The international law that we know does not
forgive the Israeli blockade imposed on the Gaza Strip.
It does not prevent its civilians from having even a little
bit of life and hope. It does not forgive the Israeli air
strike on the home of the Sawarkas, which killed five
little children in that family. International law does not
forgive when a little girl goes to sleep hoping to celebrate
her tenth birthday the next morning, only to wake up
and have to attend her parents' funeral. International
law does not forgive the killing of a man in Hebron
who went out to buy food for his waiting family and
never came back. It does not forgive Israel's holding on

to the bodies of martyrs and the pain that causes their
parents. It does not forgive a sniper shooting a press
photographer in the left eye while he was documenting
violations committed by the Israeli occupiers. The
soldiers believed that killing the witness would conceal
their crime, but it only revealed and condemned them.

International law does not forgive ambushes and
arbitrary arrests of girls and boys. Nor does it forgive
their torture in Israeli prisons and detention centres.
It does not forgive the military invasions of cities,
towns and camps or the sowing of terror in the hearts
of mothers who fear for the fate of their children.
International law does not forgive forced displacement
or the demolition of houses and property and the
displacement of their owners. International law does
not forgive the rioting and acts of terrorism by Israeli
settlers, their looting of Palestinian natural resources
or their burning of fields and olive trees. International
law does not forgive the fact that people are made to
wait for long hours at army checkpoints. It does not
forgive the expansion of settlements in the West Bank
or the racist annexation of Jerusalem, the provocative
acts carried out in Haram Al-Sharif or the imposition
of illegal taxes on the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.

International law does not forgive silence on these
things. Neither the Palestinian people nor its leaders
will give in to political blackmail. We will continue to
take every measure possible to legally and politically
counter the racist policies and inhumane practices that
we are witnessing, in order to honour our commitment
to the Palestinian people in our homeland and abroad,
to their historical sacrifices and to the defence of
our rights and national positions, including our right
to freedom, security and dignity in our own beloved
homeland of Palestine. As one of our famous poets
once said,

"If one day a people desires to live, then fate will
answer their call. And their night will then begin to
fade, and their chains will break and fall."

