Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian delegation notes with satisfaction the

 

recent progress made towards consolidating democracy
and constitutional order in Haiti and the establishment of
the new Haitian police. The highest praise goes to the
United Nations Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH),
which is responsibly carrying out the tasks that have been
entrusted to it by the Security Council. We should like to
express our gratitude to the staff of this Mission, among
whom are our compatriots, for their tireless efforts to
support and strengthen democracy in Haiti.

As we have stated on numerous occasions, the
Russian Federation had doubts regarding the necessity to
extend the mandate of this Mission, and in particular to
preserve its military element, and our position in this
regard remains unchanged. It is our profound conviction
that the situation in that country did not and does not
represent a threat to international or even regional peace
and security. It has lost the specific characteristics on
account of which we once agreed to the deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation there.

At the same time, taking into account the appeal of
the President of Haiti, Mr. Rene Preval, the
recommendation of the Secretary-General and the views
of the group of "Friends of the Secretary-General for
Haiti", Russia agrees, in principle and in the spirit of
compromise, to a final extension of the UNSMIH
mandate for a concluding eight-month period.

At the same time, if in the light of the Secretary-
General's report in March next year, the Security Council
deems it possible to conclude this operation two months
earlier, by 31 May 1997, we will be ready to support such
a proposal. The principal thing is that it be clearly spelt
out by the draft resolution's sponsors that the mandate of
UNSMIH is being extended for a final time. And this
time will, indeed, be final.

At this stage, provisions have already been made for
a reduction in the military element of 100 people financed
by the United Nations and for the Secretary-General to
submit future recommendations regarding further
reduction in the size of the Mission. Thus, the bases have
been laid for a phased, full withdrawal of the military
elements of the United Nations from Haiti by the time the
mandate of UN SMIH is ended.

All United Nations operations must, in one way or
another, be time-bound. The maintenance of a significant
United Nations presence in Haiti in the form of military
elements, particularly against the backdrop of the far
more drastic crisis situations in other regions of the world

 

and the extremely difficult financial situation of the
Organization, could be perceived as a manifestation of
double standards, especially when one takes into account
the totally different attitude towards other truly critical and
more volatile flashpoints.

As for Haiti's potential difficulties, inter alia, in the
area of internal security, after the withdrawal of UNSMIH
they will have to be resolved not by means of United
Nations peacekeeping operations but rather with the
assistance of mechanisms external to the United Nations.

At the same time, we will be ready to consider
recommendations of the Secretary-General regarding the
possible nature and form of a subsequent international
presence in Haiti, as provided for in the draft resolution. In
this context, it is important that the draft resolution single
out the high-priority tasks of the economic rehabilitation
and reconstruction of Haiti. The Russian Federation has
often expressed its View regarding the fact that the major
cause for the continuing problems of that country is its
difficult socio-economic situation. We are convinced that
only a speedy recovery of the economic situation and stable
development in Haiti can provide a truly sound foundation
for lasting stability and the further strengthening of
democracy in that country.

As regards external support for reform and
development programmes, there must be significant and
decisive action and coordination of international efforts by
the United Nations specialized agencies, international
financial organizations, including the Bretton Woods
institutions, donor States and neighbouring and interested
countries.

In conclusion, I must emphasize that our work on the
draft resolution demonstrated once again that constructive
approaches and mutual respect for positions and interests
help the members of the Council to find universally
acceptable decisions. We are grateful to the sponsors of the
draft for its reflection of a number of the basic elements of
our approach, although we would have preferred more
radical reductions in the United Nations military element.
Nevertheless, in the light of all of the views stated above,
our delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us.

