Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for presiding over
this important meeting, and to thank Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing today and his efforts in general.

The prospects in our region are dire. We are faced
with challenges that are complicated, interlinked and
unprecedented in their variety and extent. People in
the region suffer daily from the repercussions of long-
standing crises and conflicts. A failure to deal with their
root causes will unquestionably make them worse and
feed the sources of terrorism and extremism in a way
that is a threat to the entire world. The international
community must not waste time. The most recent
detente regarding some of the issues in the region, and
the international cooperation accompanying it, must
be expanded on in order to launch a wider and more
comprehensive dialogue on all the controversial issues
in the region and to resolve the Palestinian question,
which is at the core of the conflict in the Middle East.

Peace is not just a choice we call for over and over;
it is the only way. We must work to create the conditions
for the resumption of serious and comprehensive
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians, eliminate
the obstacles that stand in the way of such negotiations,
entrench the two-State solution 4 creating a fully
sovereign, independent Palestinian State on national
Palestinian soil, along the lines of4 June 1967 and with
East Jerusalem as its capital - as well as to ensure
security and safety for all the peoples and States of the
region.

Jordan has major genuine direct national interests
in achieving peace. Direct negotiations that are both
serious and commited, with a set time frame towards the
two-State solution, must be resumed. Comprehensive
peace must be achieved. And all fundamental
issues - Jerusalem, refugees, security, borders, water
and others - must be addressed in accordance with
the international terms of reference, international law
and the Arab Peace Initiative in all its elements, so
as to achieve vital Jordanian interests related to those
matters. Such negotiations must be accompanied by a
serious commitment, in words and deeds, to avoid any
unilateral measures that may threaten or prejudice the
results of the negotiations. That includes settlement
activity, which the entire world agrees is illegal, as
well as the forced expulsion of Palestinians and the
demolition of their homes and confiscation of their
land.

As a member of the Security Council, Chair of
the Ministerial Council of the League of Arab States
and as a member of the Arab ministerial committee on
negotiation and contact with major Powers, Jordan is
committed to resuming serious negotiations between
Israelis and Palestinians to achieve and international
agreement on a framework for negotiations through
every possible means.

The United Nations and regional and international
parties must improve all facets of the lives of
Palestinians. They must take the necessary steps on the
ground to support the Palestinian economy - whether
by investing in the private sector, supporting the rule of
law or facilitating the movement of people and goods.
Jordan calls on the international community to put an
end to the exacerbation of the social, economic and
humanitarian suffering in the Gaza Strip, which is part
and parcel of the future Palestinian State. The Israeli
siege on the Gaza Strip must be lifted, and reconstruction
must be revitalized. We call on the international donor
community to support the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) to fulfil its mandate 4 in the Gaza Strip,
the West Bank and, indeed, the countries that host
Palestinian refugees. UNRWA faces an unprecedented
financial shortfall, about which we have repeatedly
warned. That shortfall will lead to reduced the services
provided by the Agency, in particular to Jordan, which
hosts the largest number of Palestinian refugees.

The Middle East region is known for its conflicts
and instability. However, we know full well that our
region is very rich in resources. Our young people
want to live in security and to enjoy well-being. They
want to preserve their identity and historic and cultural
background. The international community must work
to achieve comprehensive peace in the region and a
solution to the Palestinian question.

