The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
warmly welcome the Secretary-General, the ministers
and other distinguished representatives present at
today's meeting. Their participation here today is an
affirmation of the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.

I wish to congratulate the Republic of Argentina
because today, 25 May, marks its day ofindependence.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, C6te D'Ivoire, Cyprus,
Estonia, Germany, Guatemala, Hungary, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Israel, Jordan,
Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate in
this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: Ms. Christine Beerli,
Vice-President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, and Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte, Deputy Executive
Director for Advocacy of Human Rights Watch.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Eduardo
Fernandez Zincke, Counsellor and Head of the
Humanitarian Affairs Section of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the observer of the
Observer State of the Holy See to the United Nations
to participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/20l7/365, which contains a letter
dated 26 April from the Permanent Representative
of Uruguay to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.

I wish to also draw the attention of Council
members to document 8/2017/414, the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.

The Secretary- General: I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to address the critical issue of
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

During my 10 years as High Commissioner for
Refugees, I saw the tragic results of our failure to
protect civilians caught up in conflict in the refugee
camps and the settlements that I visited all over the
world. I heard countless horrific stories and met many
of the women and girls, men and boys who fled for their
lives. Their suffering is incalculable and represents
wasted human potential.

But despite our efforts, civilians continue to bear
the brunt of conflict around the world. In Syria, the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry has
documented relentless attacks and sieges that show no
signs of abating. In South Sudan, horrendous abuses
continue as parties to the conflict target civilians,
including aid workers. In Yemen, civilians are trapped
and targeted by all sides. Attacks against humanitarian
personnel and supplies continue putting national staff
at particular risk. The deliberate denial of access to aid
and the abuse of bureaucratic restrictions are becoming
more prevalent in conflict zones. Suffering is pushed to
unbearable limits when civilians are deprived of food
and health care in sieges that can last months or in some
cases years.
Cities like Aleppo, Juba and Mosul have become
death traps, while the destruction of housing, schools,
markets, hospitals and vital infrastructure will affect
generations to come. Attacks on hospitals and medical
staff and the removal of medical supplies from
humanitarian convoys are symptoms of a continued
grave disregard for international law and the protection
of civilians. Endemic sexual violence, including rape,
abduction, human trafficking, sexual slavery and forced
marriages, contributes to the disproportionate suffering
of women and girls in conflict. Women are particularly
at risk in urban warfare, during house searches and
operations in residential areas, and at checkpoints.

This brutality has forced unprecedented numbers
of civilians to flee in search of safety. More than
65 million people are displaced by conflict, violence
and persecution worldwide - two-thirds of them
within their own countries. These unrelenting attacks
on civilians, coupled with a lack of access to aid, are
also playing a major role in creating conflict-driven
famines that threaten 20 million people in Nigeria,
Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen.

One year ago, the Security Council took specific
action to improve the protection of medical care
during conflict by adopting resolution 2286 (2016). In
August, my predecessor submitted recommendations,
which I fully endorse, for the swift implementation
of the resolution by Member States and other parties
to conflict. These developments created hope for an
improvement in the lives of millions of people affected
by war and violence.

But on the ground, little has changed. Attacks
against medical workers and facilities continue and
no one is spared. According to the World Health
Organization, attacks on medical facilities - including
hospitals, doctors and ambulances - and on the
wounded and the sick took place in at least 20 countries
affected by conflict in 2016. In most of these places,
fragile medical systems were already at the breaking
point as staff struggled to treat huge numbers ofpeople.
In most cases, no one was held accountable.

In Syria, Physicians for Human Rights has
documented more than 400 attacks on medical facilities
since the conflict began. More than 800 medical staff
have been killed. In Yemen, just a few months after the
adoption ofresolution 2286 (2016), 15 people, including
3 medical staff, were reported killed when a hospital

was hit in an airstrike - even though the roof of the
building was clearly marked and the GPS coordinates
had been shared with all parties. In Afghanistan, the
number of reported attacks against health facilities and
personnel almost doubled in 2016 compared with 2015.

These attacks are evidence of a broader trend. Parties
to conflict are treating hospitals and health clinics as
targets rather than respecting them as sanctuaries. This
goes against the spirit of the Geneva Conventions, the
fundamental tenets of international humanitarian law
and our basic humanity. These attacks not only cause
immediate suffering to patients, medical workers and
their families; they also deprive entire communities
of essential health care, making them uninhabitable
and contributing to the global displacement crisis. In
Syria, more than half of all medical facilities are closed
or are only partially functioning, and two-thirds of
specialized medical personnel have fled the country.
In South Sudan, after years of attacks on medical
facilities, fewer than 50 per cent are functional in areas
affected by conflict. This severely restricts the services
they can provide.

Resolution 2286 (2016) and the Secretary-General's
recommendations provide an important platform
for enhancing respect for the norms of international
humanitarian law. What is needed now is action that
will turn these words into reality.

There has been some progress. Switzerland and
Canada have gathered an informal group of States to
support the implementation of resolution 2286 (2016).
Several Member States are in the process of reviewing
their domestic laws and policies to strengthen
implementation. In some conflict zones, parties
to conflict and national authorities are discussing
deconfliction arrangements and making credible efforts
to investigate incidents.

The United Nations, for its part, is improving data
collection so we can understand patterns and work
to change them. The World Health Organization is
consolidating and sharing information on attacks that
obstruct access to medical care. I welcome these efforts
and thank the civil society organizations that have
played such an important role in driving them. I urge
all to use these as a basis for progress.

More broadly, there are three clear ways to improve
the protection of civilians in armed conflict:

First, we must ensure greater respect for
international humanitarian and human rights law. I
urge parties to conflict to take concrete steps to limit
harm to civilians in their military operations, as they
are obliged to do under international law, and I call on
all Member States to use their influence to promote
respect for international law and ensure accountability
for violations. I urge those engaged in arms transfers
to show greater responsibility and consider the
potential consequences of those sales for human lives
and for our common security. And I call on all to
support international accountability mechanisms that
complement national efforts, including the International
Criminal Court.

Secondly, we must step up the protection of
humanitarian and medical missions by implementing
my predecessor's recommendations on resolution
2286 (2016). Many of these measures can and should
be extended to protect other humanitarian actors and
all civilians. We must also prioritize the protection
of civilians in United Nations peace operations and
ensure that missions have the capacity to deliver their
mandates. The Security Council has a central role to
play here. I call on all Member States to endorse the
Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians as an
urgent priority.

Thirdly, we must do more to prevent forced
displacement and find durable solutions for refugees
and internally displaced people. We need a strong and
comprehensive agreement to re-establish the integrity
of the international refugee protection regime, in line
with international refugee law, and we must commit to
action on the plight ofthe internally displaced. We must
also tackle the causes of displacement. That means
addressing the root causes of conflicts by investing
in inclusive and sustainable development; promoting
all human rights a civil, political, economic, social
and cultural - and the rule of law; strengthening
governance and institutions; and enhancing mediation
capacity, from communities to national Governments.

No one is winning today's wars; everyone is losing.
I appeal to all leaders, parties to conflict and those
with influence to bring these raging conflicts to an end
and to do all in their power to prevent new ones from
erupting. Preventing and ending conflict is my first
priority as Secretary-General. I call on all to make it
theirs, for the sake of the millions of civilians who are
suffering around the world.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

I now give the floor to Ms. Beerli.


