As the protection of civilians worldwide remains the highest priority for Poland, we would like to begin by thanking Estonia for providing, despite current restrictions, this opportunity to exchange views on the situation of civilians in armed conflict. I would also like to extend Poland's appreciation to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, Mr. Peter Maurer and Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf for their briefings during this open high-level video-teleconference of the Security Council. While we align ourselves with the statements delivered on behalf of the European Union and of the Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflicts, Poland would like, in its national capacity, to welcome the report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366) and share our most recent experience of membership in the Security Council. The report acknowledges that more than 20,000 civilians were killed or injured as a result of attacks in only 10 ongoing conflicts, which raises the highest alarm for Poland. Equally disconcerting is the urbanization of conflict, the inhumane impact of improvised explosive devices, the unlawful denial of humanitarian access, attacks on humanitarian and medical personnel, hospitals and other facilities, the destruction of civilian infrastructure, counter-terrorism measures that impede humanitarian action, and sexual and gender-based violence. Attacks on journalists and human rights defenders are yet another example of flagrant violations of the existing normative framework. Those few examples alone should be enough to incentivize the international community to step up its efforts to protect civilians, given how disturbing this comprehensive overview is. The already dire situation for civilians in conflict- affected areas is being further impacted by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. It is taking a toll among refugees, internally displaced persons, migrants, the young and the elderly, men and women and persons with disabilities, among so many others. For the purpose of this statement, however, we will focus on the situation of persons in the most vulnerable situations - persons with disabilities, women and children, refugees - as well as such crucial issues for the agenda as emerging threats, accountability and peacekeeping. To protect persons in the most vulnerable situations, including persons with disabilities, Poland joined the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire so that fighting parties stop hostilities, which only aggravate the suffering of civilians. Simultaneously, Poland would like to recall that States have a primary obligation to protect civilians, including during major health crises, and that COVID-19- related precautionary measures introduced by States should not be used as a pretext to disregard their obligations under international humanitarian law and human rights law. Yet armed conflict and current crises continue to have significant impact on persons with disabilities. The wide range of challenges includes, among many other things, violence and a lack of access to health-care services, education and employment opportunities. Almost a year after the adoption of the resolution 2475 (2019), presented by Poland and the United Kingdom, the detrimental impact of conflict on persons with disabilities persists. Organizations working on disability inclusion in Yemen face constraints while providing crucial services, due to bureaucratic delays and cuts in funding. Persons with disabilities facing life- threatening situations have limited access to escape and often live in deplorable conditions. Resolution 2475 (2019) was meant to be an important step in changing that. But, in order to see tangible effects on the ground, it must be fully implemented, also by including persons with disabilities in decision-making processes. Women and children continue to face obstacles regarding health care, livelihood, education and other critical support. Bearing in mind imminent risks caused by armed conflicts for women and girls, in particular under the special circumstances caused by COVID-19, Poland would like to underline the importance of initiatives aimed at the effective implementation of the women and peace and security agenda as well as prevention and response efforts on the fight against sexual, gender-based and domestic violence. Moreover, Poland is especially concerned about the increased attacks on educational facilities, students and teachers. We welcome and support initiatives aimed at putting an end to the use of schools and universities for military purposes. The 2014 Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict are a good example in this regard. To confirm our commitment to the effective implementation of those Guidelines, Poland signed the Safe School Declaration. We believe that such initiatives constitute an important step towards the protection and promotion of the rights of the child, especially in conflict situations. It is especially important as children in Syria, Afghanistan, Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and many other countries are being forced to fight on the front lines and exposed to killing, maiming and sexual violence. Given the gravity of this situation, the Warsaw Process Humanitarian Issues and Refugees Working Group, which convened in February in Brasilia, focused on ways to foster political solutions and improve coordination and structural interventions to reduce the impact of humanitarian crises in the Middle East on children and young people. In addition, the refugee and forced displacement crises are among most pressing issues to be addressed by the international community. The number of displaced people worldwide reached almost 71 million in 2019, with 2 million displaced in Syria and Libya alone. Those figures continue to grow, and the situation is deteriorating further due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The protection persons in the most vulnerable situations remains the priority for Polish development cooperation. Although Poland is a relatively new donor of development assistance, including humanitarian aid, we have already managed to develop areas in which we can share our knowledge and experience - for example, the protection in conflict of persons with disabilities and of other groups at risk of exclusion. Polish Aid is also involved in development activities aimed at providing psychological support for children affected by the conflict in Ukraine. Together with Polish Humanitarian Action, we work to improve the functioning of social-service systems by developing the capacities of social and psychological services personnel in the settlements along the contact line. Ukrainian civilians on the contact line continue to face direct physical threats to their security as a result of daily shelling, small arms fire and mine and unexploded ordnance contamination. For many, this remains the primary threat to their safety, particularly in the light of increased ceasefire violations. Parties to the conflict should continue to exercise restraint in the use of force and abide by international humanitarian and human rights norms and principles. Let me turn to emerging threats and accountability. The international community should diligently address humanitarian challenges in the protection of civilians, such as the inhumane impact of improvised explosive devices, and curb illicit flows of small arms and weapons. Last year, according to the report of the Secretary-General, in Afghanistan alone more than 10,000 civilians were killed or injured as a result of the use of improvised explosive devices. The situation is no better in Syria, Yemen, South Sudan or Somalia. Conflict also continues to have a negative impact in other domains, including the environment, which results in further negative consequences for human health, inflicting serious health problems and reducing access to resources vital for survival. In all those cases, international humanitarian law, international human rights law and international refugee law continue to apply, and must be respected by all parties and actors, in order to ensure effective protection for conflict-affected countries. Poland believes that respect for international humanitarian law and international human rights law must be enhanced. We strongly call on all States and non-State parties to conflict to comply with their legal obligations. And, since international legal norms are just as applicable online as they are offline, we call on States also to adhere to the existing legal framework in cyberspace. Impunity for any violation of international humanitarian law should be put to an end. We need to ensure accountability regardless of the perpetrator. The International Criminal Court (ICC) should play the leading role on the international stage in terms of accountability and restoring a sense of justice. We believe that the Security Council should promote accountability by more frequently referring to the ICC cases involving the most serious international crimes. At the same time, we would like to emphasize the crucial role played by peacekeeping when it comes to the protection of civilians. Deployed in evolving security contexts, peacekeeping operations are at times the basic security guarantee for civilians. The protection of civilians remains a high priority issue for Poland, which is why we have acceded to the Kigali Principles and why we call on Member States, including all troop- and police-contributing countries, to endorse them. Finally, we would like to emphasize that the protection of civilians is not an exclusively humanitarian task, but requires a comprehensive approach with adequate political support and actions to be taken in peacekeeping, human rights, the rule of law, political, security, development and disarmament domains. As the challenge is global, we should promote cooperation and partnership among States, international and non-governmental organizations, but also other stakeholders. These actions should be supported by the heightened diplomacy, awareness-raising and necessary training. For these reasons, Poland has been advocating and facilitating communication with State and non-State actors, and encourages others to do the same.
