Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): On behalf of my
delegation, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. I wish also to thank
Ambassador Levitte of France for the effective way in
which he guided the work of the Council last month.
Our thanks and appreciation go to the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/2001/970) on
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). Let me
also take this opportunity to extend a warm welcome to
His Excellency Mr. Le'onard She Okitundu, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and to thank him for the useful and important
statement he delivered this morning. I further thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Ngongi, for his excellent introduction of the report of
the Secretary-General.

The report before the Council conveys an
important message, which in its essence has been
repeated for a long time now: the conditions for peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are positive;
the ceasefire is holding; and the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are ready for peace.
Unfortunately, that positive situation has up to now
been matched with only limited assistance from the
United Nations and the rest of the international
community.

At last, the Secretary-General recommends that
the Council authorize MONUC to enter phase III of its
deployment in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in accordance with the proposed concept of operations.
While we have called for this in the past, and while we
certainly welcome the recommendation, we cannot help
but point out that the proposed step-by-step approach is
too cautious and too limited in scope given the size of
the country and the demands of the peacekeeping
operation itself. My delegation would have preferred a
full-fledged deployment of phase III, because this is
the right time for it.

Obviously, some problems still exist, and it
would be naive for anybody to expect perfect
conditions in any peace process. Minor problems
should realistically be expected in every situation.
What needs to be guarded against is blowing incidents
out of proportion, since that might be exploited by
those who are not really interested in peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The same could
result if there were any hint of hesitation on the part of
the United Nations or if a vacuum were created in the
security situation.

In our view, those who invaded the territory of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo are still being
allowed to frustrate the peace process and to pursue
personal, exploitative and selfish agendas under the
guise of national security. At the same time, the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie (RCD) is
hampering MONUC's operations, including through
the illegal imposition of taxes contrary to the status of
forces agreement. Resolution 1304 (2000) is loud and
clear in its demand for foreign forces that have violated
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to withdraw, and for
Kisangani to be demilitarized. However, despite those
clear provisions, virtually no progress has been made,
and the parties in question continue to make demands
with the clear objective of sabotaging the peace
process.

Of grave concern to my delegation is the
information provided this morning by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, which, of
course, we have heard also from other sources: that
Uganda and Rwanda are reinforcing their troops in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo at a time when they
are supposed to be withdrawing. That is a clear
indication of the real motives of those two countries.
Are we going to have another Kisangani, another fight
over the natural resources of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo?

That should not be allowed to happen. The
Security Council should ensure the full and
unconditional implementation of its resolutions, in
particular resolution 1304 (2000), which it adopted
under Chapter VII of the Charter.

My delegation welcomes the decision by the
Political Committee in favour of the co-location of the
Joint Military Commission (JMC) with MONUC, and
we trust that final arrangements for the transfer of the
JMC to Kinshasa have been made.

We further welcome the successful preparatory
meeting for the inter-Congolese dialogue, which was
held in Botswana in August, and the important
commitments agreed to by the parties. We regret that
the Addis Ababa meeting was suspended, mainly
owing to lack of funds, and hope that the dialogue will
resume soon with the participation of all parties. In this
regard, we call on the international community for
increased financial support for the inter-Congolese
dialogue. Only then can the dialogue succeed.

The report states that the humanitarian situation
in the eastern part of the country continues to
deteriorate. It provides facts and statistics about food
shortages and the restricted availability of health
services. All this is exacerbated further by the fact that
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has received
large influxes of refugees in recent months. It certainly
underlines the need to urgently restore peace to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, it is also
a call for the international community to strengthen and
expand its support to the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The progress in peace efforts
should be matched by increased assistance aimed at the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of the economy and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as a whole.

It is furthermore disturbing to note that the RCD
continues serious human rights violations, including
the raping of women and girls. These atrocities should
not be allowed to continue with impunity.

On a more positive note, my delegation is happy
that progress is being made with regard to the situation
of children, in particular through the demobilization
and repatriation of child soldiers. Other efforts, such as
the assistance to war traumatized children through
counselling and other treatments, are also welcome. In
this connection, we welcome the efforts by the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) to vaccinate
Congolese children against polio.

We agree that the next phase of MONUC's
responsibilities will be challenging. But that is the
price the international community has to pay in order
for peace to return to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The disarmament and demobilization of armed
groups and the repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration of the ex-combatants into society will
require determination and well coordinated plans by
the international community. MONUC can succeed in
its mandate; all it needs is strong political and other
support. In this context, we welcome the Secretary-
General's continued efforts to promote the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. His
recent visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region was particularly important for
confidence-building and to give momentum to the
peace process.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to commend
the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Namanga Ngongi, for the enthusiasm and
determination already visible in his work. We offer him
our full support and cooperation. We also share the
appreciation for the women and men of MONUC, for
the contribution they continue to make to the
restoration of peace in the Democratic Republic Of the
Congo.

