Mr. Locsin (Philippines): The words "ultima ratio
regis" were once inscribed in the bronze on Spanish
royal cannon, meaning, "the sovereign's last argument".
Kings in the past, republics in the present. War is the
last argument of sovereignty - to fight for things
essential to national honour and self-preservation,
where surrender is never an option.

But mediation is a wise preliminary choice. Through
mediation, States at odds might arrive at the settlement
of disputes by the exchange of words, not bullets, and
the deployment of arguments, not armour. Anyway,
"ultima ratio regis" is always available - never peace
at any price. There are situations where property is not
worth saving and life not worth living, but speaking
only from the mouths of the most number of cannons
will not always decide the outcome in their favour.
What is still the longest war proves it: a lightly armed
people defeated in no uncertain terms, accompanied
by the most graphic photographic images. First the
Europeans, then a super-Power that threw at a tiny
nation of small people like my own every weapon of
mass destruction short only of nuclear weapons. None
are defeated until they say so; no one is victorious until
the enemy leaves in disarray, as when the last chopper
took off from the rooftop of the enemy's Embassy.

Discreet mediation followed the release ofprisoners
of war and remains of the slain for their memorials
back home, but the costs of victory and defeat were
staggering: 3 million killed on one side, 54,000 soldiers
and scores of student protesters on the other. Billions of
dollars in weapons were left rusting in rice fields - the
last ones dumped in the sea - and a great nation came
to doubt its indispensable mission to advance freedom
in the world.

Mediation in Paris came too late, especially for
those who, in good faith, made common cause with
a foreigner and paid the price of abandonment. The
minimum that mediation achieves is that, even when it
fails, a lot is gained. For example, the realization of the
real value in contention and the real price to be paid for
it before the first shot is fired in an intractable conflict
and before the last shot fired in vain. Sometimes the
game is not worth the candle, nor is the price worth the
cost of war.

That said, we take note of Russia's point: mediation
can be misused to achieve domination on the cheap.
It is much worse today: conflicts are longer and
more intractable, with precision weaponry more
indiscriminate and, from that height, impervious
to compassion. All the more compelling is the case
for mediation.

The Philippines highly appreciate the leadership
of the Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland in convening
today's open debate on mediation and the settlement
of disputes. We reaffirm the Philippines' commitment
to mediation. The Manila Declaration on the Peaceful
Settlement of International Disputes is eponymous
with the Philippines' desire for peace and its emphatic
abhorrence of settlement by the use or threat of force.

When used in key phases of conflict, mediation
is a game changer, especially in indecisive conflicts.
The Philippine experience attests to this. After 18
years of sustained engagement in the peace process, the
Philippine Government has enacted the Bangsamoro
Organic Law, creating the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region. Signed by President Rodrigo Roa Duterte, it
recognizes the aspirations of those living in Muslim
Mindanao, including indigenous and Christian
peoples, within the framework of one indivisible
democratic republic and one bill of rights. Sovereignty
cannot amputate itself; a republic cannot sponsor a
non-republican solution, nor a democracy a dictatorship.
A caliphate was never in the cards.

With regard to our peace negotiations with the
Communist Party of the Philippines, the presidential
adviser on the peace process announced that the doors
for peace negotiations with the communist rebels are
still open. We thank Norway for its hospitality and
perseverance and, we hope, its continued engagement
in that peace process.

The Philippines continues to co-sponsor the
General Assembly resolution on promoting mediation
and more funding for it. We have contributed mediation
experts and constitution-writing, power-sharing and
gender-inclusion issues to give prominence to women's
organizations in recognition of the gender that binds
the wounds of war and bears the heaviest burden of its
excesses on their shoulders, as well as those of their
loved ones. While we should put our trust in a common
humanity, we must keep our powder dry.

