Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would like to thank the
Uruguayan presidency for convening this important
open debate and the briefers for sharing their
valuable insights.

Germany fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union and with
the statement to be delivered by Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends. Germany also supports the
vision outlined by the Secretary-General in his report
on strengthening the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts (S/2017/414).

I will make a few short remarks in my national
capacity.

First, I would like to point out a deeply worrying
trend. Many non-State armed groups flagrantly violate
international humanitarian law by failing to protect
civilians and blocking humanitarian access. What is
equally troubling is that certain States do the same. All
States are bound to protect civilians under international
humanitarian law. We therefore urge all States and all
parties to armed conflict to make the protection of
civilians a priority. We call on this Council to find ways
to enhance compliance with international humanitarian
law and ensure that perpetrators are held accountable
for their violations.

Secondly, the protection of civilians must never
be a secondary concern in peacekeeping operations.
Their protection must always be a prime consideration
and a central element in the operation's mandate. Of
course, the most effective way to protect civilians is
to end the conflict by finding a sustainable political
solution. That is why we have scaled up our mediation
and mediation support activities in recent years. In
order to protect civilians, the mission must be equipped
with the necessary capabilities and resources to keep
civilians safe, including resources to provide medical
assistance. Ultimately, that is not just the responsibility
of the Council and the United Nations, but of every
troop- and police-contributing country.

Thirdly, we must protect humanitarian and medical
missions. To help survivors of violent conflicts, it is
essential that we have full, rapid, unimpeded and
sustained humanitarian access. However, despite the
adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), we witnessed an
increase in attacks against medical and humanitarian
personnel in 2016. That trend is unacceptable. The
international community must do everything in its
power to ensure the safety and security of those
personnel. Conflict parties must abide by rules of
engagement to protect medical personnel and facilities.

Germany champions the protection of civilians
through all stages of crisis.

First, we have substantially increased our crisis
prevention efforts and capacities, including early
warning systems and mediation.

Secondly, by upholding international humanitarian
and human rights law, we promote respect for
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Furthermore, we vigorously fight impunity and support
accountability. In the case of Syria, for example,
we support the recently established International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law,
as well as the work of the Human Rights Council's
Commission of Inquiry.

Thirdly, our projects on the ground in conflict
areas are geared towards the protection of civilians.
For instance, we invest in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration projects in many conflict areas and
support humanitarian mine action and other initiatives
to decrease the impact of small arms, light weapons and
improvised explosive devices.

Fourthly, in our military contribution to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, we have made the protection ofcivilians
an important element in our pre-deployment training.

The protection of civilians in conflict must be our
highest priority. If the international community fails to
deliver here, we fail to achieve the purpose for which
this institution was created.

