Mr. Okamura (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to pay tribute to His Royal Highness Crown Prince Al
Hussein bin Abdullah II for his initiative in organizing
this open debate. Its focus on the role of young people
in countering violent extremism and promoting peace
is timely and important. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.

When young people move, society changes.
Their power is the driving force that pushes the world
forward. That power can promote peace, freedom
and democracy. Look at what happened in Tunisia. It
was the country's youth who overturned the regime,
bringing about a movement that has changed the whole
face of the Middle East. But at the same time, youthful
power can also lead the world to war and conflict.
Young people can be exploited by political Powers and
even support those who wish to disrupt society.

About four years ago, when Cote d'Ivoire was
in the midst of a political crisis after the presidential
elections of 2010, I was there as Japan's Ambassador.
A man named Charles Ble Goude encouraged young
people to support the-then incumbent President Laurent
Gbagbo. He manipulated various youth groups, whose
demonstrations created fear among the people. They
called for withdrawal of the United Nations presence
and even attacked United Nations personnel and
vehicles. Against such a backdrop, it is clear that we
must try as hard as possible to direct young people's
transformative and potentially explosive power towards
peace, freedom and democracy rather than war and
conflict. That lesson is all the more true today, when
we are seeing so many young people being taken in
by radical terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant. We must take a close look at the
frustrations and anger that young people are dealing
with as a result of economic difficulties and social
repression. We must turn their energy and passion into
constructive actions, not destructive ones.

From that perspective, Japan considers the position
of young people in the economic and social spheres
to be directly connected to the issue of peace and
stability. We have been working diligently to empower
young people in order to engage them in development,
economic growth and the promotion of business. A
good example of that approach is our efforts conducted
through the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD) process, under which we have
supported capacity-building for young Africans, and
which I oversaw as Director-General for African
Affairs at Japan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

The most recent TICAD conference, TICAD V,
held in 2013, saw the launch of several youth projects
in that area. The projects include the African Business
Education Initiative for Youth, which aims to invite
1,000 African youth participants to Japan over a period
of five years to help them develop effective skills
and knowledge in various fields. The objective is to
contribute to the development of industry throughout
Africa. We have already received 155 participants
from Africa in Japan. They are all expected to become
brilliant leaders in business and to further strengthen
the close relationship between Japan and Africa.

Another project launched at TICAD V was the
establishment of human-resource development centres
for business and industry at 10 locations, to serve
25 countries in Africa. These centres, along with other
support programmes, are intended to build the capacity
of some 30,000 young people.

As for the issue of Violent extremism, I share
the concern at the fact that the number of victims of
violent extremism around the world is growing. Japan
is not an exception. At the beginning of this year, two
Japanese citizens were murdered in Syria. Immediately
thereafter, Japan announced a policy of assistance to
create societies resilient to radicalization. In essence,
we hope to put into practice the Arab proverb that states,
"the best way is to go in the middle". Under this policy,
Japan is realizing various projects such as connecting
youth with employment opportunities, correcting
inequalities and supporting educational exchanges and
exchanges of people.

Prime Minister Shinto Abe, on the occasion of his
visit to Africa in January last year, stated, "If we can
reveal a bright future to young people, the future of
Africa will without a doubt also become bright". Here
we could replace the word "Africa" with "the world".
We have to reveal a bright future to all young people in
order to make the future of the world bright.

Japan is determined to continue to work closely
with its partners in the international community
towards creating stable and energetic societies all over
the world and giving hope to young people.

