Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
I offer a warm welcome to Dr. Hala and Ms. Amina
Khoulani. I thank them for sharing their stories, and
we applaud their extraordinary courage for speaking
out about the abuses that they, their families and their
fellow Syrians have endured at the direction of Bashar
Al-Assad and his military and intelligence commanders.

The issue of detainees and missing persons
in Syria is one of the great tragedies of the Syrian
conflict. In 2011, as peaceful protesters took to the
streets of Damascus to seek modest political reforms
and increase social freedoms, Syrians also sought an
end to the fear of torture and arbitrary arrest by Syrian
intelligence services. It is difficult to find any Syrians
who have not been affected by that systematic practice.
In August 2013, a military defector known by the
codename Caesar smuggled over 53,000 photographs
out of Syria of over 6,700 victims of torture who had
died in Syrian regime custody. Those photographs have
been independently verified and represent damning
evidence of the systematic torture that is present in
Al-Assad's prisons.

We have heard again and again from Syrian civilians
that the fate of those who disappeared at the hands of
Al-Assad is foremost on their minds when considering
both the prospect of a return to Syria for those who
fled the country and the vision for a political solution.
Syrians deserve to know the truth about what happened
to their family members, receive justice for what they
have endured and gain assurances that they and future
generations of Syrians can live without the fear of
being arbitrarily detained, tortured or disappeared by
their own Government. That is why we called for this
meeting today.

There is both a humanitarian and a political
imperative for improving transparency and access to
regime prisons and securing the release of the Syrian
civilians who have been arbitrarily detained by the
regime. The issue of detainees is central. Resolution
2254 (2015) calls for the release of any arbitrarily
detained persons, particularly women and children.
There can be no political solution and no stability in
Syria without the reversal of those abhorrent practices
and guarantees that regime officials responsible for
such practices will be held accountable for their actions.
In addition to the moving testimony of our speakers
and the thousands of other Syrians who have bravely
spoken out against the regime, as well as the photos that
have been mentioned, there is exhaustively researched
data demonstrating the scale and severity of the crimes
committed against innocent civilians in regime prisons.
The Al-Assad regime's attempts to silence dissent and
erase its crimes have failed, thanks to the courageous
acts of bravery of Syrians like Caesar, Dr. Hala and
Ms. Amina Khoulani.

Since 2011, Syrian documentation groups estimate
that as many as 215,000 persons, including 35,000
prisoners of conscience, have been detained, the vast
majority by the regime, and that 14,000 have been
killed as a result of torture, including 177 children.
Nearly 128,000 people are currently detained by the
Syrian regime, including doctors, humanitarian aid
workers, human rights defenders, journalists and
others, including women and children. Those numbers
have been widely documented by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic and other reputable organizations.

We have seen reports of specific detention centres,
including military intelligence branch numbers 215,
227, 235 and 251; the air force intelligence investigation
branch in Mezzeh military airport; and the Sednaya
prison, and the names of some of the senior regime
officials who were responsible for murder, rape, torture
and other mistreatment at such centres. We cannot
come to the political solution described in resolution
2254 (2015) until those practices end.

Today, the United States therefore calls for the
immediate unilateral release of civilians, including
women, children and the elderly, who are being held
in Al-Assad regime prisons, in an effort to pave for
the path forward for the implementation of resolution
2254 (2015). That is an achievable confidence-building
measure that would help advance Special Envoy
Pedersen's efforts to relaunch the political process, as
well as create momentum for the Al-Assad regime and
the Syrian opposition to work together.

As part of that effort, we also urge the Al-Assad
regime to grant the United Nations and other impartial
and independent international entities immediate
access to Syrian detention centres, particularly those
where numerous credible reports of torture and abuse
have been documented, including by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic. United Nations access to those
facilities is imperative to ensure that conditions in
regime detention facilities are in line with appropriate
international legal standards.

We are asking the Al-Assad regime only to abide by
its own laws and fulfil its obligations under international
human rights and humanitarian law to expedite the
release of arbitrarily or unlawfully detained persons,
including persons detained due to political beliefs.
The Syrian Constitution prohibits arbitrary detention,
outlaws the use of torture and humiliation, requires the
State to inform the incarcerated of the reasons for his
or her arrest and guarantees incarcerated individuals
access to legal counsel, a fair trial and due process.

The United States appreciates Special Envoy
Pedersen's continued interest in galvanizing progress
on the detainee file. Parallel tracts have not produced
concrete results to date, and it is time now to consolidate
all work on the detainees and missing persons file under
the Special Envoy's offices in Geneva and to regularly
include updates on progress towards that aspect of
resolution 2254 (2015) in monthly Council meetings
on Syria.

Unfortunately, efforts to negotiate the release of
detainees under the auspices of the Astana guarantors
have focused on one-for-one prisoner exchanges
between the regime and Syrian armed opposition forces,
largely ignoring the plight of the many thousands of
Syrian civilians who represent the vast majority of
individuals held by the regime. And even those efforts
have been undermined, as the regime has detained
hundreds of former fighters in the past year who had
signed so-called reconciliation agreements brokered by
the Russian Federation. We ask our Russian partners,
on behalf of the Astana guarantors, to consolidate
the efforts of its working group, under the leadership
of United Nations Special Envoy Pedersen, and to
renew their commitments to negotiating the release of
victims, pressing for an end to the regime's detention
practices and strongly supporting mechanisms for truth
and accountability.

Progress on Syrian detainees is essential to the
success of any political solution, in line with resolution
2254 (2015). In a show of good faith to reinvigorate
the political process, we strongly urge the Al-Assad
regime and its supporters to take the concrete steps
that I have outlined to address that issue. To Amina
Khoulani, Dr. Hala and the hundreds of thousands of
Syrians affected by the Al-Assad regime's practice of
arbitrary detention, torture, disappearance and killing,
the United States stands with them in their pursuit of
justice and will spare no effort to bring the regime's
torture to a halt. The Syrian people deserve an end to
their suffering, a pathway to justice and a chance to live
in peace.

