Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to convey my gratitude to Ms. Kang for her briefing.
The situation that she has just described illustrates, if
there were need for it, the scale of the disaster that we
have been witnessing for nearly five years now in Syria.
This is the greatest tragedy of the century.

France asked the Security Council for an emergency
meeting today with three complementary objectives: to
ensure that everyone faces up to their responsibilities
in connection with the human tragedy that is unfolding
before our eyes in Madaya and other besieged cities
in Syria; to maximize the pressure that the Council
can exert to bring about the immediate lifting of the
sieges and the provision of emergency humanitarian
assistance to all concerned areas; and, finally, to create
the conditions necessary for the launch in a few days
of the intra-Syrian dialogue, because there can be no
credible political process without serious and tangible
progress on the humanitarian track.

Close to 400,000 individuals are trapped in besieged
cities in Syria, without any means of subsistence or any
access by humanitarian workers. In addition to the cities
of Madaya, Fu'ah and Kafraya, tens of thousands of

individuals are besieged on the outskirts of Damascus,
in eastern Ghutah, in Mouadamiya, in the rural area of
Damascus, near Madaya, in Darayya, in Zabadani and
in other localities.
Four and a half million people are living in hard-to-
reach locations: 147 such cities and villages have been
identified by the United Nations, of which only 32 per
centreceivedaidinlate 2015,accordingto the mostrecent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/962). The most
vulnerable individuals, namely, women and children,
are by definition the first victims. Humanitarian actors
have these past few days described horrendous scenes:
women and children dying of hunger in Madaya and
other locations, because starvation is being used, just
as it was in the Middle Ages, as a weapon of war and
terror, and no one can say that they did not know.

Over and beyond the immediate lifting of all sieges,
permanent, immediate and unrestricted access must
be granted to humanitarian workers so as to ensure
that they can assist all those in need. France wishes
once again to underscore the primary responsibility
borne by the regime. The most recent report of the
Secretary-General states that although there were
91 requests for inter-agency convoys, only 13 were
completed. Following long months of negotiations, the
United Nations and its partners were able to distribute
emergency assistance only twice to the people of
Madaya, Fu'ah and Kafraya, on 11 and 15 January. This
is completely insufficient.

Access of emergency assistance to the civilian
population is not, as Ms. Kang stated so eloquently, a
favour or a concession granted by the Syrian regime. It
is an absolute obligation under the Geneva Conventions.
The Council has repeatedly and in multiple resolutions
asked the regime and the other parties to the conflict
to put an end to their use of starvation as a weapon
of war, which is clearly prohibited under international
humanitarian law. The Secretary-General underscored
yesterday that this constituted a war crime. The
Council has also asked that attacks that directly or
indiscriminately target the civilian population in Syria
come to an immediate end.

In extension of France's ongoing initiatives, we
renew our calls for an immediate end to attacks against
the civilian population, including through the use
of barrel bombs and against civilian infrastructure,
especially hospitals and schools. We call upon Syria to
stop bombing the civilian population and call on Russia
to act responsibly in the context ofits military operations

in Syria and to target only Council-designated terrorist
groups. Humanitarian workers also fall victim to such
attacks; 81 have died in Syria since the beginning of the
conflict, and 27 have either disappeared or are being
detained.
Finally, at a time when intra-Syrian negotiations,
which are necessary to achieve peace in Syria, are
about to be launched, I wish to reiterate that there will
be no credible political process without an immediate
improvement in the situation on the ground for the
Syrian people.

In order to be able to believe in a genuine relaunching
of the political process and the implementation of a
ceasefire, the Syrians must no longer be the victims of
deadly, indiscriminate attacks or subjected to arbitrary
detention, and they must receive the humanitarian
assistance and treatment that they urgently require.
France will be very careful with respect to the options
proposed by the Secretary-General in his report on the
implementation of confidence-building and ceasefire
measures, in conformity with resolution 2254 (2015),
which clearly shows that when the Council wants to
present a united front, it can.

A few days before the launch of a decisive cycle of
intra-Syrian discussions, the Council must shoulder its
responsibilities both to put an end to the humanitarian
tragedy that we see reflected in the unbearable images
of the concerned locations, and thus contribute to the
creation ofa credible political process that could finally
lead to the peace to which we all aspire.

