Mr. Zhukov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Da Costa, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, for his
statement, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Haq, for her briefing on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

We welcome recent developments in Timor-
Leste. The overall internal political trends are positive.

With the assistance of the Mission, the national
reconciliation process is moving forward, which is
particularly important in the light of the impending
2012 presidential and parliamentary elections. The
security situation is also stable. It was encouraging to
see the smooth transfer in March of law enforcement
responsibilities from the Mission in the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL).

Next year should be a milestone of State-building
in Timor-Leste. We hope that the elections will take
place calmly and that their outcome will demonstrate
the lasting nature of the results achieved in that
country. Next year will also be a kind of exit test for
UNMIT, too. Strengthening peace in Timor-Leste and
developing State institutions, including the PNTL, has
called for significant efforts, the results of which have
also been encouraging. We believe that the Mission
should continue to guarantee stability, safeguard young
institutions and, when necessary, provide operational
assistance in the maintenance of law and order during
the electoral process.

It is encouraging to note that the efforts of the
international community in crisis resolution and
post-conflict peacebuilding are producing results. The
situation in Timor-Leste is a worthy example thereof.
We believe, however, that any final decision on the
withdrawal of UNMIT in late 2012 should be taken
after the presidential and parliamentary elections have
been held, taking into account the prevailing political
and security situation. Arrangements of a subsequent
United Nations presence in Timor-Leste must be
subject to substantive discussion with the country's
new Government.

