Mr. Turky Saed (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to address the
Security Council. On the basis of its agreement with
the members of the Security Council, the Government
or Iraq has submitted its third and final quarterly report
(see S/2010/567, annex, enclosure) pursuant to
paragraph 3 of resolution 1905 (2009), setting out the
following activities in implementation of the
provisions of that resolution.

First, with respect to the requirements for
successor arrangements for the Development Fund for
Iraq (DFI), the Central Bank of Iraq has pursued its
contacts with the Federal Reserve Board in connection
with the special accounts for the deposit of Bank funds
and oil revenues pursuant to the letters exchanged
between them, with an emphasis on opening a separate
compensation sub-account to which 5 per cent - or
any percentage to be agreed upon later - of revenues
from oil, oil products or natural gas will be
3
automatically transferred pursuant to resolution 1483
(2003).

Despite the efforts and contacts made with
foreign banks and international financial institutions in
this regard, the Government of Iraq could not secure
the necessary guarantees to protect Iraq's assets at the
level of protection provided by the resolution under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter. In view of
the difficult circumstances facing Iraq and the ongoing
delay in forming the Government, the Committee of
Financial Experts hopes that the Security Council will
take into account the efforts of the Government of Iraq
to implement the successor arrangements plan when it
considers the Government's request to extend the
immunities of the DFI for one year in order to enable it
to address all outstanding issues.

The Government of Iraq has pursued its contacts
with creditor countries outside the Paris Club - in
particular Pakistan, Poland, Turkey and Brazil - and
called on brotherly and friendly countries to assist it in
expediting the settlement of these debts, including
those of the Gulf Cooperation Council countries, in the
light of the provisions of the Paris Club agreement.
The offer of the Government of Iraq to repurchase
commercial debt at 10.25 per cent of its total value
remains valid. Ernst & Young, the accountancy and
auditing firm retained by the Ministry of Finance,
continues to follow up this file.

What is obstructing the final resolution of the
debt problem are the unknown and unregistered claims.
We therefore hope that the Security Council will, in its
next resolution, consider setting a deadline for
acceptance by the Government of Iraq of the claims of
commercial creditors by the end of June 2011. Such a
document would closely comply with the provisions of
resolution 1905 (2009) and thereby ensure that the
Government of Iraq acts in accordance with the regular
mechanism for administering Iraqi funds, especially
given the fact that this methodology was adopted by
the Security Council in accepting compensation claims
after the Gulf war in 1990.

With respect to claims inherited from the
previous regime, the Governments of Iraq and the
United States of America signed an agreement to
establish a compensation fund for the claims of United
States citizens. The agreement has been ratified by the
Iraqi Council of Ministers and referred to Parliament
for ratification as well.
The Central Bank of Iraq and the United Nations
Controller's Office have settled the outstanding letters
of credit under the oil-for-food programme for which
documents were provided, and BNP Paribas Bank will
be directed to pay the related amounts. In this regard,
the Committee of Financial Experts agrees with the
reference in the Secretary-General's second quarterly
report to the effect that,

"[a]bsent the receipt by the Secretariat of the
requisite confirmations of arrival of the
remaining letters of credit, the Security Council
may wish to consider cancelling those remaining
letters of credit that have outstanding claims of
delivery" (5/2010/359, para. 1 8)

to enable the closure of the programme by the end of
2010.

With respect to strengthening financial and
administrative control over the DFI, the Government of
Iraq has taken the following steps.

Currently, the ministries are working in
accordance with valid laws and structural charts. Some
have been updated to meet the changes in the nature of
their work and are in various stages of referral -
either to the Cabinet, the Consultative Council or
Parliament - and expected to be approved when
Parliament convenes after the formation of the
Government.

The Ministry of Finance has prepared valid job
descriptions adopted by all ministries. Some have
updated their job descriptions to meet the changes in
the nature of their activities, pursuant to the
Committee's recommendation based on the external
auditor's observations, and will be approved upon the
formation of a Government.

The committee charged with the selection of the
president and members of the management board of the
Federal Service Board continues to interview and
select from among those who meet the requirements to
occupy the aforementioned jobs. There are 29 qualified
candidates so far.

As my colleague noted earlier,
PricewaterhouseCoopers presented its assessment of the
oil-metering system and briefed the International
Advisory and Monitoring Board (IAMB) in its meeting
in Amman on 14 and 15 October. According to the data
presented, good progress was made in general in the
installation and calibration of meters in export ports,
while a negative deviation appeared in the internal
distribution network. The Committee and the Ministry
of Oil are following up the implementation of the plan
on a monthly basis, and hope that it will be finalized by
the end of 2011, with the exception of the work of the
newly established Maisan Oil Company, which will
complete installation by late 2012, at which time a
briefing on developments and achievements will be
given by the IAMB.

Regarding Iraqi funds abroad, the Ministry of
Finance has tried to establish a data base of these funds,
as it stated in its letter to the Committee of Financial
Experts dated 18 October, which included itemizations
to a total of €83 million, $118 million, £280,000,
¥664,000, 180 million Swiss francs and 238 million
Jordanian dinars, in addition to the requests for their
transfer to the DFI pursuant to the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council. The final financial statements of
the State for 2008 were completed and referred to the
Council of Ministers, which in turn was to refer them to
the Council of Representatives. The Board of Supreme
Audit continues to audit the financial statement for 2009
while it waits to receive the data in its final form before
issuing it.
10-63109

Through ongoing meetings and contacts between
the Committee, heads of the audit teams of the Board of
Supreme Audit in the concerned ministries, and
representatives of those State entities, numerous audit
observations were made in external auditors' reports for
2007 and 2008. The observations stated in KPMG's draft
report for 2009 were discussed in detail with KPMG's
representatives at the latest IAMB meeting in Amman on
14 and 15 October. The IAMB was briefed in the same
meeting on the report by PricewaterhouseCoopers on the
interim review report on DF I cash flows and payment for
the first six months of 2010.

I apologize for the length of my statement, but I
have tried to present to the Council all the efforts made by
the Government of Iraq to find an acceptable successor
arrangement to deal with Iraq's public funds and to serve
the interests of the people of Iraq, as provided for in
resolution 1483 (2003) and other relevant resolutions.

