Mr. Pascoe: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to present to the Security Council the
Secretary-General's report (S/2010/327) on Eritrea's
compliance with the provisions of resolution 1907
(2009) of 23 December 2009.

Members will recall that in that resolution the
Security Council requested the Secretary-General to
report within 180 days on Eritrea's compliance with
the provisions of the resolution relating to the border
dispute between Djibouti and Eritrea. The other aspects
of the resolution, relating to Somalia, will be best
addressed by the newly established Monitoring Group
on Somalia and Eritrea. May I note at the outset that in
preparing this statement and the report before the
Council, we have consulted with the representatives of
Djibouti, Eritrea and Qatar.

As members are aware, the dispute between
Djibouti and Eritrea erupted in March 2008 following
Eritrea's deployment of troops and military equipment
in Ras Doumeira and Doumeira Island, two localities
adjoining the de facto Djibouti-Eritrea border. Despite
conflicting colonial agreements on the precise position
of the borderline, Ras Doumeira and Doumeira Island
were administered by Djibouti up until the eruption of
hostilities between the two countries.

The most recent development during this period
is the agreement signed by Eritrea and Djibouti on
6 June 2010, under the auspices of the State of Qatar.
In the agreement, the two States decided to resolve,
through a negotiated settlement, their border conflict.
The agreement mandates the State of Qatar to establish
10-45706
a mechanism that would facilitate the demarcation, by
an international company, of the common border
between Djibouti and Eritrea. The agreement further
provides for the State of Qatar to monitor the border
and address the question of prisoners of war and
missing persons.

In a letter dated 9 July addressed to the Secretary-
General, the Prime Minister of the State of Qatar
informed us that Eritrean troops have withdrawn from
the areas of Ras Doumeira and Doumeira Island, and
the State of Qatar has deployed military observers
pending a final settlement, which both parties agreed
would be final and binding. The letter further stated
that the withdrawal of the two forces from the border
and border areas was completed on 5 June 2010. The
Government of the State of Qatar deployed a company
unit in the State of Eritrea as of 31 May 2010 and a
platoon-size unit in the Republic of Djibouti as of
4 June 2010. The Government of Qatar has confirmed
to us that cooperation between both countries and the
Qatari forces is good, and the Qatari forces will remain
deployed in both countries until the dispute between
them has been settled.

The Secretary-General has remained engaged on
this issue and offered the services of the United
Nations should the parties and the State of Qatar need
them. On 24 June 2010, the Secretary-General received
a letter from President Isaias Afwerki which reiterated
the Government of Eritrea's positions on issues of
peace and security in the Horn of Africa region,
including on Security Council resolution 1907 (2009).

The letter stated that lack of a final resolution on
the Eritrea-Ethiopia border dispute remains the
underlying source of instability in the region. It makes
reference to the ruling of the Eritrea-Ethiopia
Boundary Commission in 2002 and the lack of
progress in its implementation. It further stated that the
State of Qatar was engaged in an initiative to resolve
any misunderstandings between Djibouti and Eritrea.

In his reply to President Afwerki's letter, the
Secretary-General reaffirmed his commitment to
dialoguing with him and his government on the
regional challenges raised in his letter. He also
reiterated his belief that durable peace and stability in
the region require the constructive engagement of all
regional stakeholders, including Eritrea. He also stated
that a comprehensive approach needs to be taken to
effectively address the conflicts in the Horn of Africa,
10-45706
including through the settlement of the border dispute
between Ethiopia and Eritrea.

In conclusion, first, we commend the recent
concrete steps taken by Eritrea and Djibouti on the
border issue, with the active mediation efforts of the
State of Qatar. The Secretary-General has offered the
technical support of the United Nations, should it be
requested.

Secondly, it is our belief that the States in the
Horn of Africa region, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the Africa Union and the United
Nations must work together to effectively address the
interlinked conflicts in the region, including in
Somalia, and the long-standing border dispute between
Eritrea and Ethiopia.

Lastly, with the recent appointment of the
members of the Monitoring Group on Somalia and
Eritrea on 1 July, we urge all States and other parties
involved to facilitate their work. We look forward to
the Monitoring Group's independent reporting on
Eritrea's compliance with the provisions of relevant
resolutions.

