Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Mr. Ghassan Salame, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his very informative briefing
on recent developments in Libya. I also want to thank
Ambassador Olof Skoog, Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya, for his presentation.

Let me begin by expressing my deepest condolences
to those who have lost loved ones, as well as my
wishes for a speedy recovery to those injured in recent
clashes in Libya. We condemn the recent escalation of
violence in and around Tripoli in the strongest terms,
particularly the indiscriminate shelling by armed
groups that resulted in killing and injuring civilians,
including children. We therefore call on all parties to
the conflict to fully respect international humanitarian
law, including by taking every possible precaution to
protect civilians and ensure that the wounded and sick
are cared for, including through medical evacuations.
We remain concerned about the human rights violations
and abuses that have been committed in the context of
detention, as well as the prolonged arbitrary detention
of thousands of men, women and children without
due process. We therefore call for the closure of the
detention centres and respect for the human rights of
detainees. A zero-tolerance policy on torture, summary
executions and killings in custody is a prerequisite for
building a country based on the rule of law.

We call on all Libyan parties to cease hostilities
immediately and abide by the ceasefire agreement
brokered by the United Nations and the reconciliation
committees. In that regard, we welcome yesterday's
result of the mediation by the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya designed to de-escalate the violence
in and around Tripoli and ensure the protection of
civilians. With regard to the political process, we
welcome the strong engagement of Libyan women in
political, peacebuilding, recovery and reconciliation
efforts, commend the dedicated work that has been done
to ensure their participation in the National Conference
process and underline how vital it is to ensure their
inclusion in the political process.

In conclusion, I would like to express my gratitude
to Special Representative Salame and the staff of the
United Nations presence in Libya for their dedication
and support to achieving a peaceful end to the transition
in Libya.

