Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of August. We are confident that under
your and your team's guidance the Council will be very
effective in its work during the month. China will fully
cooperate with the presidency. I thank members of the
Council for their expressions of appreciation to China
during our presidency of the Council last month. We
thank members of the Council for their cooperation.

I welcome the new Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation, Ambassador Vassily Nebenzia, to
the United Nations.

China appreciates the Egyptian initiative in
convening this meeting, and thanks the briefers:
Executive Directors Fedotov and Khan, Acting
Executive Director of Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate Chen, and INTERPOL Special
Representative Roux.

China welcomes the unanimous adoption of
Security Council resolution 2370 (2017), and we thank
Egypt for the important efforts it has made in that
connection. We hope that the resolution will further
facilitate the strengthening of cooperation and taking
comprehensive measures within the international
community aimed at cutting off the channels that
enable terrorist organizations to acquire weapons,
thereby safeguarding regional and international peace
and security:

First, the international community must use
uniform standards in combating terrorism so as to plug
loopholes that may make weapons available to terrorist
organizations. The various Security Council resolutions
clearly stipulate that all States shall refrain from
providing any form of support, including weapons, to
entities and persons involved in terrorist acts. All States
should fully and strictly implement the relevant Council
resolutions, giving particular effect to the provisions
on the arms embargo and the monitoring mechanism.
Only through Council-defined uniform standards and
comprehensive and effective measures can we cut off
the pathways through which terrorist organizations
acquire weapons. We must plug all loopholes that allow
the transfer of weapons between terrorist organizations
or give them opportunities to undertake terrorist acts.

Secondly, Member States should play their
appropriate role by assuming their primary
responsibility to prevent terrorist organizations from
acquiring weapons. All countries must, within their
jurisdiction, exercise enhanced control and supervision
over weapons production, storage and transportation,
and their transfer. Countries must suppress any illicit
arms trade, trafficking and smuggling, which supply
weapons to terrorist organizations. Countries should
also continuously improve their legislation, regulations
and administrative processes so as to establish an
international institutional framework that is guaranteed
to prevent terrorist organizations from acquiring
weapons from arms-trafficking criminal networks.

Thirdly, Member States should step up
international and regional counter-terrorist cooperation
forming synergies and interconnectivities aimed at
preventing terrorist organizations from acquiring
weapons. Countries should enhance the sharing and
exchange of information pertaining to the ways and
means by which terrorist organizations buy weapons.
We must draw on one another's good practices and
experience in combating illegal trafficking and the
transfer and production of weapons and improvised
explosive devices.

The United Nations counter-terrorism entities
should focus on the new trends and characteristics
identified in counter-terrorism efforts, and the
Organization should fully play its role as a coordinator
in multilateral counter-terrorism efforts. Moreover,
at the request of Member States, those entities should
provide technical support in order to build up their
capacity in that regard.

It is imperative to step up efforts and cooperation
in blocking the use of the Internet and social media by
terrorists in acquiring weapons and funds.

China participates actively in many multilateral
mechanisms, including the United Nations, the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the
Global Counter-Terrorism Forum. The 17th meeting
of the heads of State of the SCO was recently held in
Kazakhstan. At that summit, the SCO Convention on
Countering Extremism was signed. China called for
enhancing the regional counter-terrorism mechanism
and offered once again to host the SCO online counter-
terrorism exercise.

That shows that China and other relevant countries

are making efforts to enhance regional counter-terrorism
initiatives. China looks forward to the translation of the
outcome of this meeting today into new measures to
strengthen international counter-terrorism cooperation.

