Ms. Rodriguez Gomez (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Today, as we celebrate
the International Day of Peace, is the ideal moment to
examine the situation in a sisterly country that is part
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, that is, the
Syrian Arab Republic.

This year, 3 September, which was just a few days
ago, marked exactly a year since the dissemination of
an image that shocked the international community:
that of the lifeless body of the child Aylan Kurdi,
on a beach in Turkey. That image truly prodoundly
touched the human conscience, embodying as it does
the humanitarian tragedy that the country is living
through: 300,000 deaths; 6.6 million internally
displaced persons; 13.5 million people in situations of
humanitarian emergency; and 4.8 million refugees. The
international community, and we deeply regret having
to say this, has become accustomed to such numbers
as if they were a normal part of daily life. We have lost
the humanitarian dimension in what is really happening
in the situation in Syria. The question is how we got
to this point. It was not due to happenstance or divine
intervention. It was because of the interference of
international Powers that have violated international
law through violation of Syria's sovereignty, its
independence and the fundamental purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
sought to overthrow a legitimate Government, ignoring
the desire of the Syrian people.

We have not arrived at this point by chance. We
have heard about the use of chemical weapons. We
must seek the truth because, while the international
community has many regrets, it has also been the
victim of imperial lies. Or have we perhaps forgotten
the case of Iraq, where supposed existence of weapons
of mass destruction led to military intervention in
that country in the Middle East. That was not done to
provide happiness, progress or development but, rather,
to sow violence, death and destruction. The only goal
was to grab the natural resources and energy resources
of that fraternal country, which is also a member of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The international community cannot continue to be
subjected to lies sold by the centres of Power through
the international media conglomerates. I have heard
here that citizens are tired of their Governments. No, we
citizens are not tired of our Governments. Citizens are
tired of certain Powers attempting to govern the world.
That is what we are tired of. We are tired of the lack
of norms and regulations, because in our Governments
we comply with the multilateral system of the United
Nations and abide by international treaties.

Just a few days ago, on Saturday, 17 September,
when we met in Margarita at the historic Summit of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, we painfully
witnessed with shock an attack by the United States
against the army of a brotherly country, Syria. That
incident facilitated the advance of terrorist groups on
the ground. How many more such mistakes will we see?
It is very easy to state afterwards that mistakes were
made. But such mistakes cost hundreds of thousands
and even millions of human lives. We cannot simply
remain silent before such a situation when we are told
that mistakes have been made. There are those who are
responsible for the mistakes and we have called on the
Security Council to take action.

When we see that terrorist groups are trying to
take the place of a legitimate Governments and to
disregard the will of the people, we ask ourselves, in
this place, where we are in charge of the maintenance
of international peace and security, who is supporting
them, who provides weapons and who finances the
logistical support for terrorists? Those are truths that
cannot be hidden. Or must we wait another 10 years
before the truth is known?

One cannot continue to lie to the world so shamelessly
and immorally. Clearly, in the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, we see that our Constitution considers the
development of peace not only as a founding principle,
but a fundamental right. We advocate for the right of
the Syrian people to peace and development and for
safeguardng their right to sovereignty. In that regard,
we would join any effort to promote a peaceful political
solution, based above all on respect for the Syrian Arab
Republic's State institutions and on the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of that brotherly country.

