Mr. Issa (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to commend your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation, for his efforts last month.

Today the Council is considering a draft
resolution introduced by the United States of America
and France and supported by other States, including
Germany and the United Kingdom - all of which are
countries friendly to Lebanon. We recall that two
previous resolutions on Lebanon, resolution 425 (1978)
of 19 March 1978 and resolution 520 (1982) of
17 September 1982, were adopted by the Council, in
the first instance because of Israel's aggression and
occupation of southern Lebanese territory and the
western Bekaa, and in the second instance when Israeli
forces invaded Lebanese territory and occupied part of
Beirut. Resolution 425 (1978) called for the withdrawal
of all Israeli forces from all the Lebanese territories
they had occupied; resolution 520 (1982) emphasized
the determination of Lebanon to ensure the withdrawal
of all non-Lebanese forces from Lebanon following the
invasion of Lebanese territories and incursions into
Beirut by Israeli troops.

Although we appreciate the interest shown by the
United States, France, the United Kingdom and
Germany - all of which are friendly countries, as I
said - and their emphasis on Lebanon's sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence, we must
recall that it is the Lebanese people who have a stake in
those matters. The country that attacks Lebanon,
continues to occupy parts of its territory and threatens
its political independence with continued air, land and
sea aggression - Israel - was forced to leave the
western Bekaa and the south by the Lebanese national
resistance but continues to occupy parts of Lebanon.

In that regard, there are no militias in Lebanon.
The Lebanese national resistance appeared following
the Israeli occupation of Lebanese territory and will
remain as long as the Israelis occupy parts of Lebanon,
because we look forward to putting an end to the Israeli
occupation. The resistance forces exist alongside the
Lebanese national forces; our military authorities
determine their presence and their size according to our
needs. The authority of the Lebanese State extends
over all of Lebanese territory except the Israeli-
occupied areas, which we are resolved to liberate by
peaceful means, if possible.
The draft resolution submitted to the Council for
its consideration today confuses two matters. The first
is the unique relations between Lebanon and Syria,
which achieve their common interests, particularly
Lebanon's interests. Friendly Syria has helped Lebanon
to maintain security and stability within its borders. It
has fended off the radicalism and violence that are fed
by Israel's extremism and Violence against the
Palestinians, which threaten their security and stability.
At the same time, Israel has also threatened Lebanon's
security and stability by violating its land borders,
territorial waters and airspace. All those violations
have been reported by Lebanon and by the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon to the relevant
United Nations organs. The second matter is purely
internal, and relates to the presidential electoral process
now under way in Lebanon because the mandate of its
President will come to an end on
23 November 2004.

Syrian troops came to Lebanon in response to our
legitimate request. Their presence is guided by the Taif
Agreement, which had the support of the Security
Council, as well as by agreements concluded between
the two sovereign States. Those troops have been
redeployed many times, and their presence is invisible.
They contribute to rebuffing Israel's radical and
excessive actions, which continue to include totally
unjustifiable and excessive acts of violence. Those
reactions in turn generate Palestinian violence, pushing
the region into a dangerous and unpredictable
whirlwind. To say that Syria supports radical
movements in Lebanon in therefore untrue. To the
contrary, as we have said, it supports a national
resistance movement seeking to liberate the territories
occupied by Israel.

The draft resolution under discussion today refers
to support for free and fair presidential elections in
Lebanon. I do not believe that an issue such as this,
which is an internal matter for a founding State
Member of the United Nations, has ever been discussed
in the Security Council with regard to any other
Member State, and the Organization has never
interfered in such a matter in the case of any other
State. Lebanon's parliamentarians have been chosen by
free and impartial elections, and, as representatives
entrusted with Lebanon's future, its Constitution and
its institutions, they have the right to take decisions
pertaining to elections and to who is elected and how.

The legitimacy of the United Nations, the Charter
and the Council's rules of procedure provide no
justification for this draft resolution, which constitutes
interference in the internal affairs of a State Member of
the Organization. The draft resolution also discusses
bilateral relations between two friendly countries,
neither of which has filed any complaint with regard to
those relations, which are guided by the agreement on
coordination and cooperation they have signed. We
therefore call for the withdrawal of the draft resolution.

