Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): I join other speakers to
commend you, Madam President, for convening this
important debate. Let me also express my sincere
condolences to the Government of Saudi Arabia on the
tragic passing away of Crown Prince Sultan Bin
Abdulaziz Al-Saud.

The delegation of Sri Lanka associates itself with
the statement made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

This is a timely opportunity to focus on the
situation in the Middle East, particularly the question
of Palestine, a question that has occupied the attention
of the Security Council for a long time. The
developments since our last opportunity to discuss the
issue are particularly important.

A peaceful settlement of the Palestinian issue will
be one of the defining achievements of this century. It
will reflect our collective will and responsibility to
help resolve a question that has occupied the attention
of this Council and the United Nations system for
several decades.

While the peaceful settlement of the question of
Palestine remains a laudable goal for the United
Nations, it is an existential necessity for the Palestinian
people.

Sri Lanka's position with regard to the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people remains
consistent. We hope that the application for admission
of the State of Palestine to full membership in the
United Nations will receive sympathetic consideration.

Sri Lanka has consistently supported a peaceful
settlement of the Palestinian issue and called for the
implementation of General Assembly resolutions
regarding the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to statehood and the attainment of a two-State
solution. Our sincere wish is that Israel, Palestine and
their neighbours coexist in peace and harmony.
Realizing the two-State solution would be the greatest
investment in peace in the region in our time.

Sri Lanka has called upon all parties to ensure a
climate conducive to finding a way forward towards
the two-State solution, which is the only sustainable
solution. The key players in the Middle East peace
process have called upon all parties to scrupulously
meet their obligations under the peace agreement.

The resolution of the issue of Palestinian political
prisoners in Israel is critical to a negotiated settlement
of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and as a confidence-
building measure. Sri Lanka welcomes the recent
exchange of prisoners between the two parties. It is a
measure that will generate positive momentum for
peace talks.

My Government is pleased to note the several
important developments that have occurred on the
ground in the midst of continued international efforts
to create conditions for the early resumption of
negotiations by Israel and Palestine. Palestine has been
successfully striving to complete its State-building
programme, which has been endorsed by the
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the
United Nations and others, as well as by the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee in Brussels in June and in New
York in September. There has been internal
reconciliation between the relevant local political
stakeholders, who have united to pursue their common
aspirations.

It is our sincere hope that the issues before the
Council today will be addressed in a just and equitable
manner that will encourage the search for peace. I take
this opportunity to commend the work that has been
carried out by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, for all
these years amid many odds, to assist millions of
Palestinian people in need, especially the people of
Gaza.

Sri Lanka wishes to reiterate its support for the
Palestinians quest for their legitimate human and
national rights. The Government and the people of Sri
Lanka would like to reassure the Council of our
continued support and solidarity.

