Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We welcome you to New
York, Mr. President, and thank you for presiding over this
meeting of the Security Council today. My delegation
would also like to thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for
his briefing and tireless efforts in taking forward the
Israeli-Palestinian question.

At the outset, South Africa would like to remind
the Council of the United Nations and the Council's
own decisions taken in resolution 242 (1967) calling for
Israel to withdraw its armed forces from the territories
occupied in the conflict. I would like to express South
Africa's unwavering support for the two-State solution
and the agreed peace processes aimed at ensuring two
viable States of Israel and Palestine with the possibility
of them coexisting side by side to the mutual benefit of
all the people in the region.

We also express our grave concern about the
continued disregard for the prevailing and long-standing
Middle East peace process, such as the systematic
foreclosing of the final-status issues, particularly with
regard to the borders and the status of Jerusalem.

South Africa believes that the continued expansion
of settlements violates international law, undermines
the prospects for achieving peace and contravenes the
decisions of the Security Council, effectively damaging
its credibility. If the Council cannot uphold its own
decisions, it will lose its effectiveness and purpose. We
continue to call for the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) and note that the overt violation of Security
Council resolutions usually evokes stricter measures
on the party responsible for such infringements. The
Council should be consistent and fair vis-a-vis all
United Nations Member States.

South Africa believes that the Council ought to
work towards restoring the trust in the legitimacy of
the peace process that has been pursued for decades
and prevent the further development of antagonism
between the parties. The rockets fired into Israel from
Gaza in recent days and the deadly Israeli responses are
clear indications that, as long as the impasse continues,
the instability will be perpetuated and more lives will
be lost.

We further call for the written response by the
Secretary-General on this matter in accordance with
resolution 2334 (2016), and we look forward to the
circulation of the written report ahead of the next
reporting cycle in September. Furthermore, we also
express our concern about the continued human rights
violations in the occupied territories and emphasize
that those violations only contribute to the festering
hatred between Palestinians and Israelis.

We believe that, instead of antagonistic acts, such as
building additional barriers and walls, closing schools
and killing civilians, the Council should encourage
gestures of hope and the building of trust between the
parties, namely, the Palestinians and the Israelis, which
has long since been lacking. The Council should urge
the current generation of Israeli and Palestinian leaders
to resolve this core issue in the Middle East. Passing
the problem onto the fourth generation of Palestinians
and Israelis since 1948 would be disastrous, and the
Council would regret it for many years to come.

South Africa therefore proposes that the Council
also reconsider its long-delayed visit to the region. In
that regard, should some members of the Council be
unwilling to participate in the visit, the Council should
consider a mini-mission, which could include those
members interested in taking part in such a visit.

We believe a visit to the region will be a clear
indication that the international community has not
washed its hands of the core and long-standing conflict
in the Middle East. Similarly to the Council's other
field visits, it will also provide Council members the
opportunity to meet relevant actors on the ground,
including the Governments of Israel and Palestine,
convey our good wishes to them and help them resolve
this question.

In conclusion, South Africa remains firmly
convinced that dialogue is the only viable option that
can effectively address the issue of self-determination
for the Palestinian people and calls on the Council to
implement its resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016). South Africa remains hopeful, and we continue
to urge both the Israeli and Palestinian sides to resume
the peace process to achieve a comprehensive, just and
lasting resolution to the Palestinian question.

As we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations, and concurrently the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the Security Council, we should recall
and implement the relevant Security Council resolutions
establishing the State of Israel, which we did, and the
State of Palestine, which we are failing to establish.

We look forward to any initiative, including on
the part of the United States of America or any other
party or parties, that can inject positive momentum
into the Israeli-Palestinian question. This crisis must
be resolved in our lifetime.

