Mrs. Viotti: I would like to thank you, Sir, for
the invitation to participate in today's meeting.

Since the end of March, when I addressed this
Council on the work of the country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission for
Guinea-Bissau, we have been able to gain a better
understanding of the situation in the country and the
main challenges for the consolidation ofpeace.

Last April, a Peacebuilding Commission
delegation visited Guinea-Bissau and established direct
contact with Government officials, international
partners, members of Parliament, civil society and the
private sector. It also had the opportunity to visit sites
in Bissau and in the interior of the country.

The configuration for Guinea-Bissau has been
holding thematic discussions on key areas for the
consolidation of peace. Those meetings have proved
useful in identifying gaps in ongoing programmes and
assessing the possible contribution of the Commission
through a continuous and fruitful interaction with the
Government and representatives of civil society.

The discussions have involved issues related to
the preparations for the upcoming legislative elections,
public administration reform, the reactivation of the
economy, the strengthening of the justice sector and the
consolidation of the rule of law, youth employment,
security sector reform and the fight against drug

trafficking. The series of thematic meetings will be
completed next week when a discussion on
infrastructure, in particular energy, will be held.

Meanwhile, the Government and other
stakeholders are preparing an integrated strategic
framework for peacebuilding. We will shortly launch
consultations with members of the country-specific
configuration on the basis of such a document so as to
finalize the strategy as soon as possible. It is worth
noting that the strategic framework for peacebuilding is
not an end in itself, but a means to bring about a
significant improvement in the stability of the country
and to create the conditions for it to embark on a path
of growth and development.

Without prejudging the conclusions and
recommendations to be decided upon by the Guinea-
Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, I would like to touch upon some of the
main challenges that need to be addressed and that
require substantial support from the international
community.

One of the immediate concerns is the
organization of the parliamentary elections to be held
in November. In spite of recent contributions by
bilateral partners and the United Nations Development
Programme, there is still a considerable financial gap
to be filled. Needless to say, a successful election
process is a precondition for the maintenance of
political stability and for the consolidation of
democracy in the country. The international community
should also assist Guinea-Bissau in turning the
electoral process into an opportunity for a broad-based
dialogue on the country's challenges and possible
solutions.

By the same token, despite the contributions
already raised after the Lisbon conference last year,
Guinea-Bissau still lacks the resources necessary to
fight drug trafficking in an effective manner. With the
support of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime - and here I want to acknowledge and appreciate
the leadership of Mr. Antonio Maria Costa - and
bilateral partners, the Government has taken important
initial steps to implement the anti-narcotics operational
plan.

However, further assistance is badly needed.
During the field trip and in our thematic discussion on
this issue, we noticed with concern the precarious
conditions of police and security forces, which lack the
most basic means and adequate human resources. The
country needs to build capacity in order to ensure
control of its more than 80 islands, its maritime borders
and its airspace, and to strengthen its judicial and penal
systems. The efforts to address drug trafficking and
related crimes would benefit from a regional approach,
given the transnational nature of the challenges in this
area, as has been stressed by both Mr. Omoregie and
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa.

Efforts in the fight against drug trafficking must
be combined with measures to reactivate the economy.
On the one hand, it is imperative to combat illicit
activities; on the other, it is necessary to set the country
on a path to a functioning economy, in which the
creation of job opportunities and income forestall the
possibility that drug trafficking infiltrates more deeply
into society.

Security sector reform continues to be a matter of
priority for the Government of Guinea-Bissau. Recent
developments in this area, such as the conclusion of the
military census, are encouraging. The support that will
be provided by the European Security and Defence
Policy Mission, and the provision of financial and
technical assistance by various partners are crucial.
However, the reform plan remains seriously under-
funded. In our discussions, the reintegration aspect of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
was emphasized. It is interesting to note that this point
was made, not only by Governmental authorities, but
also by civil society representatives. It was stressed
that previous attempts at DDR failed due to lack of
attention to reintegration. It was also felt that adequate
and careful planning for reinsertion into society of the
demobilized contingent will be a key factor in ensuring
a successful reform.

In the economic field, the Government is
committed to controlling fiscal expenditures and
promoting further reforms in public administration,
following the emergency post-conflict assistance
programme signed with the International Monetary
Fund earlier this year. However, a weak fiscal basis,
compounded by the recent difficulties resulting from
the rise in fuel and food prices, continues to hamper
the Government's ability to pay salaries and provide
basic services to the population. In particular, the
external debt and its associated interest payments
constitute a huge burden to the Government. Creative
solutions should be considered, taking into
consideration the specific needs of Guinea-Bissau as a

fragile country emerging from conflict, so that its
population could benefit from the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries Debt Initiative with the urgency that
the situation requires.

During our field trip to Guinea-Bissau and in our
interactions with different stakeholders, we noticed the
considerable economic potential of the country. Much
can be done to add value to the main export product,
cashew nuts. Fertile lands and abundant rain can be
used for food crops, in particular rice, which the
country used to export. The current food crisis, in spite
of its worrisome consequences in the short term -
Mr. Omoregie has already referred to the social
tensions that are occurring as we speak - could be
turned into an opportunity if agricultural production
were reactivated and diversified through adequate
support.

In doing so, it is also necessary to help the
Government overcome the structural bottlenecks that
currently impede economic recovery. Such measures
include updating legal frameworks, creating an
enabling environment for the private sector,
establishing a sound banking and financial system,
including through incentives to microcredit schemes
and, last but not least, rehabilitating the infrastructure,
especially in the energy sector. As we witnessed with
our own eyes, the country today is literally in the dark.
It needs the support of the international community to
lighten up the prospects for a more promising future,
when its people will finally enjoy the dividends of
peace.

We were pleased at the approval by the steering
committee, recently established in Guinea-Bissau, of
four projects to be financed by the Peacebuilding Fund.
The resources made available will be used to reform
prisons and military barracks, invest in youth
employment and support the organization of the
elections. By doing so, the Fund starts to fulfil its
mandate of providing catalytic money to the most
urgent and needy sectors. Most important, it puts into
practice the concept of a two-track approach, in an
attempt to combine strategic long-term analysis with
short-term projects that could have a direct and
immediate impact in the country. We hope a new and
more substantial allocation of resources could be
announced soon, as the country-specific configuration
finalizes the strategic framework for peacebuilding in
Guinea-Bissau.

Finally, allow me to join the Secretary-General in
his recommendation concerning the United Nations
presence on the ground. The engagement of the
Commission is a time-consuming and work-intensive
enterprise and involves a stronger support from the
Organization to the country. Let me take this
opportunity to express appreciation to the United
Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-
Bissau, under the able leadership of Mr. Shola
Omoregie, and the United Nations country team,
coordinated by Ms. Giuseppina Mazza, for their
commendable work in assisting the country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission for
Guinea-Bissau. The Commission is also fortunate to
count on the Peacebuilding Support Office, whose
dedication and commitment is praiseworthy. I am
particularly grateful to Carolyn McAskie, Ejeviome
Eloho Otobo, and Philip Helminger for their
continuous and invaluable support.

