Mr. Mutaboba: It is a great privilege for me to
present to the Security Council the second report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/335) on the activities of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). I also appreciate the
opportunity to exchange views on the most recent
developments in Guinea-Bissau.

The latest report of the Secretary-General before
the Council focuses on the political and security
situation leading up to and following the events of
1 April, when troops acting under the orders of the then
Deputy Chief of General Staff took control of the
armed forces headquarters, detained the Chief of
General Staff and briefly detained the Prime Minister.
On the same day, military armed elements forced their
way into the United Nations premises in Bissau to
demand the immediate release of the former Navy
Chief of Staff, Bubo Na Tchuto, who left the building
after signing a statement that he was leaving
voluntarily and peacefully. The report also focuses on
the efforts of international stakeholders in the country
and in the subregion to impress upon national
authorities the need to restore and respect
constitutional order and enhance control of legitimate
civilian institutions over the defence and security
forces of the country.
10-45202

In my last presentation to this Council (see S/PV.6281), I emphasized the significance of this year
as a turning point for sustaining progress in Guinea-
Bissau, building on the good economic performance
and reformist commitment of the Government and the
leadership of the armed forces at that time, and for
advancing major reforms for the long-term stability of
the country. The 1 April events, which constituted a
serious breach of constitutional order, as well as
defiance of the international community with the
violation of the United Nations premises in Bissau,
have underlined the extreme fragility of the
peacebuilding process and its vulnerability to reversals.
Key challenges and obstacles to stability in Guinea-
Bissau are well known, including the weakness of State
institutions, the insubordination of the armed forces to
the civilian leadership, critical development gaps, and
the illicit drug trafficking and organized crime that
have been affecting the whole subregion. Allow me at
this stage to highlight major developments since the
issuance of the report before the Council.

On 24 June, Prime Minister Gomes Junior
chaired a session of the Council of Ministers which
considered a proposal submitted by the Ministry of
Defence regarding the nomination of the new Chief of
General Staff of the armed forces. The communique'
issued by the Council of Ministers urged the President
to appoint a new Chief of General Staff without delay
and recommended that the President proceed with the
release of the former Chief of General Staff, Vice
Admiral Zamora Induta, who to this day is being held
in detention at Mansoa barracks.

On 25 June, Prime Minister Gomes Junior met
President Malam Bacai Sanha, and speaking to the
press after the meeting, confirmed that he and the
President were in agreement on the issue of the
military leadership. Subsequently, on that same day,
President Sanha issued a presidential decree dismissing
Vice Admiral Jose Zamora Induta from his position as
Chief of General Staff, and appointing Major General
Antonio N'djai as the new Chief of General Staff of the
armed forces of Guinea-Bissau. Major General N'djai
was formally sworn in on 29 June and promoted to the
rank of Lieutenant General. President Sanha stressed
that the decision to appoint General N'djai was a
sovereign decision not taken under coercion, and called
on the new military chief to ensure respect for the
civilian authorities.
10-45202

These recent developments are an indication that
civilian authorities in Guinea-Bissau are yet to exercise
full control over the armed forces. The appointment of
Lieutenant General N'djai was criticized by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the European Union, the African Union
and the United States Government, among other
partners, given his lead role in the 1 April military
insurrection. In an immediate reaction, a meeting of
ECOWAS Chiefs of Defence Staff scheduled to take
place in Bissau on 28 and 29 June was called off by the
ECOWAS Commission. Subsequently, consultations
were held at the margins of the ECOWAS Summit of
Heads of State and Government, which took place in
Sal, Cape Verde, from 1 to 3 July. However, these
consultations were held without the authorities of
Guinea-Bissau, who decided not to attend the informal
meeting convened on 3 July. During the informal
meeting, attended by the Foreign Ministers of Angola,
Brazil, Cape Verde and Portugal, as well as
representatives from ECOWAS, the European Union,
the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries and
myself, on behalf of the United Nations, a consensus
was reached on the need to continue to advance key
reforms in Guinea-Bissau, and in particular a more
robust security sector reform programme, as a first step
towards strengthening civilian oversight of the security
institutions and creating professional and effective
security forces capable of confronting the severe
internal and external challenges the country now faces.

Let me, in this context, update members of the
Security Council on recent developments in the area of
security sector reform (SSR). As announced at my last
briefing to the Security Council in March, an
international sensitization conference on security
sector reform was held on 23 and 24 June in Bissau.
The conference was opened by President Malam Bacai
Sanha and closed by Prime Minister Carlos Gomes
Junior, who also attended the opening ceremony. It was
co-organized by the Government of Guinea-Bissau and
UNIOGBIS, and attended by the main national and
international actors involved in the SSR process in
Guinea-Bissau, including ECOWAS, bilateral partners,
civil society and non-governmental organizations. The
conference gave an opportunity to international
partners, including ECOWAS and the United Nations,
to remind national authorities that, beyond their
renewed political commitment to pursuing key reforms,
some prerequisites set by international partners had to
be addressed to sustain the support of the international
3
community. It is important to continue to push for
these prerequisites to be met, in particular the
immediate release of former Chief of General Staff,
Vice Admiral Induta.

With respect to the Commission of Inquiry into
the March 2009 assassinations of President Vieira and
Chief of General Staff Tagme Na Waie, the Prosecutor
General informed me that the investigation is nearing
completion and that he needed to meet witnesses who
are abroad, including the widow of the late President.
He requested in that regard financial assistance and
international expertise, including from Brazil and the
European Union, so as to conclude the investigations.
Together with other international partners on the
ground, we have conveyed to the national authorities
that granting the assistance requested by the Minister
of Justice and the Prosecutor General would require
that guarantees of the fairness and credibility of the
investigations conducted so far be obtained first,
simply because we do not want to be a rubber stamp
for what has been done.

I would also like to highlight recent progress
made on the socio-economic front. From 17 to 25 June,
a mission of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
visited Bissau and expressed satisfaction at the
economic performance through May and the good
progress made in meeting structural benchmarks
established for mid-June. It also indicated that if
performance remained at current levels, the country
could reach the completion point for the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative in late 2010.
The IMF will be sending a mission in September to
review Guinea-Bissau's economic performance in the
first half of the year under the Extended Credit Facility.
While these developments are encouraging, economic
performance depends on political stability, and we
must therefore make sure that international assistance
on the socio-economic front is fully consistent with our
efforts on the political and security issues.

The challenges in Guinea-Bissau are significant,
but not insurmountable if addressed without delay. The
status quo would certainly allow the challenges, not to
mention the spillover effect on the entire subregion, to
grow bigger. While the onus is clearly on the national
authorities to be mindful of these challenges and to
address them urgently, the international community can
resort to a firmer posture to ensure that critical steps
are taken that will help stabilize the country. What is
needed at this stage is the firm and genuine
commitment of the national authorities to continuing
with security sector and other reforms, more efficient
strategies, leaders respectful of constitutional order and
the rule of law, as well as a practical and time-bound
road map developed by national stakeholders for the
implementation of these strategies.

We also need more robust international action in
addressing key challenges such as drug trafficking and
organized crime. Such actions should be combined
with a firm posture vis-a-vis national authorities,
especially the leadership of the armed forces, to ensure
their understanding of the need to stay the course of the
reform process based upon internationally accepted
standards.

