Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I will be making a shorter
statement and circulating the full text.

Malaysia associates itself with the statements to be
made by the representatives of Iran, on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, and of Djibouti, on behalf of
the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation.

Malaysians join other Muslims around the world
in observing this Islamic holy month of Ramadan. At
the same time, our thoughts are with our fellows of the
Ummah who face oppression and subjugation under the
ongoing illegal Israeli occupation. As a member of the
United Nations Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices in the Occupied Palestinian Territories, we
participated in a fact-finding mission to Amman and
Cairo last month, where we heard disturbing testimony
by witnesses. The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory continues to deteriorate, and as Israel
continues to build illegal settlements, the window for
peace is slowly closing.

The Special Committee was told that Israel had
reinstated the three-nautical-mile limit on fishermen
from Gaza and conducted numerous arrests, as well as
confiscating boats. That has led to a decrease of 60 per
cent in the total amount of fish caught this year, which
in turn has contributed to the 80 per cent poverty rate
among Palestinian fishermen. We also heard testimony
that farmers from Gaza have had to face danger in
farming on their own lands where they fall in the
deadly buffer zone, where Israeli soldiers have fired
indiscriminately at people as far as 300 to 1,000 metres
away. By the end of last year, that heinous practice had
claimed the lives of five Palestinians and resulted in
another 92 injured.

The economic blockade on Gaza, including the
near total restriction on exports, is producing chilling
results. My delegation reiterates its condemnation of
that illegal blockade, which is now in its seventh year,
and calls for an end to such cynical and deliberate
Israeli policies of collective punishment towards the
Palestinian people.

My delegation also remains deeply concerned about
the illegal detention of more than 5,000 Palestinian
prisoners. What is more alarming is the detention of
approximately 200 Palestinian children. The appalling
conditions that the children have had to endure will do
nothing but inflict long-term psychological damage on
such young minds. We therefore demand the release of
all Palestinian children in Israeli detention centres.

It is no surprise to us that Israel also continues to
contravene international law with impunity elsewhere
in the Middle East. Early this year, Israel granted
exclusive rights to a United States-Israeli company
to drill for oil in half of the occupied Syrian Golan
Heights - a blatant violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention.

With regard to the Middle East peace process,
Malaysia is keenly observing the developments leading
up to the potential resumption of direct negotiations. We
recognize the progress made by the shuttle diplomacy
of Secretary of State John Kerry. We wish him well and
offer our support for his tireless efforts to try to bring
the two sides together.

It is therefore timely to reiterate our support for a
two-State solution based on the borders of4 June 1967,
with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine.

My delegation also commends the European Union
for its recently announced European Commission
guidelines, which backs up its position and political
commitments with effective sanctions against Israeli
settlement practices.

Turning to the situation in Syria, Malaysia
welcomes the United States-Russia initiative to organize
an international conference. We stress the need for an
immediate cessation to violence and underscore the
importance of dialogue to reach a political solution.
Malaysians empathize with the suffering of the Syrian
people. Nevertheless, in our view, only the Syrian
people can decide on their own destiny. We therefore
continue to believe that a Syrian-led inclusive political
process is the way forward, based on resolutions 2042
(2012) and 2043 (2012), as well as the final communique
(S/2012/522, annex) of the Action Group for Syria
issued in Geneva on 30 June 2012.

To conclude, Malaysia reiterates its support
for Lebanon in its efforts to fully liberate all of its
territories. In that regard, we urge Israel to fully
implement resolution 1701 (2006), which calls for a
permanent ceasefire and for the complete withdrawal
of Israeli troops from Lebanon, with full respect for the
Blue Line.

