Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenca, Assistant
Secretary-General Ursula Mueller, Ambassador
Ertugrul Apakan and Ambassador Martin Sajdik for
their comprehensive briefings, especially given the
short notice for this meeting.

We always underline the need for full implementation
of the Minsk agreements by all the signatories involved.
However, it must be remembered who the victim is and
who the aggressor is in this case. Despite what we may
hear today, much ill will would be required to suggest
that it is the country that has fallen prey to Russia's
aggressive foreign policy that is failing to comply
with the Minsk agreements. It is Russia that allowed
the illegal elections conducted last November in the
so-called separatist regions in Donbas that constitute
a gross violation of the Minsk agreements. The tactic
is plain and simple: one will significantly reduce the
number of violations reported by the observers of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) if access to the separatist-controlled parts of
Ukraine in Donbas remains restricted. That has been the
reality on the ground. To truly de-escalate the situation
in Donbas, we need more effective OSCE engagement,
in particular, the unhindered implementation of the
mandate of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine. The OSCE must be allowed to permanently
monitor the Ukrainian-Russian State border.

Russian aggression against Ukraine remains a
security threat to the whole region. As we have already
stated in the Council on several occasions, the conflict
in and around Ukraine is not a domestic Ukrainian
crisis. It is a consequence of the Russian aggression
against a sovereign neighbouring State and, as often
depicted by the aggressor, a brotherly nation. That
aggression undermines the core principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. Poland fully
supports Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity,
including its maritime areas.

We are seriously concerned by Russia's unjustified
use of military force against Ukrainian ships and naval
personnel on 25 November, which took place against
the backdrop of increasing militarization in the area.
We call on Russia to ensure unhindered access to
Ukrainian ports and navigational rights in the Sea of
Azov and the Kerch Strait. Furthermore, we call for the
immediate and unconditional release of the Ukrainian
vessels and their crew members.

Russia must stop destabilizing the socioeconomic
situation in eastern Ukraine through unjustified
discriminatory inspections of vessels bound for and
originating in the ports of Berdyansk and Mariupol.

Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea, an integral
part of Ukraine, is a glaring example of the violation
of the principles of international law. That was true on
16 March 2014, when the illegal referendum deciding
the status of Crimea was held and it continues to be true
today. Russia's claims of sovereignty or sovereign rights
in maritime areas belonging to the Crimean peninsula
have no legal basis whatsoever. Ukraine's decision to
institute arbitration proceedings against Russia under
the United National Convention on the Law of the Sea
is a step that will hopefully lead to a peaceful resolution
of its disputes with Russia.

While we are always grateful for the picture of
the humanitarian situation provided by Assistant
Secretary-General Ursula Mueller, we see the
need to take immediate action to ease the difficult
humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine. First, it
requires Russia to allow international humanitarian
organizations to operate freely in the areas of Donbas
controlled by militants. The humanitarian situation
in the conflict areas is very difficult. Thanks to the
data provided by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, we are aware that humanitarian
aid and protection need to be provided to approximately
3.5 million people. The civilian infrastructure is also
being targeted and intentionally destroyed. The Russia-
backed forces refuse to make basic improvements to the
crossing facilities at the entry-exit checkpoints along
the contact line, where thousands of civilians wait for
hours in order to meet their basic needs such as seeing
family members, and to collect medicine and food. The
Special Monitoring Mission is reporting a threefold
increase in deaths by natural causes at checkpoints
in comparison to the previous year. In mid-December
last year, when the temperature was below freezing,
local pipelines in Donetsk were shelled and damaged,
resulting in a water supply disruption for about 43,000
Toretsk inhabitants, including about 5,000 children in
21 educational facilities. Water supplies were resumed
after five days when the parties to the conflict agreed
to hold fire on the water supply infrastructure for
the repair of damaged pipelines. Moreover, despite
the safety guarantees, the water workers found
themselves under heavy fire on 25 December. That is
simply unacceptable.

Apart from supporting Ukraine at the political level,
since 2014 Poland has been providing the necessary
humanitarian aid to internally displaced people from
areas affected by armed conflict in eastern Ukraine, as
well as to the most vulnerable local population. Ukraine
is a priority State for Poland's development assistance
and will remain one as long as our partners recognize
the need for it.

In conclusion on a positive note, we recognize
the latest amendments to the Constitution of Ukraine
introducing its European and Euro-Atlantic integration
perspective. Broad support is reflected both in the
Ukrainian Parliament and on the Ukrainian streets.
Despite all the uncertainties that will arise at some
point, we are sure that a lot can be built on that support.
We stand shoulder to shoulder with our friends to
overcome any obstacles.

