Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Madam President, for your kind words on the
United Kingdom's presidency of the Security Council
in August, and I wish you well for your stewardship of
the Council in September. Thank you also for convening
today's debate on children and armed conflict.
I want to recognize the presence ofForeign Minister
Asselborn today. We commend Luxembourg's strong
leadership and unwavering commitment to this issue
during its time on the Council, including through the
chairmanship of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. Let me also warmly thank all today's
briefers for their inspiring and moving statements.

We have seen some progress on this dossier. This is
largely a result of the dedication and active engagement
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, as a tireless champion
for children affected by conflict. Most recently, in
May the Government of South Sudan and the Sudan
People's Liberation Army in Opposition committed
to ending grave violations against children and the
Government of Yemen signed an action plan to end
the recruitment and use of children. We also welcome
the Special Representative's news that the Free Syrian
Army has committed to ending the recruitment and use
of children. Moreover, Ms. Zerrougui has driven the
implementation of commitments through her effective
advocacy, field visits and, in particular, by launching
the Children, Not Soldiers campaign with UNICEF
in March, aimed at ending the recruitment and use of
children by Government armed forces in conflict by
2016.

As others have noted, the completion of Chad's
action plan has led to its delisting from the annexes of
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/339). We
urge Chad to continue building on that success and to
share its experience with other Governments. We also
call on all parties - State and non-State - that have
not yet concluded action plans to do so as a matter
of priority, and we call on those that have signed, to
honour their commitments in full.

Although the progress is welcome, the report of
the Secretary-General and the moving evidence we
have heard today from the five briefers highlight the
horrifying scale of violations still being committed
against children in new and intensifying crises across
the world today. Given time constraints, I shall mention
just two.

In Syria and the region, 5.5 million children
are in need of education and more than half of them
are out of school. We are facing a lost generation of
Syrian children traumatized, displaced and without
education. Their lives have been disrupted and their
future potential wasted with the obvious future risk of
alienation and radicalization. That is why the United
Kingdom is supporting UNICEF and others in Syria
and the region to deliver the No Lost Generation
initiative. That aims to increase support to education,
to psychosocial programmes and protection for the
children of Syria and to partners who are establishing
child-friendly spaces for Syrian children to safely play
and study.

The past year has seen an increasing trend of attacks
against the military use of schools, as well as abductions
and the detention of children. In Nigeria, today marks
the 148th day since over 200 schoolgirls were abducted
in Chibok. There were 57 who escaped, but 219 are
still missing and none has so far been rescued. Those
attacks are not only barbaric abuses of human rights.
They deprive children of their right to education; they
put an end to their innocence as they become hostages
and instruments of conflict. Communities and families
are torn apart by fear, trauma and loss.

As Sandra Uwiringiyimana so movingly pleaded,
we must do more to fight against impunity for crimes
committed against children. The International Criminal
Court has an important contribution to make. When
the Council visited the Hague last month, we called on
the Court to hold perpetrators to account for all such
egregious violations of international law. We urge the
Secretary-General and the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict to consider ways to increase
pressure on persistent perpetrators of human rights
violations and to put an end to impunity. We owe that,
at least, to victims like Sandra and her family.

This debate is a reminder that children continue not
only to be affected by conflict, but, much worse, are
often specifically targeted, coerced and exploited during
conflict. The United Kingdom remains committed to
working to prevent these abhorrent violations, to ensure
the implementation of action plans, and to tackle those
who persist in committing violations against children.
To provide the world's children with a safer future, we
must spare no effort.

