Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, we take this opportunity to warmly welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey.
We also welcome Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco, and thank him for his briefing
today.

Bosnia and Herzegovina would like to join other
members of the Security Council in condemning in the
strongest possible terms the attack that was carried out
by the Israel Defense Forces on a flotilla of ships
carrying unarmed civilians and humanitarian aid for
Palestinians in Gaza, leaving at least 10 of those
unarmed civilians dead and numerous other injured.
Bosnia and Herzegovina deeply regrets this tragic loss
of life and the injuries sustained, and we wish to
extend our deepest condolences and heartfelt sympathy
to the families of the victims.

This attack on and killing of innocent
humanitarians comes at a time when new efforts have
been made in order to create the environment for
negotiations. It can only aggravate the suffering of the
Palestinian population and deepen the crisis. These
were civilian ships carrying unarmed civilians and
humanitarian aid intended for the 1.5 million
Palestinians who are being held in Gaza under siege by
Israel.

This Israeli attack on unarmed civilians aboard
foreign vessels sailing in international waters
constitutes a grave breach of international
humanitarian law and a violation of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea. Nothing can justify
such a use of violence. Bosnia and Herzegovina calls
for a full investigation into the attack to be carried out
immediately, so that the perpetrators, as well as those
with command responsibility for the attack, are swiftly
brought to justice, in accordance with international
humanitarian law.

This tragic event points to the urgent need to lift
the ban on humanitarian aid intended for Palestinian
civilians in Gaza. Bosnia and Herzegovina is deeply
concerned about the hardship and tragedy of the
Palestinian civilians in Gaza. Their living conditions
are unsustainable. We therefore reiterate our call upon
Israel to allow the immediate, sustained and
unconditional opening of crossings for the flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to
and from Gaza, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009) and the 2005 Agreement on
Movement and Access.

It is unacceptable for Israel to continue to act as a
State that is above the law. If there is to be lasting
peace in the Middle East, Israel must stop violating
international law and start to act with restraint and in
line with its international obligations.

