Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Madam President, for holding this important
debate today. I would also like to warmly thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for his valuable briefing
and the representatives of the media - Mr. Engel,
Ms. Carroll, Mr. Abdinur and Mr. Abdul-Ahad - for
sharing their moving experiences and powerful insights
with the Security Council this morning.

Journalists help to shape our understanding of the
world by providing accurate, impartial reports of what
is happening around us. That is particularly important
in conflict areas, where access to information is
challenging and often inconsistent. Journalists often
place themselves in dangerous situations in order to
reveal the facts. They go where most of us are unable to
go in order to report and reveal. They seek out and bear
witness to human rights violations and the violation of
international laws. That is why they should have the
freedom to report the news without fear of reprisal or
being targeted.

Unfortunately, journalists, human rights defenders
and non-governmental organizations promoting
freedom of expression continue to be specifically
targeted across the world. Last year was one of the
bloodiest on record with regard to journalists' deaths.
One hundred and twenty-one were killed and more
than 200 imprisoned. Eighteen of those killings were
in Somalia alone. And not much has changed this year.

Many here will recall the murder of the journalist
Liban Abdullahi Farah only a few weeks ago. Liban
worked for the London-based channel Kalsan TV. He
filed a series of reports on the election campaigns
in Puntland in Somalia. Liban was shot six times
in the neck and chest by three gunmen. His murder
demonstrates that exposing injustice and abuse often
takes journalists to unsafe places, where they are at
greater risk of random violence as well as intentional
targeting. In Syria, eight journalists have been killed
this year alone, and at least 39 since the conflict began.
Case after case ofjournalist killings around the globe
underscore that murder is the most brutal form of
censorship. It is our moral duty to protect those who
risk their lives in the name of truth, justice and human
rights.

The United Kingdom is deeply committed to
the protection of civilians in situations of conflict,
including the protection of journalists, and fully
supports resolution 1738 (2006). Deliberate targeting
of journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel who are reporting on armed conflicts and
not directly participating in hostilities is unacceptable.
All parties to an armed conflict must comply fully
with their obligations under international law related
to the protection of civilians, including journalists,
media professionals and associated personnel. As
the Council reaffirmed in February's presidential
statement (S/PRST/2013/2), journalists should not be
differentiated from civilians and should be respected
and protected as such under international humanitarian
law.

International journalists can and do try to mitigate
the risks of working in conflict zones, as we have
heard. Civil society plays an important role in assisting
journalists in that regard. For example, the Committee
to Protect Journalists has published a security guide
that suggests ways journalists can protect themselves
while covering armed conflict, organized crime and
corruption, including guidance on security training,
protective gear and satellite technology. Columbia
University here in New York has supported valuable
research on the psychological trauma that journalists
may face in their work and on measures to address it.

But despite heightened awareness, killings are on
the rise. Danger is compounded by the failure of States
to prosecute those who kill journalists. That culture
of impunity, which all the journalists have spoken
about today, must end. In countries where justice for
such crimes is left unaddressed, there is clear evidence
that systematic violence against the press recurs year
after year. States must do more, not only to protect
journalists but to bring to justice those who kill them.
Media outlets should also do more to develop and
sustain safety provisions for their staff.

The international community must also do its
part. Journalists provide an invaluable service to the
United Nations, particularly the Security Council, by
reporting on situations that threaten peace and security.
The United Nations has produced a plan of action on
the safety ofjournalists and the issue of impunity. The
United Kingdom fully supports the plan, which will
help States develop legislation and mechanisms to
allow for freedom of expression and support efforts to
implement existing international rules and principles.
We encourage all Member States to work together with
the United Nations to implement its provisions.

It is a sad irony that the deaths ofjournalists and
support staff are themselves underreported by the
media. The vast majority ofjournalists killed are local
reporters whose murders go almost entirely unnoticed.
They simply become statistics. That group often has no
access to the protection and guidance offered by large
media and civil society organizations. They are the
most at risk and the most in need of support. And as
we have heard, most of them are not killed in armed
conflict; only about one in four are killed in war zones.
The great majority are killed in their own countries in
times of peace, covering serious public-interest issues
such as corruption and crime. That is deplorable. The
murder of journalists is an attack on democracy and on
the goal of promoting free speech.

In every part of the world, during times of peace
and conflict, journalists broadcast the people's voice.
The Council must recognize and support that goal. We
must continue to take steps to protect journalists and
enable them to report, for their reporting is one crucial
element in the difficult path towards peace.

