The President (spoke in French): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
France.

First, I would like to say that we fully associate
ourselves with the statement to be made by the
Presidency of the European Union.

France condemns the action conducted against
Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, which has caused the death of
10 Palestinians, as France has always condemned the
principle of any extrajudicial execution as contrary to
international law. The practice of extrajudicial
executions violates the fundamental principles of the
rule of law, without which no just and effective policy
is possible, including within the context of combating
terrorism. This practice by the Israeli armed forces
must stop.

In addition to the fact that it was illegal,
yesterday's attack could be counter-productive at the
political level. It could exacerbate tension in the
occupied Palestinian territories and throughout the
region. It threatens efforts made in recent months to
obtain a ceasefire from the Palestinian movements. It
can only lead to a radicalization of the Palestinian
population, and beyond that, of the populations of the
Near and Middle East. France is extremely concerned
about the risk of a further worsening of the situation
and calls upon all parties to exercise the greatest
restraint in the face of this latest blow dealt to recent
efforts for a resumption of the political process.

France recognizes the imprescriptable right of
Israel to security, to defend itself and to combat
terrorist attacks, which are totally reprehensible,
morally repugnant and cannot be justified by any
means. France systematically condemns suicide
bombings and other terrorist attacks committed against
Israeli civilians by armed Palestinian groups, in
particular by Hamas. However, the fight against
terrorism must be waged in compliance with the law.
Its effectiveness depends on its legitimate, credible and
just nature.

Israel's security and that of its citizens requires
peace. Violence, which has killed more than 3,200
Palestinians and more than 900 Israelis since the end of
September 2000, cannot be a solution. Everything
should be done to save the road map and, along with it,
the possibility of a just, negotiated settlement based on
the principles enshrined in Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003)
and the principle of land for peace. There is no
alternative to renewed implementation of the road map,
which remains the only settlement plan agreed by both
sides and endorsed by the international community.
Political dialogue and the political process must
resume. France reaffirms its conviction that only a just
and negotiated solution leading to the end of the 1967
occupation and to the creation of an independent,
viable, peaceful and sovereign Palestinian State, living
side by side with Israel, will give Israel the security to
which all Israelis are entitled.

France calls upon the parties to immediately meet
their reciprocal and parallel obligations under the road
map. The first step is to renounce violence. The
Palestinian Authority must implement security reforms
and ensure that its security machinery is centralized
under a single authority. It must take the steps
necessary to dismantle terrorist infrastructures, to
prevent new attacks and to ensure that perpetrators of
terrorist acts are brought to justice. The international
community is prepared to help the Palestinians to meet
their obligations.

The Government of Israel must meet its
obligations as the occupying Power under the Fourth
Geneva Convention. The Israeli authorities must stop
building the separation barrier, which encroaches on
Palestinian territories occupied since 1967; halt the
colonization policy, including in East Jerusalem; and
take the steps necessary to improve the humanitarian
and economic situation of the Palestinian people,
particularly by putting an end to blockages and
impediments to the circulation of goods and people.

France is convinced that it is only through
collective action that the international community -
particularly through the Quartet - can play an
essential role in helping to bring about a just solution
that is acceptable to both sides. We must emerge from
the current impasse and put an end to the cycle of
hatred and vengeance. We have the collective duty to
act to help the parties take the risk of peace. The stakes
are even higher, given that the settlement of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is an essential condition for the
Middle East to find stability and to be able to commit
itself to the path of reform and modernization.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

As a measure to optimize the use of our time in
order to allow as many delegations as possible to take
the floor, I shall not individually invite speakers to take
seats at the table and invite them to resume their seats
on the side. When a speaker is taking the floor, the
Conference Officer will seat the next speaker on the
list at the table.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Libyan Arab J amahiriya.

