Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): First of all, I
would like to welcome Mr. Jibril to the Council's
meeting today.

In accordance with paragraph 24 of resolution
1970 (2011), of 26 February, I have the honour to
report to the Security Council on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to that resolution. The
report covers the period from 28 June to 26 September.
Allow me to begin by noting that by its resolution
2009 (2011), adopted just 10 days ago (see S/PV.6620),
the Council modified the measures previously imposed
in relation to Libya. Among other things, the Council
introduced additional exceptions to the arms embargo,
removed the names of the Libyan National Oil
Corporation and the Zueitina Oil Company from the
asset freeze list, while partially relaxing the financial
restrictions in connection with the other listed entities
and lifting the ban on flights of Libyan aircraft. The
Committee will thus be monitoring those measures, as
modified.

During the reporting period, the Committee
convened three informal consultations - on 7 July,
18 July and 14 September. Those informal
consultations were aimed to discuss the scope and
application of the arms embargo; to hear a briefing by
the Office far the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
on the potential impact of sanctions on the civilian
population in Libya; to hear a presentation by the Panel
of Experts on its interim report and to go over pending
requests for guidance from Member States.

I would like to elaborate further on the informal
consultations of 14 September. Following a recap of its
findings up to 11 August, the Panel presented
11 recommendations, with four relating to the assets
freeze, six relating to the arms embargo and one
relating to a procedural matter concerning
communication with the Committee. In the discussion
that ensued, it was stressed, among other things, that
the Panel could assist the Committee by closely
monitoring the soon-to-be modified asset freeze, the
illicit flows of arms out of Libya and the
implementation of the travel ban. The Panel was asked
to look both backwards and forward in investigating
incidents of non-compliance.

It was also suggested that the Panel build a
cooperative relationship with the new Libyan
Government and establish some form of coordination
with the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. The
Panel, on its part, emphasized the importance of
continual access to Libya for the effectiveness of its
work, with which the members of the Committee
agreed.

The Committee has dealt with a number of
written communications from Member States, most of
which relate to the financial restrictions. In sum, the
Committee expressed no objection to 11 notifications
pertaining to the asset freeze under the basic expenses
provision set out in paragraph 19(a) of resolution 1970
(2011). It approved 41 requests for an exception to that

measure, under the extraordinary expenses provision
set out in paragraph 19(b) of the resolution; it
acknowledged receipt of one notification under the lien
or judgment provision set out in paragraph 19(c) of the
resolution; and it acknowledged receipt of 10
notifications under the prior contracts provision set out
in paragraph 21 of the same resolution.

I should like to highlight here that in its
resolution 2009 (2011), the Council recalled its
determination to ensure that assets frozen pursuant to
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) shall as soon
as possible be made available to and for the benefit of
the people of Libya, and welcomed steps taken by the
Committee and Member States in that regard. Indeed,
under the extraordinary expenses provision, more than
$16 billion has already been unfrozen through the
Committee for the humanitarian needs of the Libyan
people.

Moreover, in paragraph 19 of resolution 2009
(2011), the Council decided that the Committee shall,
in consultation with the Libyan authorities, lift the
designation of the Libyan Arab Foreign Bank, the
Libyan Investment Authority and the Libyan Africa
Investment Portfolio as soon as practical; and the
members of the Committee will be working towards
this goal

With respect to the arms embargo, the Committee
approved five requests for an exception to that
measure, in accordance with paragraph 9(a) of
resolution 1970 (2011), and acknowledged one
notification pursuant to paragraph 9(b) of the
resolution. In the context of the enforcement of the
embargo, the Committee has thus far received a total of
22 reports of inspections of cargo on board vessels
heading to Libya.

Finally, during the period under review the
Committee has answered seven requests for guidance
on aspects of the asset freeze and it has received 21
reports from Member States on the implementation of
this measure, as well as the arms embargo and travel
ban, thereby bringing the total number of such reports
to 51.

