Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): First of all, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his statement and
his personal engagement in this important issue. I
would also like to thank the Peruvian presidency for
organizing this debate on the recently released report
of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict (S/2006/826). Slovakia is also grateful to
Ms.Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, as well as to Ms. Ann Veneman, Executive
Director of UNICEF, for their tireless work on behalf
of children affected by armed conflict around the world
and for their participation in our meeting today.

As Slovakia fully associates itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union, I will limit
myself to a few additional remarks.

Slovakia supports the full implementation of
Security Council resolutions on children and armed
conflict, in particular resolution 1612 (2005), which
was adopted a year ago, making a significant milestone
in the protection of children affected by armed conflict.

We welcome the new report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict, as well as the
recommendations it contains. The report reflects the
progress made and points to new situations that have
emerged since the 2005 report.

Yesterday's Arria formula meeting with the
representatives of the Coalition to Stop the Use of
Child Soldiers, the International Save the Children
Alliance and the Watchlist on Children and Armed
Conflict, which was organized by the Permanent
Mission of France, gave us another excellent
opportunity to hear additional information and many
valuable recommendations from non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) that are active on the frontlines.
We very much appreciate the work done by NGOs. We
fully support the idea of a close partnership between
the United Nations Task Force on Children and Armed
Conflict and NGOs.

Slovakia welcomes the reported progress made in
the implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, the development and implementation of
action plans and the information on the activities of
child protection advisers of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Thousands of children
associated with armed groups and affected by armed
conflict have benefited from various disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes and have
managed to return to their communities and schools.
That progress has been made possible through the
effective and pragmatic approach of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
UNICEF, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
NGOs and other important actors on the ground.

Unfortunately, even with all the attention being
paid by the international community to the protection
of the rights of children, we are still witnessing the

killing and maiming of children, acts of rape and other
sexual exploitation, abductions, the denial of
humanitarian access to children, the recruitment and
use of child soldiers and other gross violations of
children's rights in many of the situations reported on
in the Secretary-General's report of 2005. Furthermore,
new conflict situations have arisen in which a great
deal of effort has to be made to prevent children from
being victimized and to minimize human rights
violations.

Despite improved communication and
cooperation with Governments of countries in conflict
situations, in many cases United Nations and other
humanitarian personnel continue to face difficulties in
securing safe and unhindered access. With respect to
any national activity carried out by countries in
situations of concern, there is a prerequisite to
cooperate with United Nations bodies - in particular
with the Task Force on Children and Armed Conflict,
country-level monitoring and reporting task force
teams, peacekeeping missions and United Nations
country teams - as well as with regional and
non-governmental organizations, in order to achieve
progress in ending the recruitment and use of children
by armed groups.

Impunity for crimes against children is
unacceptable; national judicial authorities have the
primary responsibility to bring the perpetrators of
crimes to justice. However, with regard to situations of
armed conflict in which national judicial authorities are
not fully capable of coping with crimes against
children, Slovakia endorses the continuation of the
active engagement of the International Criminal Court.

Both annexes of the Secretary General's latest
report list many parties to conflict - often the same
ones as in previous annual reports - who have
notoriously disregarded appeals of the international
community and have continued to recruit child
soldiers. In that connection, we believe that in some
cases effective targeted measures by the international
community against parties to armed conflict who
continue to use child combatants or to commit other
crimes against children in armed conflict could lead to
a change in the behaviour of notorious violators.
In conclusion, I would like to express our serious
concern about the information regarding the possible
involvement of United Nations peacekeeping personnel
in the sexual exploitation of children in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Preventing sexual exploitation
and abuse by United Nations peacekeeping personnel
remains a crucial issue in the endeavour by the United
Nations to protect children affected by armed conflict.
We fully support a policy of zero-tolerance in respect
of crimes committed by United Nations personnel. We
therefore hope that the investigation into allegations in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will by duly
conducted and that offenders will not go unpunished.
We believe that appropriate training of peacekeeping
forces clearly has a positive effect on the behaviour
and actual conduct of troops as they carry out their
duties. This issue needs to be properly addressed as
plans for security-sector reform are carried out.

