At the outset, I would like to thank the delegation of the Russian Federation for holding this annual debate on women and peace and security. This debate is of great importance in the light of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its many repercussions for women, which are exacerbated by conflict. I also thank His Excellency Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Under-Secretary-General and Executive Director of UN-Women, for their valuable briefing. This year marks the commemoration of important events related to women and peace and security, namely, the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Being Declaration and Platform for Action and the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), in which the Council stresses the need to ensure the equal participation of men and women at all levels, particularly with regard to decision- making and involvement in peacebuilding and peacekeeping, in view of the disasters and conflicts afflicting humankind. In the light of the emerging global crisis, the need to lay the foundations for peace is more urgent than ever. We reaffirm the support of Bahrain for the Secretary- General's call in the first months of the pandemic for an immediate global ceasefire and an international response to COVID-19. Led by His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa, the Kingdom of Bahrain has made maintaining the highest levels of social security one of its national priorities. In doing so, it supports women's participation in decision-making and public affairs and their role as equal partners in addressing current and future challenges and opportunities, by promoting self-sufficiency, scientific excellence and digital technology. Aware that achieving gender balance supports sustainable development, Bahrain is at an advanced stage of developing a comprehensive system to regulate the processes of mainstreaming and ensuring equality of opportunity for men and women. This system encompasses plans, programmes and mechanisms aimed at supporting and integrating the needs and aspirations of women so that they may continue their progress at the national, regional and global levels. Under the leadership of Her Royal Highness Princess Sabeekah bint Ibrahim Al Khalifa, Consort of the King of Bahrain, the Supreme Council for Women has launched initiatives to provide everything necessary to meet the needs of Bahraini women on the front lines and to ensure that they benefit from financial packages and Government decisions to ameliorate women's family and economic situations. Such initiatives are in line with intensive national efforts to address the pandemic, safeguard the gains made and strengthen the efforts of Bahrain in the area of women's advancement, in accordance with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as the country continues to uphold its international obligations under the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action as well as resolution 1325 (2000). In order to strengthen cooperation with the United Nations in supporting women and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, last year the Supreme Council for Women announced the winners of the first edition of the Princess Sabeekah Bint Ibrahim Al Khalifa Global Award for the Empowerment of Women. Her Royal Highness stressed that the award sums up, from an intellectual and knowledge standpoint, our national experience with women's participation and continuing advancement in Bahrain, enabling us to place this initiative at the disposal of the international community through UN-Women. A believer in the important role of education in empowering women and girls, especially those in conflict zones, Bahrain has established schools in Syrian refugee camps in countries neighbouring Syria and in the Gaza Strip. Moreover, Bahrain is working to eliminate practices that hinder women's progress and to bridge existing gaps in that regard. One example is combating trafficking in persons; Bahrain was placed in tier one for the third consecutive year by the United States Department of State in its report on combating trafficking in persons, the lone country in the Middle East and North Africa region to attain that distinction. Lastly, we affirm that Bahrain supports all international efforts to promote the advancement of women and achieve gender balance in all areas related to development and humanitarian matters, so as to ensure a comprehensive response to the coronavirus pandemic and recovery from its repercussions, as well as to promote the contributions of women as active partners in security, peace and sustainable justice.
