Ms. La Lime (spoke in French):
I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council
on the situation in Haiti for the first time since I took office
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/1059), which was transmitted to the members
of the Security Council on 28 November, provides an
update and analysis of developments pertaining to the
political situation, the operating environment in Haiti
and the efforts of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) to implement its
mandate. My briefing will focus on the most important
points covered by the report and some of the major
events that have occurred since its publication.

(spoke in English)

The political crisis triggered by the violent
demonstrations in July has been exacerbated by
numerous allegations of mismanagement of public
funds by the Government. Despite the appointment in
September ofa new Cabinet led by Prime Minister Jean-
Henry Ce'ant, tensions grew further as the population
continued to demand improved governance and
accountability, and as elements ofthe opposition called
for the resignation of President Moise. While there
were some tense moments during the demonstrations
of 17 October and 18 November, the Haitian National
Police (HNP) showed professionalism in its handling of
large crowds simultaneously - even during the smaller,
but somewhat more violent, protests of 18 November,
which were followed by a two-day general strike that
paralysed the country.

Since then, however, calls from the opposition
for new protests have failed to garner much popular
support. Concurrently, there were worrying episodes of
violence in some of the most notorious neighbourhoods
of Port-au-Prince, areas where State authority is limited.
Investigations by both the authorities and human rights
organizations are ongoing, while our human rights
service is also working to determine what happened.

It is against that backdrop that MINUJUSTH
strives to implement its mandate. Even though progress
has been slow, the visuals before the Council show
the incremental, yet positive, impact that the Mission
has had on reinforcing rule-of-law institutions,
increasing the capacity of the Haitian National Police
and promoting human rights in Haiti. At the request of
the Prime Minister, we established a joint commission
composed of his advisers and MINUJUSTH staff, with
the participation of other United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, to remove several bottlenecks
in the implementation of MINUJUSTH'S mandate
and to provide a technical forum for transition-related
issues. The joint commission has already met three
times in constructive dialogue. The law on the creation,
organization and functioning of the National Council
on Legal Aid was finally promulgated on 26 October,
after months of discussion. If fully implemented, it
will greatly contribute to alleviating the protracted
phenomenon of prison overcrowding. Likewise,
following a series of nominations made in the fall by
the executive branch, we now estimate that only an
additional 60 to 70 judges are required for the tribunals
in the country's 18 jurisdictions to operate at capacity.

The work undertaken by MINUJUSTH to increase
the capacity of human rights actors in the country is
also yielding results. The fact that the Government
now has a dedicated ministerial-level focal point for
human rights indicates Haiti's readiness to engage with
international human rights bodies and to prepare a
national action plan. Another encouraging development
is that the Office of the Ombudsperson for Human
Rights is slowly increasing its presence outside of Port-
Au-Prince. In that connection, the space for human
rights organizations to operate in a more conducive
environment is expanding.

However, much remains to be done. Successful
pilot projects, such as the one that brings together the
principal actors in the penal chain to directly tackle
the problem of pre-trial detention in the jurisdiction of
Port-Au-Prince, must now be replicated throughout the
country. The inspection mechanisms in the judiciary
need to be made more robust in order to increase the rate
at which cases are adjudicated by judges. The issue of
gang violence, endemic to a number of neighbourhoods
of the Port-Au-Prince metropolitan area, must be
addressed in a systemic manner to avoid the types of
worrisome episodes that have occurred in recent weeks.
In that respect, the executive branch and the Haitian
National Police recently committed to increasing their
engagement in order to find sustainable solutions to
that problem.

A more assiduous and focused Parliament will
be required to pass essential legislation, such as the
organic law on the Haitian National Police, a new
criminal code and a new code of criminal procedure.
Finally, it would behove not only on the Government
of Haiti but also the international community to fulfil
their commitment to fully fund the five-year strategic
development plan of the HNP so as to ensure the
continued build-up of human, logistical and material
capacity of that institution. MINUJUSTH will focus
on fulfilling those objectives in the coming months, a
period during which the country is expected to prepare
for and hold constitutionally mandated parliamentary
and municipal elections. Following a request by Haitian
authorities, a needs assessment mission was recently
deployed to Port-au-Prince to determine the extent to
which United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
would be able to provide technical assistance and
logistical support to the process.

While the totality of the benchmarks will not
be achieved by 15 October 2019, with careful and
responsible planning all options for the reconfiguration
of the United Nations presence in Haiti are still
feasible. Close collaboration with the Government and
its partners will be essential to achieve a successful
transition to a non-peacekeeping United Nations
presence in the country. I am pleased to report that,
in accordance with resolution 2410 (2018), this month
MINUJUSTH will be reducing the footprint of its
formed police units (FPUs) from seven to five. The
Bangladesh FPU, currently stationed in Miragoane, and
the India 1 FPU, based in Port-au-Prince, ceased their
activities on 1 December and will have left Haiti by the
end of this year. Their departure is accompanied by a
series of measures to ensure civilian populations do not
experience a decrease in security. The Rwanda FPU,
currently stationed in Jere'mie, will be relocated to
Miragoane, thereby giving it easier access to the entire
south-west region, as well as to Port-au-Prince. The
progressive withdrawal of the two FPUs is being offset
by a redeployment of HNP forces to the affected areas.
The departure of the other formed police units, which
has been planned for in an updated security transition
plan, will take place in 2019 if conditions permit.

The success of the MINUJUSTH's efforts,
however, is conditional on the good functioning of the
Government. That is why in the past weeks I have used
the good offices of the Secretary-General to reach out to
the President and the Prime Minister, as well as leaders
from across the political spectrum and key players
of the private sector, to advocate for a de-escalation
of current tensions and respect for the constitutional
order. I am encouraged by the initial signals sent out
by the Moise-Ce'ant Administration to start a genuine
dialogue with the political opposition and civil society,
while also launching a number of social appeasement
initiatives to address popular grievances.

Let me conclude by saying that the country's
current context is laden with challenges, but also hope.
The popular call for greater accountability in the use of
public funds provides a clear sign of the strength and
vibrancy of Haitian civil society, and of its desire to
actively participate in shaping the future of Haiti. The
prompt and efficient response of the Government to the
6 October earthquake, which struck the northern part of
the country, demonstrates the true capacity for action
of the Haitian State when it is united. It is therefore
important that we collectively assist the country in
emerging from the current political impasse. Through a
constructive and peaceful dialogue, the democratically
elected Government of Haiti could set the stage for
the next cycle of elections and continue to implement
programmes that will improve the lives of its citizens.

