Mr. Fonseca (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): It is a
great honour for us to see you, Sir, presiding over the
Security Council. I believe that you could not have
chosen a better topic for this open debate under the
Argentine presidency. The decision to tackle today's topic
reflects Argentina's traditional commitment in the
humanitarian field and demonstrates the generous concern
of the Argentine people for international issues.

Over the past few years we have seen an increase
in the number of attacks or uses of force against United
Nations personnel, associated personnel and humanitarian
personnel. The sense of urgency in our discussion today
cannot be denied. As the Secretary-General has recently
stated, the presumption that the United Nations flag
guarantees protection is no longer universally valid. The
same reasoning applies to other organizations with a long
history of impartial work in the humanitarian field, such
as the International Committee of the Red Cross.

 

It is not necessary to repeat examples of deeds that
are widely known. What we need is not a precise diagnosis
of the problem; we need appropriate remedies.

The context in which humanitarian emergencies
occur has changed. On 21 January 1999, the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, described to the Council what the new
context signifies. He said,

"Today's warfare often takes place in cities and
villages, with civilians as the preferred targets, the
propagation of terror as the premeditated tactic and
the physical elimination or mass displacement of
certain categories of populations as the overarching
strategy." (S/PV.3968, p. 2)
The supplies used in humanitarian assistance are seen
as useful assets and are often seized by belligerents for
strategic purposes. Similarly, humanitarian workers are
often seen as potential enemies, insofar as their attempt to
provide relief for those in need is wrongly interpreted as a
way of favouring one of the parties to the conflict.

What we are confronted with here, in fact, are grave
violations of human rights, of humanitarian law and of the
rights of refugees in the face of scorched-earth policies and
deliberate violence against civilians. It is urgent that we
undertake every effort, on a priority basis, to improve the
security of humanitarian personnel and United Nations
personnel.

This is not an abstract discussion. Let their be no
doubt about our challenge: we must take concrete measures
to protect the lives of those whose security is threatened
and abused merely because they seek to relieve the
suffering of desperate people.

Concrete and specific suggestions have been put
forward during this debate. I wish to emphasize the
importance of the statements of our Deputy Secretary-
General, Louise Frechette, and of Ms. Bertini, of the World
Food Programme. The Brazilian delegation has no further
suggestions, but we believe that we must underscore a few
points.

First, the preparation for United Nations operations
and humanitarian operations must include, whenever
appropriate, a significant security component, because
respect for the flags of the United Nations and of the
International Committee of the Red Cross cannot always be
guaranteed.

Secondly, the Office of the United Nations Security
Coordinator must be strengthened. It is also important to
spare no effort in training humanitarian personnel in
security matters.

Thirdly, in order to preserve credibility and trust in
areas devastated by conflict, it is imperative to maintain
the clear distinction between military activities and
humanitarian activities. Troops certainly can support
humanitarian efforts, but they cannot serve to replace
agencies having a humanitarian mandate.

Fourthly, the instruments of the Security Council
should be used to always guarantee secure, unhindered
access for humanitarian workers to those in need. In this
context, the precarious security situation of humanitarian
and United Nations personnel in Sierra Leone and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo poses an immediate
challenge.

In conclusion, I would like to acknowledge the
contribution made by the champions of our cause, the
women and men who risk their lives in volatile regions of
the world to give hope to those without it. Humanitarian
workers and United Nations personnel in the field
unselfishly are writing one of the most poignant pages of
our contemporary history. They deserve our recognition
and respect. These are the true heros of our times. The
best way of paying tribute to them is through concrete
measures so that today's hero does not become
tomorrow's martyr.

