Mr. Hisajima (Japan): At the outset, let me express
my sincere congratulations to the Republic of Korea
for its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council, and thank the Foreign Minister of the Republic
of Korea, Mr. Kim Sung-hwan, for holding this debate.
I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Ms. Navi
Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights; and Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for International
Law and Cooperation of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, for their respective briefings.

Japan associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians
in Armed Conflict.

The need for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict continues to increase. The five core challenges
identified in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/376) remain relevant today, and we need to
address what concrete measures can be applied to tackle
those challenges. Against that background, I would like
to focus on two issues in this debate.

Although the protection of civilians and the
building of capacities towards that end have been
part of the mandates of a number of peacekeeping

operations and other missions, ensuring the efficacy of
those mandates remains a challenge. In that regard, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which counts
the protection of civilians as one of its core goals, is
expected to deploy unmanned aerial vehicles in order
to improve surveillance capacity. Japan welcomes
effective measures of that sort aimed at protecting
civilians.

In Mali, the efforts of troops from France, African
States and Mali to re-establish stability are achieving
tangible results, and Japan commends their engagement.
Nevertheless, a number of challenges still exist, such as
providing assistance to the many internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and refugees, stabilizing recovered
areas and promoting political transition in Mali.
Strengthening the capacities of the Malian authorities
is crucial in tackling those challenges and therefore in
achieving the protection of civilians.

Japan is considering allocating $120 million in order
to assist refugees and IDPs in Mali and its neighbouring
countries and to strengthen governance and security
in the region, including by supporting peacekeeping
operations training centres. We strongly hope that such
assistance will contribute to the protection of civilians
in Mali and its neighbouring areas and improve regional
stability as a whole.

Furthermore, we believe that pre-deployment
training for peacekeeping operations and other mission
personnel is extremely useful, and it is therefore
important to provide comprehensive training on such
issues as the protection of civilians and the prevention
of sexual violence.

Ensuring accountability and compliance with
international humanitarian law on the part of parties
to conflict is obviously important, but, as the concept
paper issued by the Republic ofKorea (S/2013/75, annex)
points out, it is also important for the members of the
Security Council to fully recognize the importance of
those issues. The Security Council should take more
proactive actions to accelerate concrete movement in
that regard by, for instance, launching fact-finding
missions and submitting referrals to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). In that light, 57 countries,
including Japan, have requested that the Security
Council refer the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic
to the ICC. We all need to bear in mind that inaction on
the part ofthe Security Council sends the wrong message
to perpetrators and compromises the credibility of the
United Nations.

In conclusion, it is important that this open debate
should not only promote discussion at the normative
level but also contribute to the advancement of concrete
actions towards the protection of civilians on the
ground. In that regard, Japan hopes that the reports of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict will continue to be issued regularly,
with concrete recommendations, and that open debates
will provide a forum for active discussion on the matter.

