Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the comprehensive briefing on the situation he gave us
from Pristina. I also thank the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica
Dacie, and the Ambassador of Kosovo, Ms. Vlora
Citaku, for their statements to the Security Council.

I would like to address three points: our support
for the continuation of dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, conducted under the auspices of the European
Union; our firm condemnation of the violent methods
of some opposition parliamentarians; and our ongoing
commitment to the strengthening of the rule of law
in Kosovo.

France welcomes the continuation of the political
dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo under the auspices
of the European Union. The recently holding of a new
meeting of Serbian and Kosovar Prime Ministers in the
presence of the High Representative of the European
Union is a further demonstration of the commitment
of Belgrade and Pristina for the process of bilateral
rapprochement. Further progress has been made on this
front in recent months. Integration of nearly 400 Serbian
civil protection agents in various Kosovo institutions
is a significant and symbolic step forward likely to
strengthen the integration of the various communities
in the country. Progress under way with respect to
harmonizing diplomas, freedom of movement, air and
rail integration will also have concrete positive impact
on the everyday lives of Kosovar and Serbian citizens.
We welcome this.

We expect, however, that all commitments
undertaken in the framework of agreements concluded
under the auspices of the European Union to be
implemented without delay, including on the creation
of the association of Serb-majority municipalities,
which recently received a favourable opinion from
the Constitutional Court of Pristina. This is a key
element of the dialogue. The normalization of relations
between Belgrade and Pristina remains generally a
prerequisite for their respective progress on the path of
European integration.

The political situation in Kosovo is worrying. The
current disruptions of the functioning of the Assembly
are absolutely unacceptable, as are violence and other
acts of intimidation against politicians. France calls on
those responsible for these unacceptable acts to play the
game of democracy and press their claims within the
framework of existing institutions and in compliance
with the provisions of the Constitution.

Violence and hate rhetoric have no place in the
society to which the overwhelming majority of Kosovo
citizens aspires. They jeopardize the progress achieved
by Kosovo patiently for over 10 years on the path of
building an independent, modern and democratic
State. We salute the professionalism and restraint by
the Kosovo Security Forces and the mediation efforts
carried out by the authorities in Pristina. We assure
them once again of our full support.

The election of the new President was an important
and necessary step in the proper functioning of
institutions. We regret the behaviour of some members
of the opposition on this occasion. Despite tensions,
Kosovo authorities should seek to maintain dialogue
and continue to listen to the people. Internal reforms are
essential if citizens' prospects for the future are to be
restored. The implementation of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement should lead in this direction by
creating favourable conditions for necessary changes.

Continuing wholehearted efforts to consolidate
the rule of law in Kosovo must more than ever remain
a priority. This pertains first and foremost to the
combat against impunity. The ratification last week
by Kosovo of the headquarters agreement signed
with the Government of the Netherlands to set up
the Kosovo Specialist Chambers in The Hague is
a bold step forward that we welcome. This is a clear
reflection of the determination of Kosovo to implement
its commitments in the area of the rule of law. It is
now important that all components of these Specialist
Chambers begin operating according to the planned
timetable and that the Kosovar authorities cooperate
fully, so that prosecution of those responsible for the
crimes denounced in the Marty report can begin.

Continued work on the question of disappeared
persons is also of great importance. The signing of a
cooperation agreement on the exchange of information
between Kosovo and Montenegro is a step in the
right direction. Relaunching the dynamic of the Serb-
Kosovar joint Working Group on this topic, however,
is urgent. We hope that this work will benefit from
the recent appointment by Pristina of the head of its
delegation, which we welcome.

The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) also has an important
role to play in this area. I would be grateful to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General if
he could tell us about the measures planned for the
implementation of recommendations in this area by
the UNMIK International Human Rights Working
Group, in particular regarding the prosecution of those
responsible for violations and compensation for victims.

Consolidating the rule oflaw also means combating
radicalization in all of its forms. France welcomes the
unconditional commitment of Kosovo in this area both
at the local level and in the context of the international
coalition against Da'esh.

Finally, I take this opportunity to reiterate our
support for the European Union Rule of Law Mission,
which provides daily support for the rule of law and
security in Kosovo.

I should like to conclude by recalling once again, as
our colleague from the United Kingdom has just done,
our wish that the Council finally review its timetable
for consideration of this issue given the continued
progress on the ground, particularly concerning the
consolidation of Kosovar institutions and the bilateral
dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia.

