Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): I express sincere appreciation
to you, Madam, for having convened this timely public
debate on the situation in Haiti. I also express my
gratitude to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Sandra Honore, for her comprehensive
briefing, as well as for her invaluable contributions
to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) throughout her tenure.

Both Haiti and the United Nations have arrived at
a pivotal juncture of transition from MINUSTAH to
its successor, the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH). Jamaica has long
recognized the significant role of peacekeeping in
the maintenance of international peace and security
and appreciates the role that MINUSTAH has played
in supporting Haiti since its inception. We recall in
particular the vital relief response that MINUSTAH
provided in the aftermath of the 2010 earthquake. We
recognize that the Mission's remit over the years has
been wide-ranging, encompassing the critical social,
political and developmental needs of Haiti.

As the Secretary-General reported this month,
MINUSTAH has recorded many clear accomplishments,
such as the implementation of more than 1,700 quick-
impact projects, the progress made by the community
violence reduction programme in mostly vulnerable
and urban areas, the implementation of human rights
mechanisms, including the Universal Periodic Review,
and the establishment of committees to oversee
the implementation of specific treaties, such as the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. What is of
paramount importance at this time, however, is that
concerted efforts be made to expand access to justice
and that the institutions of the rule of law, including the
Haitian national police, be strengthened.

While the range of achievements recorded by
MINUSTAH is laudable, now is the time to turn our
attention to the consolidation of the gains registered by
the Mission over its more than 13 years of operation.
We therefore support the international community's
commitment to sustaining its active engagement
through effective partnership with the Government
and the people of Haiti as they proceed on their path
towards stabilization and democratic consolidation.

I reiterate Jamaica's strong support for the urgent
action that needs to be taken by the international
community in order to resolve the health and
humanitarian situation caused by the introduction and
presence of cholera in Haiti. We recognize that there
is no simple solution to this unfortunate situation
and appreciate the steps being taken by the United
Nations and other partners to address the effects of
cholera in Haiti. Jamaica looks forward to the effective
implementation of the three-part strategy planned by
the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, which
includes mobilizing funds to address the significant
financing deficit that retards the full implementation of
the overall response to the critical situation of cholera in
Haiti. In that respect, Jamaica was pleased to facilitate,
along with Mexico, General Assembly resolution 71/161
B, adopted in July, which called on Member States to
voluntarily redirect any unencumbered balances from
MINUSTAH to the United Nations Haiti Cholera
Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund.

Mindful of ensuring that residual stabilization
needs are afforded priority, we urge that attention be
placed on addressing issues surrounding justice reform
and the promotion of human rights, including the
protection and promotion of women's rights. We note
that areas of concern include the prolonged periods of
pre-trial detention and prison overcrowding.

As MINUSTAH withdraws, Jamaica recognizes
the importance of ensuring that the transition period
be executed in close cooperation with the United
Nations country team. The aim is to enable a smooth,
careful and progressive transfer of assets and duties to
MINUJUSTH, the Haitian authorities and other key
stakeholders, in alignment with the on-the-ground needs
of Haiti. Jamaica concurs with the observation of the
Secretary-General that ultimately, the security, political

and development agenda ofHaiti can be shaped only by
the national authorities and the Haitian population.

1 reaffirm the Government of Jamaica's long-term
commitment to Haiti and its people as they proceed on
the path towards sustainable development.

The meeting ruse at 12.55 pm.
