Mr. Konuzin (spoke in Russian): I am very
pleased to address the Security Council today in my
capacity as Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) in order to brief the Council on the
Committee's activities and to submit for the Council's
consideration the Committee's twelfth work
programme, for the next 90-day period, from 1 July to
30 September 2004.

As the Council knows, I assumed the position of
Chairman of the CTC at the end of May, succeeding
Ambassador Arias of Spain. On behalf of the
Committee, I would like to express once again our
gratitude and appreciation for the effective leadership
and great creativity which Ambassador Arias
demonstrated throughout his 13 months at the head of
the Committee.

I would also like to introduce Mr. Javier Ruperez
of Spain, who has been appointed Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate. He has already started practical planning
work aimed at consolidating the new structure. I am
confident that under his leadership the Executive
Directorate will effectively support the activities of the
CTC.

Before presenting the twelfth work programme, I
shall refer to the implementation of the CTC's previous
work programme. The adoption of resolution 1535
(2004) on 26 March marked the start of the important
process of revitalization. Since that time, the major
challenge for the Committee has been the maintenance
of an effective balance between reform efforts and the
Committee's short-term activities.

During this new stage of its work, the CTC has
continued to monitor implementation of resolution
1373 (2001), relying on reports submitted by States in
response to the letters addressed to them by the
Committee. It should be noted that during this
transitional period the CTC could not avoid a
slowdown in the review of reports. Of 65 reports
planned for review from 1 April to 30 June 2004, only
25 were actually completed. Nevertheless, the
Committee has taken all possible measures to
accelerate the process and to overcome the delay.

At the same time, the CTC has detected that the
approach to this work also needs to be changed. The
analysis of country assessments of assistance needs
should be integrated into the review process as one of
its major elements. That task was highlighted in the
Committee's previous, eleventh work programme, but
practical work did not begin until last month.
Assessments of that kind could be instrumental in
developing practical cooperation with donor countries
and organizations and in ensuring that the global
technical assistance efforts are better adjusted to real
needs. The Committee will continue to work in line
with that approach.

Encouraging States to become parties to the
relevant conventions and protocols related to terrorism,
and to implement their provisions in their national
legislation, has remained one of the priorities in the
Committee's work. Through the efforts of the CTC, the
number of States joining the international conventions
related to terrorism has increased, making an important
contribution to the strengthening of the international
legal basis for the fight against terrorism.

During the Chairman of the Committee's early-
July briefing to interested delegations, the report on the
current status of ratification of the 12 conventions and
on the role in that process of the CTC itself were
presented. We will continue to engage in regular
monitoring of the process of ratification and
implementation of the conventions, and will encourage
States to join the treaties as soon as possible.

In the area of technical assistance, the Committee
has continued to pursue its work with Member States,
in order to develop an approach that is better adjusted
to their needs. The Committee has also continued to
develop the Directory of Counter-Terrorism
Information and Sources of Assistance as an
information tool on best practices, model laws and
assistance programmes. However, the Directory alone
cannot meet the new requirements. The Committee
intends to assume a more active role in coordinating
the provision of technical assistance, particularly
through the new formats of direct dialogue with
Member States, both in New York and in capitals, and
of information exchange with the donor community.
We will take all necessary measures to promote that
process.
With regard to transparency, the Committee
resumed the practice of regular briefings by the
Chairman for interested delegations. A briefing on the
CTC's current activities was held on 2 July 2004. It
was attended by more than 50 delegations. At the same
time, we should recognize that the Committee web site
has not been regularly updated. Furthermore,
experience has proven that the Committee's outreach
efforts have been inadequate to its tasks at this stage of
revitalization. That lack of public awareness about the
CTC's activities may have led to some misperceptions
about the Committee's work, adding to the problems of
communication and practical cooperation with Member
States. The Committee will therefore continue its
efforts to improve its communication methods.

The Committee has continued to develop
cooperation and coordination with international,
regional and subregional organizations. During the
eleventh 90-day period, the Committee's experts
participated in many international conferences and
seminars concerning various aspects of counter-
terrorism. Briefings to the Committee by a number of
international organizations and bodies - including the
European Union and the Anti-Terrorism Centre of the
Commonwealth of Independent States - provided the
CTC with very important information on their
experiences with and approaches to international
cooperation against terrorism. They also offered an
opportunity to evaluate the capacity of those
organizations to be involved in the process of technical
assistance and information exchange.

Let me now draw the Council's attention to the
general features of the twelfth report, which covers the
period from July to September 2004. By 30 June 2004,
the Committee had received 515 reports from Member
States and others. That included 160 second reports
from Member States and two from others, as well as
116 third, and 40 fourth, reports from Member States.
Nevertheless, by 30 June 2004, 71 States had not met
the deadline for submission of their respective reports.
I should like to take this opportunity to remind the
representatives of those States that they should submit
their outstanding reports as soon as possible.

We are open to every possible means of
cooperation and dialogue with Member States in order
to assist them to solve the problems that caused the
delay in the submission of their reports. The review of
reports from Member States will remain a key element
of the CTC's activities. The Committee will also
continue to call upon States to meet the requirements
of resolution 1373 (2001), as well as to support them in
doing so.

The Committee's main task during the twelfth 90-
day period is the implementation of resolution 1535
(2004). On 29 June, Ambassador Javier Rupe'rez took
office as Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). In
accordance with resolution 1535 (2004), within the
next 30 days, the Executive Director is to submit to the
Committee an organizational plan for the CTED.
Ambassador Ruperez has started consultations about
the draft plan with members of the CTC. We expect to
consider the draft plan in late July, and to present it to
the Security Council for its endorsement. Pursuant to
resolution 1535 (2004), the Secretary-General will then
take the appropriate steps to implement the plan on an
expedited basis, including, at the appropriate time, by
seeking General Assembly approval.

The Committee will pursue the course of closer
coordination with United Nations bodies dealing with
various aspects of the fight against terrorism. First of
all, we plan to strengthen cooperation between the CTC
and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al Qaeda and the Taliban. Those issues have already
been discussed at an informal meeting between the
Chairs of the two Committees, and we have agreed on
some forms of cooperation. As the contacts between
our Committees develop, we will be ready to consider
further coordination measures. The CTC will also seek
appropriate working contacts with the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) concerning non-proliferation problems in the
context of the terrorist threat.

With regard to technical assistance, we shall
continue the work on country assessments of assistance
needs, bearing in mind the need to create an effective
mechanism to share non-classified information with
potential donors. The CTC intends to cooperate with
the Counter-Terrorism Action Group of the Group of
Eight, and plans to discuss information exchanges with
the Action Group that will open the way for the most
effective use of the donor community. In order to build
an effective and flexible system of technical assistance,
the Committee is exploring new types of activities. The
Committee will analyse the possibilities of establishing
more effective contacts between the CTC and donor
countries and organizations.

As provided for in resolution 1535 (2004), the
Committee intends to begin preparations for its first
visit to a Member State, subject to its consent, in order
to engage in direct dialogue with its authorities in the
context of ensuring effective monitoring of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). Such a
mission is essential to the purpose of creating a climate
of cooperation and of providing technical assistance
based on more accurate assessments of countries'
needs. We plan to invite representatives of participating
international organizations to join the mission. Such
monitoring missions could be instrumental in providing
direct assistance, adjusted to identified needs.

Pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), the
Committee will develop all necessary forms of direct
dialogue with Member States seeking assistance in
strengthening their capacities to combat terrorism.
Along with traditional contacts between interested
countries and the CTC's subcommittees, whereby
countries may raise questions related to the letters sent
by the CTC in response to their reports, we intend to
explore new approaches to communicating with States.
As Chairman of the Committee, I should like to take
this opportunity to say that we would welcome
messages sent to the CTC and its experts, Bureau,
subcommittees, Vice-Chairmen and Chairman with
proposals on how to improve its work, questions on
participation and requests for donor assistance.

The CTC should not be viewed as some kind of
inquisition. On the contrary, we deem it necessary to
develop the friendliest relationships with States. The
Russian Chair will attempt to ensure that cooperation
between the CTC and States Members of the United
Nations develops in the most effective manner and is
open in nature. In keeping with the principle of
transparency, the Chairman of the Committee will
continue to hold briefings for interested delegations on
the CTC's activities.

The development of cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations
will remain a priority of the CTC's work. The League
of Arab States has offered to host the Committee's next
meeting with international organizations in Cairo later
this year, and the Committee has accepted the offer.
Following the approach agreed by the Committee and
the procedures followed at previous such meetings, the
CTC plans to start preparations for the meeting, to be
held in November and December 2004. The meeting
will be open to all States Members of the United
Nations for participation as observers. We expect it to
contribute to a focused and action-oriented dialogue
with international, regional and subregional
organizations, as well as regional States, on the main
problems encountered in the practical implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) and in international
cooperation in combating terrorism.

We are open to criticism, suggestions and remarks
from States members of the Security Council and other
Members of the United Nations, which I am sure will
contribute to the CTC's progress at the current stage of
its revitalization. I invite participants to pose any
questions they may have.

