Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and the
countries aligning themselves with this statement.

The European Union welcomes the holding of
elections to the Palestinian Legislative Council that
took place on 25 January and congratulates President
Abbas and the Palestinian people on an electoral
process that was free and fair. The European Union, in
line with the External Relations Council's conclusions
of 30 January, fully endorses the statements made by
the Quartet on 26 and 30 January, as well as today. We
reiterate our full support for President Abbas's
determination to pursue a peaceful solution to the
conflict with Israel. The European Union stresses that
violence and terror are incompatible with democratic
processes and urges Hamas and all other factions to
renounce violence, to recognize Israel's right to exist
and to disarm.

The European Union expects the newly elected
Palestinian Legislative Council and the newly formed
Government to commit themselves to a peaceful and
negotiated solution of the conflict with Israel, based on
existing agreements and the road map, as well as on the
rule of law, reform and sound fiscal management. The
Union urges the newly formed Government to confront
all those engaged in terror and to dismantle terrorist
capabilities and infrastructure. On this basis, the
European Union stands ready to continue to support
Palestinian economic development and democratic
State-building. Against the background of the Quartet's
appeal for measures to facilitate the work of the
interim Palestinian Government, the European Union
mobilized a €120-million package on 27 February to
meet the basic needs of the Palestinian population and
to help stabilize the finances of the caretaker
Government. As the Quartet reiterated today, future
assistance to the new Government will be reviewed by
donors against its commitment to the principles of non-
violence, recognition of Israel and acceptance of
previous agreements and obligations, including the
road map.

The European Union congratulates acting Prime
Minister Ehud Olmert on his success in the
parliamentary elections on 28 March. We welcome the
reiteration of his commitment to the road map and call
on the future Government to adhere to Israel's
obligations under the road map. The EU continues to
urge Israel to reverse its settlement policy and to freeze
all settlement activity, to dismantle outposts erected
since March 2001 and to end land confiscation and the
construction of the separation barrier on Palestinian
land, all of which threaten to render the two-State
solution physically impossible to implement.

The European Union condemns all acts of terror
and violence. It expresses its grave concern over the
recent violent events in the West Bank and in the Gaza
Strip. It calls on both parties to exercise maximum
restraint. The European Union continues to urge the
Palestinian Authority to take effective measures
against terrorism, notably the launching of Qassam
rockets, and to reform its security services. It calls
upon Israel to stop the practice of extrajudicial killings,
which is contrary to international law. We remind both
parties of their obligations under the road map and to
existing agreements, including the Sharm el-Sheikh
understandings and the Agreement on Movement and
Access.

The European Union reaffirms its strong support
for a negotiated settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, leading to the emergence of an independent,
democratic, viable and contiguous Palestinian State,
living side by side in peace and security with Israel and
its other neighbours.

On final status issues, the European Union will
not recognize any change to the pre-1967 borders other
than those arrived at by agreement between the parties.
We reaffirm the central role of the Quartet in
promoting progress in the peace process.

Turning to Lebanon, the European Union
welcomes the launching of the national dialogue and
the initial agreements in respect of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We encourage the
continuation of the dialogue and hope it will contribute
to political stability in the country by addressing
critical issues of national concern. We reiterate our
support for Lebanon's unity, stability and independence
and remind its neighbours of their obligation to respect
Lebanon's sovereignty.

We condemn the past violent attacks on Lebanese
citizens, journalists and political leaders and the
ensuing loss of lives. We are deeply concerned about
the continued intimidation and about attacks against
the right to freedom of expression.

The Union reaffirms its full support for the
United Nations International Independent Investigation
Commission concerning the assassination of Rafik
Hariri, as mandated by Security Council resolutions
1595 (2005), 1636 (2005) and 1644 (2005), and
welcomes the report by Serge Brammertz. We urge all
parties to cooperate unconditionally with the
Investigation Commission and hope that light will be
shed on this and other assassinations.

We underline the importance of the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1559
(2004), including the disbanding and disarming of all
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias. We encourage the
Government of Lebanon to extend its authority
throughout the country.

We reaffirm our full support for the Government
of Lebanon and urge it to launch the economic and
political reforms programme initiated during the Core
Group meeting held in New York in September 2005.
The Union received Prime Minister Siniora on the
margins of the External Relations Council meeting on
20 March and stands ready to support credible and
effective plans for political and economic reform.

Moreover, the European Union expresses its
grave concern at the persistence of tension and
violence along the Blue Line and urges all parties to
exercise the utmost restraint, to refrain from any
provocation that could further escalate the tension and
to fully respect the entire withdrawal line.

In conclusion, the European Union reaffirms the
importance of and the need to achieve a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East on
the basis of all relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003), the Madrid terms of reference
and the principle of land for peace.

