Mr. Tladi (South Africa): Allow me to congratulate
Mr. Hassan Boubacar J allow, President Theodor Meron
and Mr. John Hocking on their respective appointments
as Prosecutor, President and Registrar of the Residual
Mechanism. I also wish to thank Judge Vagn Joensen and
Mr. J allow, President and Prosecutor, respectively, of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), and
Judge Meron and Mr. Serge Brammertz, President and
Prosecutor, respectively, of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), for their
reports and presentations this morning.

As we approach the entry into force of the statute
of the Residual Mechanism on 1 July, it is important
that both the ICTY and the ICTR strengthen their
efforts towards finalizing their caseloads and ensuring
compliance with the completion strategy, as provided
for in the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
As has been noted, it is important, however, to ensure
that the need to complete the cases speedily does not
compromise due process standards.

In that respect, I wish to express my delegation's
appreciation of the efforts made by both Tribunals,
amid immense challenges, to complete the cases on
their current dockets, while ensuring the maintenance
of due process standards. We have already observed
how the ICTY experience in referring cases to national
jurisdictions has contributed to alleviating some of the
caseload pressures. We firmly believe that referral to
domestic jurisdictions not only helps with easing the
caseload of the international Tribunals, and, in that
way, contributes to compliance with the completion
strategy, but also is important for building the capacity
of national jurisdictions in dealing with such crimes.
It is also important for ensuring that, where possible,
justice is done close to the victims of the crimes.

In our last statement (see S/PV.6678), we encouraged
the ICTR to consider making more referrals to domestic
courts with jurisdiction in the cases relevant to Rwanda,
in particular. We are pleased that several referrals
have already been made and that there are currently
applications pending for further referrals. We were also
pleased to hear this morning that referral has become
the focus of the ICTR. We continue to encourage the
ICTR to consider whether even more referrals could be
made.

While we continue to strongly support referrals
to domestic courts with the necessary jurisdiction, the
Tribunals should continue to monitor the handling of
such cases in order to ensure the proper administration
of justice, including adherence to human rights and due
process standards. We note with concern the challenges
cited by the Prosecutor of the ICTY in connection
with the functioning of the judiciary of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is imperative that all involved join
efforts to ensure the success of the referral system. The
success of referrals to domestic courts will ensure the
lasting legacy of both the ICTY and the ICTR.

A serious challenge facing the ICTR is, of course,
the apprehension of the remaining fugitives, as has been
noted several times this morning. We call on relevant
States Members of the United Nations to cooperate as
far as possible with the ICTR in the apprehension of
fugitives, as required by the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, as well as the Statute of the ICTR.

Both Tribunals are facing difficulties with respect
to staff retention. As they wind down their operations,
it becomes more difficult to retain staff. We, as a
delegation, stand ready to consider, within the financial
constraints of the Organization, of course, innovative
solutions that may be suggested by the ICTY and the
ICTR to deal with that challenge.

