Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): It is not the first time
during Poland's term in the Security Council that the
Council is looking into active regional involvement in a
situation which creates a threat to international peace and
security. It has to be noted that the theme of regional
initiative is becoming more and more popular. This is a
very welcome phenomenon to which we have already
here in this room devoted much time and energy.
The Security Council will soon deliberate on the
case of a multinational force which has been successfully
operating in another part of the world. It is very likely
that we will do this with a great deal of relief, satisfaction
and growing trust that regional leadership can be effective
in maintaining international peace and security in today's
complex and demanding world. With this hope, we are
looking at the contents of the draft resolution before us
today.

There is no doubt that the Central African Republic
is experiencing a particularly difficult period in its history.
There also seems to be no longer any doubt that this
country has not been able to cope with its problems on its
own. Fortunately, the region, which well understood the
danger for peace and stability in Africa, managed to
prevent further worsening of the situation in the Central
African Republic. The Bangui Agreements were signed
and as a result the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) was
established.

Today, taking note of the letter dated 4 July 1997
from President Patasse and of the concern expressed by
many members of the international community, the
Security Council is about to approve the continued

 

conduct of the operation by Member States participating in
MISAB.

We will vote for the draft resolution before us because
in our view, despite regional efforts, the situation in the
Central African Republic continues to constitute a threat to
international peace and security. Therefore, we believe that
States of the region should be given adequate support.

We are satisfied that the resolution takes due care of
the question of the security and freedom of movement of
the members of the operation.

In conclusion, as is always done in cases like today's,
it has to be stressed that the future of the Central African
Republic is ultimately its people's responsibility. This must
not be overlooked while counting on international, including
United Nations, involvement in the process of achieving
peace in any troubled country.

