Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of Mr. Mbeki, Chairperson of the African
Union High-Level Panel on Darfur, Special
Representatives Gambari and Menkerios and Joint
Chief Mediator Bassole. We thank them for sharing
their assessments of the situation.

The Sudan is passing through a decisive stage in
its history. Success will be crucial for regional peace
and stability. Our discussion reaffirms the need for a
comprehensive approach to the peace process in the
Sudan. Full implementation by the Sudanese parties,
with the active assistance of the international
community, of the North-South Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) remains the irreplaceable basis for a
Sudanese settlement. The Sudan's recent general
elections marked an important stage in the
implementation of the Agreement.

We welcome the agreement between the parties
on the establishment of a bilateral mechanism to
discuss disputed issues within the framework of
preparations for the January 2011 referendum. Here,
the role of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) should be to assist the parties in resolving
their differences on the main elements of a settlement.
In our view, a priority for the international community
is to help create the conditions conducive to the
holding of the referendum in Southern Sudan and
Abyei.

The situation in Southern Sudan is a matter of
concern, with grave security problems and a
humanitarian crisis. Nearly 40 per cent of the
population of the South needs food aid, and almost
1.5 million people are threatened by hunger. In that
context, UNMIS should continue to carry out the
strategy of protecting the civilian population, including

expanded patrols in problematic areas of Southern
Sudan. Monitoring the process of disarming the
civilian population is another responsibility, along with
helping to set up local mechanisms for resolving tribal
disputes. But it is obvious that the main responsibility
for remedying the situation lies with the Southern
Sudanese authorities.

The only viable formula for resolving the
problem of Darfur remains the parties' conclusion of
the necessary political agreements. The most pressing
task is to put in place a robust regime in Darfur to put
an end to armed activities, along with mechanisms to
monitor it.

The process of negotiations between the
Government and rebel groups is making only sporadic
progress. The international community must support
the position of the Government of the Sudan, in order
to rapidly achieve a comprehensive agreement to settle
the Darfur conflict, and it must urge the leaders of
rebel groups to resume their participation in the
political dialogue, without preconditions. In our view,
the rebels' approach of using various pretexts to block
the Darfur negotiating process - which is under the
auspices of the Joint Chief Mediator and with the
assistance of Qatar - is unacceptable. The
international community should condemn the
destructive activities of armed groups in Darfur, which
is reflected, inter alia, by the rebels' refusal to provide
peacekeepers of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
humanitarian organizations with access to areas under
their control and by their attempts to expand those
areas. We strongly welcome UNAMID's activities and
its important stabilizing role.

Settlement of the Darfur conflict is being
promoted by the normalization of relations between the
Sudan and Chad, which should be consolidated and
supported. It is in keeping with the interests of the
entire subregion.

The coming period will determine the future of
the Sudan. The task of making unity attractive to the
population of Southern Sudan remains a priority. We
view as unacceptable all outside attempts to impose on
the parties formulas for the future status of the Sudan.
That fateful decision should be made solely by the
Sudanese themselves.

There is a need to ensure a coherent approach by
the international community to resolving Sudanese
issues. Only in that way can we make progress towards
a settlement. The Sudan peace process should be based
on constructive, even-handed dialogue between the
international community and the Government of the
country, respecting the principles of sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

