Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): We are
meeting today at the request ofa member ofthe Security
Council to discuss the 13 March letter (S/2018/218, annex) written by the British Prime Minister, which
concerns a topic that we already met to discuss last
month (see S/PV.8203). This meeting comes on the
heels of a special meeting of the Executive Council
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) held yesterday in The Hague on the
same subject, at which Russia's attempt to have a draft
decision adopted was overwhelmingly rejected. That
meeting was held even before the OPCW had issued
its findings concerning the incident at hand, thereby
showing that yesterday's initiative, like today's, was
a diversionary tactic in an attempt to sow confusion.
It is therefore more important than ever to maintain a
technical and objective approach to the issue.

Let us return to the facts. They are shocking, they
are serious and they are unacceptable. On 4 March in
Salisbury, a military-grade chemical agent, identified
as belonging to a class of such agents known as
Novichoks, was deployed in a public setting, targeting
a former Russian intelligence officer and his daughter
and contaminating a British police officer and civilians
in the area. That was the first verified use ofa chemical
weapon in Europe since the end of the Second World
War. It has been 100 years since the use of military-
grade gas wrought destruction on European soil, during
the Great War. France has stated at the highest levels
of Government its full support for, and its unwavering
solidarity with, the Government and the people of the
United Kingdom. We renew them today.

While the Defence Science and Technology
Laboratory at Porton Down has confirmed that the
gas used belongs to the Novichok class and the United
Kingdom continues to pursue its investigation in full
compliance with the Chemical Weapons Convention,
I would like to reiterate France's full confidence in
the work carried out by British investigators. France
stands ready to make its expertise available to the
United Kingdom, should it so desire. I also welcome
the decision of the Director-General of the OPCW in
responding positively to the British request to dispatch
an assistance mission to the United Kingdom. The
ongoing investigation must be completed independently
and without interference. Given the information that the
United Kingdom has communicated thus far, we share
its assessment that there is no other plausible explanation
for the attack than one involving Russia's responsibility.
Although Russia advocates for cooperation, France
was surprised by the Russian refusal to answer the
United Kingdom's entirely legitimate questions. We
call on Russia to shed light on matters of accountability
with regard to the unacceptable Salisbury attack and
notify the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons of any programmes that might not have been
declared to the OPCW.

The ban on the use of chemical weapons is at the
heart of the non-proliferation regime, which underpins
our system of collective security. In that context, the
full-scale re-emergence of those barbaric weapons in
the Middle East, Asia and now in Europe cannot be
tolerated. The taboo that we collectively established on
the use of chemical weapons has been broken, including
in Salisbury. That is an indication of how urgently we
must reaffirm and consolidate the absolute prohibition
of chemical weapons. The normalization of the use of
chemical weapons would signify a victory for barbarity
over civilization and an unspeakable regression of
the international order. That is why we cannot resign
ourselves to such a fate, especially since - let us make
no mistake - the normalization of the use of chemical
weapons would create fertile ground for chemical
terrorism, which we all fear, and, indeed, for which we
would all pay the price.

France therefore will never tolerate allowing those
who develop or use toxic agents to enjoy impunity.
We recall our full support for existing institutions,
in particular the OPCW. France will maintain its full
commitment to supporting such institutions' activities
with every resource at its disposal. That is the goal of
the International Partnership against Impunity for the
Use of Chemical Weapons, which we launched last
January. The gravity of what is at stake requires us to
act. The use of chemical weapons by whomever and
regardless of the circumstances runs equally contrary
to our universal conscience and the most basic norms
of international law.

Again, let us make no mistake: the use of chemical
weapons poses a threat that could potentially ring the
death knell of the very sustainability of the international
regime on the non-proliferation of chemical weapons,
which today is the most elaborate and successful of all
international non-proliferation regimes. Allowing it to
crumble without reacting would translate into accepting
the weakening of the entire international regime on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, which
we built laboriously together over the past decades
and which is the keystone of the international security
architecture. We are therefore in need of Russia's
sincere and resolved commitment. Russia must be part
of the solution, not the problem. Russia, which was one
of the pioneers of the international non-proliferation
regime, should be one of its pillars.

Because the threat is existential forus all, combating
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction must
be more than ever at the heart of the priorities of the
Security Council. If there is one area in which the
Council has the moral and political responsibility to
come together to act, this is it. Ifthere is one area where
the Council's credibility is at stake, and where there is
no place for tactical one-upmanship, this is it.

