Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China thanks the Under-Secretary-General, Ms. DiCarlo; the Special Representative of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Chairperson-in- Office, Ambassador Grau; and the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission Chief Monitor, Ambassador Cevik, for their briefings. In February 2015, the Minsk agreements were signed and subsequently endorsed by the Security Council in resolution 2202 (2015). China believes that the agreements have played a vital role in the political mediation of the Ukrainian crisis. Over five years, their authority has been fully recognized by all parties. The various mechanisms related to the implementation of the agreements have generally functioned smoothly. We note that in December last year, the Normandy Four summit was successfully relaunched and the parties reached an important consensus on_ the implementation of the Minsk agreements, which is a clear indication that the Normandy format retains the full support of all the parties and remains the key to the political mediation of the Ukrainian crisis. China calls on the parties to fully implement the agreements, remain committed to achieving a political settlement and seek a comprehensive solution to the crisis through dialogue and consultation in order to facilitate the realization of peace, stability and development in Ukraine, promote harmony among all ethnic groups in Ukraine and foster Ukraine's peaceful coexistence with the other countries of the region.China has always adopted an objective and impartial position on the Ukrainian crisis and respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries, including Ukraine. It also opposes interference in Ukraine's internal affairs by any foreign forces. We have always believed that there is no military solution to the crisis and that dialogue and negotiation are the only way forward. China will continue to play a constructive role in reaching a political settlement to the Ukrainian crisis.
