Mr. Fulci (Italy): Italy voted in favour of the
resolution just unanimously adopted by the Security
Council - in the original drafting of which it
participated - fully convinced that it was urgently needed.
The resolution focuses on the humanitarian situation in
Croatia, following the offensive of the Croatian forces in
Krajina - a situation which arouses our deepest concern,
especially in light of the recent reports about attacks and
abuses against groups of refugees leaving the country. This
new wave of 150,000 refugees and displaced persons
constitutes another act of the long humanitarian tragedy in
the former Yugoslavia. Such a situation could not be
ignored by the Security Council. Therefore, the present
resolution is both necessary and timely. It is a clear,
unequivocal message to the parties, and especially to the
Zagreb Government. Moreover, its adoption takes place in
the light of the alarming signs of growing tension which
come from Sector East, where a further escalation of the
conflict might lead to a new and unprecedented scale of
hostilities.

We should not forget that the Croatian offensive
followed the breakdown of the peace talks in Geneva, under
the auspices of Mr. Stoltenberg. This circumstance is
particularly regrettable - and it is deeply regretted in the
resolution we have just adopted - as a possible
breakthrough seemed to be in sight and, in our view,
deserved a renewed effort at negotiation instead of the
military solution chosen by the Croatian Government.

Therefore, we welcome the fact that in the resolution
adopted today the Security Council reiterates its call for a
negotiated settlement which guarantees the rights of all
communities and urges the Government of the Republic of
Croatia to resume the peace talks. I wish to emphasize the
words "negotiated settlement".

The fact that the self-styled State entity of the
Krajina Serbs has disappeared in no way implies that the
problem of the Serb residents in Croatia - who have
been living there for many centuries - should be solved
through a unilateral initiative by the Croatian
Government. A viable solution should be sought by both
parties, through negotiation under the auspices of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia.
Allow me to recall briefly, Mr. President, that my country
reached a negotiated agreement with the main linguistic
minority living in Italy. We were able to do so through
patient negotiation, and we strongly hope that this
peaceful path will be followed by the Croatian
Government and by the local Serb community.
Another important aspect dealt with by today's
resolution is respect for the security and dignity of the
United Nations personnel, whose courage and generosity
in performing their duties will never be commended
enough. Once more we have had to witness the death of
three Blue Helmets - one Danish and two Czech - to
whose Governments and families I wish to reiterate the
deepest sympathy and condolences of the Italian
Government and people. Once again United Nations
peace-keepers have been subjected to unacceptable and
intolerable humiliation and abuses, such as being used as
human shields in front of attacking forces. Therefore, we
welcome the resolution's strong condemnation of such
attacks and abuses and its request to the Croatian
Government to refrain from such actions in the future and
bring to justice those guilty of any such attack or
harassment. We have taken note of the formal assurances
given to the Council in this regard a few minutes ago by
the Ambassador of Croatia.

One of the reasons why my Government has
vigorously condemned the Croatian offensive is the
serious risk of a further escalation and generalization of
the conflict throughout the former Yugoslavia. Recent
reports of abuses by fleeing Krajina Serbs against the
remaining Muslim and Croatian communities in the area
of Banja Luka show us the sad repercussions on the
highly sensitive ethnic situation in Western Bosnia of this
new flow of refugees. They confirm the growing
interrelation between the Croatian and the Bosnian cases:
every escalation of the conflict in one of those countries
inevitably spills over into the other, creating new human
tragedies and adding fuel to the fire.

The Government and the people of Italy are
extremely sensitive to this new humanitarian emergency,
which is taking place so close to our territory. We have

 

provided the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees - whose efforts we all should
highly appreciate - with a substantial amount of goods and
equipment for initial assistance to the refugees and
displaced people. As for the political aspects of the new
crisis, our Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mme. Agnelli, has
promptly contacted the authorities of Zagreb, Sarajevo and
Belgrade, urging all of them to exert the utmost restraint,
in order to prevent a general conflagration in the area of the
former Yugoslavia, and above all to actively pursue a
comprehensive negotiated agreement. We continue to
believe strongly that any military action will have no other
result than to add to an already too long chain of human
suffering, increasing the hate and divisions among the
peoples living in that area, and making a comprehensive
solution more and more difficult to reach.

To conclude, the Croatian offensive has created an
entirely new situation in the area. Needless to say, the
mandate of the United Nations Confidence Restoration
Operation in Croatia (UNCRO) will have to be adapted to
this new situation. But we continue to believe that the
presence of the United Nations in Croatia must be
maintained. It is a necessary guarantee of respect for the
human rights of the Serb population, in a difficult moment
of transition, which again we hope will lead to a peaceful
settlement. Therefore, we look forward to the next report of
the Secretary-General on Croatia, and to his
recommendations for the future of UNCRO. We hope that
they will be submitted to the Council's attention as soon as
possible, to help put an end to this difficult time of
uncertainty and disarray.

