Mr. Prosor (Israel): Barely a week has gone by
since the Security Council met to discuss the situation
in the Middle East (see S/PV.7281). One would think
that we have reconvened today to address the rampant
violence and bloodshed that plagues the region between
the Mediterranean Sea and the Arabian Sea. After all,
the past few days have seen untold suffering. In Iraq,
a suicide bomber drove into a security checkpoint
and killed 38 people. In Lebanon, militants linked to
Al-Qaida launched an attack on the central market,
leaving 42 people dead and 150 wounded. In Syria,
500 people were killed and injured in seven days of
the regime's aerial bombardments. In Iran, a 26-year-
old woman named Reyhaneh Jabbari was executed for
killing a man who tried to rape her. In Saudi Arabia,
three lawyers were sentenced to eight years behind bars
for tweeting messages that "undermined the judiciary".
That is a relatively light sentence in Saudi Arabia,
which has beheaded 59 people so far this year.

Most of the millions of men and women being
oppressed in our region are completely ignored by the

Security Council. They are cast aside to make way for
a litany of half-truths, myths and outright lies about
Israel. I am here to convey one simple truth: the people
of Israel are not occupiers, and we are not settlers.
Israel is our home and Jerusalem is the eternal capital
of our sovereign State. There are many threats in the
Middle East, but the presence of Jewish homes in the
Jewish homeland has never been one of them. And yet
that is the issue that we have convened to discuss today.
It says a great deal that the international community is
outraged when Jews build homes in Jerusalem, but does
not say a word when Jews are murdered for living in
Jerusalem. The hypocrisy is appalling.

I have said it before and will say it again: the
primary obstacle to peace is not settlements. That is
a just a pretext for the Palestinians to avoid making
painful compromises. The primary obstacle to peace is
the Arab world's refusal to acknowledge that Israel is
the nation State of the Jewish people i and its refusal
to acknowledge Jerusalem as the eternal capital of the
Jewish people.

Throughout history, Jerusalem has been the capital
for one people and only one people - the Jewish
people. I am holding a Bible which details almost
4,000 years of Jewish history in the land of Israel. In
it we read about our forefathers - Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob - who wandered Jerusalem's rolling hills. We
read about King David, who laid the cornerstone for his
palace over 3,000 years ago. That is King David from
Bethlehem, not King David from the West Bank, and
certainly not King David from the occupied territories.
And in the Bible we read about King Solomon, who
constructed the First Temple.

Jerusalem is a divine promise to the Jewish people.
Following the destruction of our Temple and the
Babylonian exile, the great Jewish leader Nehemiah led
the Jewish people back to Israel saying:

"Then I prayed to the God of heaven let him
send me to the city in Judah, Jerusalem, where my
ancestors are buried so that I can rebuild it."

Jerusalem is central to our identity and our
tradition. The holy city is named more than 900 times
in the Bible. On holidays we sing "l'shana haba'ah
b'Yerushalayim" - "Next year in Jerusalem". For
thousands of years, through persecution and massacres,
expulsions and crusades, blood libels and pogroms,
Jews turned their hearts in prayer towards Jerusalem.
The connection between the Jewish people and our
capital cannot be denied. And nothing you can say here,
Madam President, could change that.

Jerusalem is Mount Zion and Mount Moriah and
the Temple Mount. To walk in that place is to follow
in the footsteps of our forefathers and to feel the hopes
and dreams of the Jewish people. The Palestinians and
others have had the audacity to accuse us of trying to
alter the historic Jewish character of our ancient city.
Really?
The truth of the matter is that Jerusalem had a
Jewish character long before most cities in the world
had any character. It was the capital of the Jewish people
long before Homer composed the Iliad, before Romulus
and Remus founded Rome, and before the armies of
Alexander the Great swept across the Middle East.

Jerusalem is steeped in Jewish history. In an effort
to erase all traces of the religious and historical ties
between Jerusalem and the Temple Mount, the Waqf is
deliberately destroying archaeological evidence. Each
and every one of us knows that. The United Nations
knows it. Is it out there? Is it saying anything? They
even brought in a fleet of bulldozers and removed 6,000
tons - not, you know, a little bit - 6,000 tons! - of
earth from the south-east corner of the Temple Mount,
also known as Solomon's Stables. With every shovelful
of soil, they are trying to shovel away Jewish history.
But one does not need a research institute at the United
Nations to figure that out.

If the Palestinians wish to secure a brighter future,
they must stop rewriting history and start making
history by making peace. They must abandon the
destructive rhetoric. A people can only build a brighter
future if it makes peace with the past. If not, it will be
held captive by the chains of resentment and hatred and
pass on a legacy of violence and intolerance to the next
generation.

Former Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin
said that ifan enemy ofthe Jewish people says he seeks to
destroy us, believe him. Do not doubt him for a moment.
If history has taught the Jewish people anything, it is
that we must take all calls for our destruction seriously.
Hamas's genocidal charter calls for the destruction of
Israel and the murder of Jews worldwide. Some in this
Organization do not have the courage to mention Hamas
by name, never mind to condemn the terrorist group
for its crimes. Hamas deliberately targets our civilians
by blowing up buses and restaurants, kidnapping and
murdering teenagers, shooting rockets into our cities
and building terror tunnels into our towns.

That is Hamas. What about the leader of the
Palestinian Authority, President Abbas? Well, he is
the reason that we are sitting here today. You see, he
is orchestrating a campaign to vilify Israel, and the
Security Council seems willing to play second fiddle.
Let me remind the Council about the conductor behind
the accusations that it heard today.

Palestinian President Abbas wrote a dissertation
denying the Holocaust, and he educates Palestinian
children to hate Jews. In schools, mosques and the
media, generations of Palestinian children are being
taught to hate, vilify and dehumanize Israelis and
Jews. In his remarks in the General Assembly last
month (see A/69/PV.12) - and everyone here heard
them - President Abbas delivered a hate-fuelled
attack and accused Israel ofthe worst crimes, including
genocide.

Earlier this month, he called on Palestinians to
prevent Jews from visiting the Temple Mount by
using "all means necessary". Are those the words of
a leader committed to making peace? I did not hear
that in the briefing by Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman. It is not just in general, from both sides. The
video of his hateful remarks was broadcast on official
Palestinian Authority television 19 times in 3 days.
That is not someone who is not relevant, or second-tier.
The results of those inflammatory remarks were almost
immediate. Hundreds of Arabs rioted in Jerusalem,
damaging the light rail system, and a Hamas terrorist
deliberately drove full-speed onto a Jerusalem train
platform, killing two people.

Did President Abbas express outrage or remorse
over the senseless killings? Of course not. He could
not even muster the courage to denounce an attack that
left a three-month-old baby dead. Rather than trying
to extinguish the flames of conflict, the Palestinian
leadership is adding fuel to the fire. First they incite
violence on the Temple Mount, and then they run to the
Security Council to complain about the consequences.
If that is not manufacturing a crisis, I do not know what
is.

Let us try to follow the logic here. Palestinian
extremists have turned the Temple Mount into a
battleground by throwing stones and Molotov cocktails
at visitors and police. That is phrased as "allegedly"
throwing stones. Allegedly throwing stones? Why,
we could build a whole quarry from the stones that
allegedly were thrown. In doing so, they are preventing
Muslims from praying at their holy site. Israeli police
are forced into harm's way to restore quiet, and then the
Palestinians come to the Security Council complaining
about Israel's activities on the Temple Mount. Do you
have trouble following this logic? I certainly do, but
I can tell you this: it both starts and ends with the
irresponsible actions of the Palestinian leadership.

The Palestinians had the audacity to come to the
Council and speak about religious freedoms. Let me tell
you, Madam, just how much the Palestinian Authority
cares about holy sites. Take Shechem, which has been
under the control of the Palestinian Authority since
1995. Shechem was home to the grave of the Biblical
patriarch Joseph. Palestinian vandals broke into the
sacred site, burned Jewish prayer books and reduced
the building to rubble.

In Bethlehem, which is also under Palestinian
Authority control, violent extremists have looted
and desecrated the Church of the Nativity, one of
Christianity's holiest sites. As a result of the persecution
that they face, the City's Christian population has
decreased by nearly 70 per cent.

It is not just the Palestinians that have impinged on
religious freedoms. I would like to remind the Council
that from 1948 to 1967 Jerusalem was under Jordanian
rule. Jerusalem was divided, and everyone could come
in and visit Judaism's holiest sites, except the Jews.
They were denied access. Following Israel's victory
in the 1967 war, Israel reunited Jerusalem. Since then,
all people - and I mean all people - regardless of
religion and nationality have been able to visit the
city's holy sites. While we were victorious and assumed
control over all of Jerusalem, Israel extended a hand in
peace to the Muslim world. According to the status quo
brokered between Israel and the Waqf, Muslims would
enjoy access to pray at their holy sites, while all other
religions would be allowed access to the Temple Mount.
That was the case until a couple of years ago.

Israel went one step further than that with respect
to religious freedoms, and decided that Jews would
not be allowed to pray on the site. I want to make sure
the Council understand this. The Temple Mount is
Judaism's holiest place, but we were willing to restrict
our own freedoms for the sake of peace. Can you think
of another nation that would make such a compromise?
Can you think of another religion that would make such
a sacrifice?

Today Jerusalem under Israeli authority is
united - united for Muslims, united for Christians
and united for Jews. As Prime Minister Netanyahu
reiterated this week,

"We are maintaining the status quo and allowing
everyone access to the holy places, and we will
continue to do so."

Israel is doing everything in its power to minimize
tensions. Even when riots break out, Israeli security
forces, acting in coordination with the Jordanian
Government, refrain from entering the mosque and its
courtyard unless there is an imminent threat to the site
and its visitors.

The Palestinians, on the other hand, are doing
everything in their power to inflame tensions. The
Waqf has violated the status quo agreement by
restricting access to Judaism's holiest place, the place
where we believe that God began the act of creation,
where Abraham brought his son Isaac and where Jacob
fell asleep and dreamed of angels.

Today a Jew who wishes to visit the sacred site
is threatened with violence. But the Council does not
have to take my word for it. Earlier this month - and
this is also not hard to find out - Hanan Ashrawi, a
prominent member of the Executive Committee of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, said that allowing
Jews to visit the Temple Mount was a "declaration of
war against Islam."

Those are the irresponsible words of a person
trying to ignite a religious war. You do not have to be
a Catholic to visit the Vatican. You do not have to be
a Jew to visit the Western Wall. But the Palestinians
would like to see the day when the Temple Mount is
open only to Muslims, and that will not take place.

I speak before the Council today as a proud
representative of the Jewish State and the Jewish
people, a people whose bond to the land ofIsrael and its
eternal capital of Jerusalem extends back almost 4,000
years. I am proud to represent an ancient people who
have outlived history's most daunting empires. Where
is the ambassador of Babylon? Where is the ambassador
of Caesar's Rome? Where is the ambassador of
Mesopotamia? They have been relegated to history,
while we, the Jewish people, continue to stand tall
against the trials and tests of time. We are a nation with
deep roots in the past and bright hopes for the future.

It is time for the Palestinians to realize that the
children of Abraham - all the children of Abraham,
Jews, Christians and Muslims alike - are not doomed
to live together in war, but rather destined to live
together in peace.

Israel will continue to strive for peace while
fulfilling the prophesy of Isaiah:

"On your walls, 0 Jerusalem, I have appointed
watchmen; all day and all night, they shall never be
silent." (The Holy Bible, Isaiah 62:6)

Israel will never be silent. We will stand guard, and
we will safeguard Jerusalem, not just for the Jewish
people, but for people of all faiths. So today I issue this
promise from the people of the promised land: under
our watch, Jerusalem, the eternal capital of the Jewish
people, will remain a free and open city for all people
and for all time.

