Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, Mr. President, I would like
to congratulate you on your friendly country on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month.

Yesterday, the Israeli occupation Government held
a meeting in the occupied Syrian Golan, which was a
grave and very provocative step, one that reflects the
fact that Israel is operating outside international law
and is flouting the international community and the
resolutions of the United Nations, namely and notably,
resolution 497 (1981), which considers Israel's decision
to impose its laws, authority and administration on
the occupied Syrian Golan to be null and void and
counter to international law. As the Syrian Arab
Republic condemns in the strongest terms possible
this aggressive behaviour which threatens to further
inflame the region, we also call upon the United Nations
and the Security Council to immediately intervene and
condemn the holding of that meeting so as to ensure
that such violations do not recur.

We were most displeased that the briefing of the
Secretary-General this morning did not include a clear
condemnation of that step taken by Israel, although
nobody doubts that it is illegal and counter to the
Charter of the United Nations and United Nations
resolutions on the occupied Syrian Golan. We expect
the Secretariat to respect the purposes and principles
of the United Nations. We expect the Secretariat to
clearly and openly condemn such steps. Failing to do
so merely sends an ambiguous message to Israel. Either
the United Nations condemns or it supports what Israel
is doing in the occupied Syrian Golan.

Deluded is he who believes that the crisis
obtaining in my country, Syria, will distract us from an
inalienable right to recover the occupied Syrian Golan
completely - that is, to the pre-1967 border. We stress
again that such a right is open to neither negotiation
nor bargaining. It has no statute of limitations, and any
illegal Israeli practices will not change that right one
iota. Proof of this fact is the position of our people in
the occupied Syrian Golan, who stressed yesterday that
the visit by Netanyahu and his occupation Government
to the Golan would in no way change their minds and
that, just as other colonizers have been ejected from
Syria in the past, the Golan will be cleansed of the
Israeli occupation sooner or later.

We stress that Israel will be legally pursued and
brought to account for all the violations perpetrated in
the occupied Syrian Golan, whether it be settlements,
racist policies, the pillaging of the Golan's natural
resources, including oil and water, support for terrorist
groups in the separation zone, or the arbitrary detention
of Syrians under occupation, especially the prisoners
Siddqui Al-Maqt, Bashira Mahmoud, Amal Abu Saleh
and Iyad Al-Jawhry, in addition to all other violations of
international law, the Geneva Conventions and United
Nations resolutions.

The United Nations and its States Members bear
a historic, legal and moral obligation to end Israeli
occupation of Arab lands and establish an independent
Palestinian State with full sovereignty and with Al-Quds
as its capital, and to see to the return of Palestinian
refugees to their homes, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III), of 11 December 1948.
However, although many decades have gone by with
all the documented accompanying Israeli violations of
international law and human rights law, the Security
Council has failed to live up to his responsibilities.
We have witnessed no serious, genuine moves in that
regard. The recent history is known to all, namely, the
blind support for Israel by some influential members of
the Security Council, which makes Israel believe that it
stands above the law, that it will not be held to account.
As a result, Israel insists on imposing occupation as a
fait accompli, and has persisted in its settler colonialist
and racist policies.

We have noted a great increase in settler activity.
The size of the area where Israeli settlements have been
implanted in the past two decades has increased by more
than 182 per cent. The number of settlers has increased
by 189 per cent in the same period. According to the
latest reports, there are projects to build settler units in
the occupied West Bank. In the first four months of this
year, the number is three times greater than the number
that was recorded in the same period last year.

The situation is no less grave in the occupied
Syrian Golan. Israel continues to act there as well in an
attempt to entrench its settler policies and its occupation
of the Golan through expanding and building new
settlements, providing financial incentives to bring
in settlers through such projects as "Come to the
Golan" or the so-called Farms Project, and, recently,
through a plan designed to set up 18 new communities
in the occupied Syria Golan. The President of the so-
called Golan Regional Council declared that it is now
preparing to absorb 1,500 new Jewish families in the
Golan settlements.

The settlements do not just constitute a war crime,
they are also part ofa systematic Israeli policy to impose
a fait accompli that will kill any chance of achieving
peace in the region, entrench the occupation and
destroy any hope of creating a contiguous and viable
Palestinian State. Ironically, while some members of
the Council say that the settlements are illegal and must
end, not one step has been taken to stop the escalation
of the settlement campaigns and no serious pressure
has been brought to bear on Israel.

Lastly, if we want to retain whatever credibility
remains at the United Nations, prevent all chances ofwar
and improve the opportunities for peace in our region,
the Organization must stop dealing with the Israeli
occupation of Arab lands in such a routine manner,
with no serious effort to reach real solutions on the
ground. The United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, must take measures aimed at ensuring full
implementation of the relevant international resolutions
on Israel's occupation of Arab land, in particular
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981), and
must compel Israel to withdraw completely from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the lines of4 June 1967.

We note that every time Israel escalates its
aggression against the Palestinian people or in the
occupied Syrian Golan, some delegations escalate the
misleading language oftheir statements about Syria, all
in an attempt to distract attention from Israel's crimes
and reduce international pressure on it. To avoid falling
into that cheap trap, I will not use this statement on
the situation in the occupied Arab territories to respond
to the empty claims that some delegations have made
about Syria. We have many ways to refute such claims
by countries that support, harbour and arm terrorists,
help to spread extremism and destruction in Syria and
have sought actively to block any efforts to reach a
peaceful settlement of the crisis.

