Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting, and Special Representative La Lime
for her briefing.

The recent political situation in Haiti has been
marked by instability, with demonstrations and violence
occurring in various parts of the country. The security
situation therefore remains fragile. Meanwhile, the
economic situation and people's livelihoods in Haiti are
in urgent need of improvement. In addition, the cholera
epidemic and the grim humanitarian situation persist.
China takes note that in his latest report (S/2018/1059)
to the Security Council, the Secretary-General calls
on the Haitian Government to pay more attention to its
people's demands and take concrete action to address
corruption. China urges the Haitian Government to take
a more serious attitude to engaging in political dialogue
with all parties in the country with a view to properly
resolving their differences through consultations.

The international community should continue
to increase its focus on the political, economic and
humanitarian situation in Haiti and help the country
maintain national stability, promote economic
development, improve its people's livelihoods
and implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. China appreciates the recent efforts
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General La Lime, and supports MINUJUSTH
and the United Nations country team in continuing to
provide justice support to Haiti in accordance with
their mandates to help the Government strengthen its
legislative and judicial functions and strengthen the
capacity of the Haitian National police with a view
to enabling the Government to effectively assume the
responsibility of maintaining the country's security and
stability. The Haitian Government should continue to
strengthen coordination with the United Nations and
cooperate with the United Nations in the work needed
to achieve MINUJUSTH's exit strategy.

