Mr. Butagira (Uganda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important meeting. I
would like to commend Mr. Antonio Guterres for his
exemplary leadership and his entire organization for
protecting and looking after the unfortunate people
who, through no fault of their own, have found
themselves to be refugees or internally displaced
persons.
He touched upon a number of very important
issues. However, before I make a brief comment on
that, let me reaffirm the commitment of Uganda to host
a special African Union summit on internal
displacement. We assure Mr. Guterres and the Council
that Uganda will do everything possible to make the
meeting a success.

Mr. Guterres touched on the issue of internal
displacement. As the Council knows very well, the
issue of internal displacement is the responsibility of
the sovereign State and not a matter within the mandate
of the High Commissioner for Refugees. Recently, we
have witnessed displacement, especially in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is the result
of the brutal activities of the so-called Lord's
Resistance Army. Many people have been displaced.
This is just one example of internal displacement.

In circumstances where internal structures or
State institutions have collapsed and therefore the State
cannot shoulder its responsibility to protect its citizens,
the question arises: What will the international
community do? Mr. Guterres was quite right in
referring to the issue of the responsibility to protect. As
the Council knows, that issue was touched on by the
2005 World Summit, and it was endorsed.
Unfortunately, nothing has moved to make it a reality,
and there are many issues concerning sovereignty
which no one wants to touch. Yet, in my opinion,
perhaps it is high time that the Council took the lead in
reactivating this issue and in finding out how we can
put into practice that principle endorsed by the World
Summit. Obviously, one cannot simply watch
helplessly as no one else cares for the internally
displaced people. I think if we address that, it could go
a long way towards helping the internally displaced.

Mr. Guterres also touched on prevention.
Obviously, it is far cheaper to concentrate on
prevention than to address the results of a catastrophe.
Quite rightly, Mr. Guterres emphasized prevention.
This is a broad concept that applies not only to
programmes that you can put in place, but also to
issues of governance. It is important to note that some
internal displacement is the result of poor governance
and poor democratic institutions in a country. This
must be addressed.

I do not believe that, in matters concerning the
responsibility of the Council in maintaining
international peace and security, we should avoid very
watertight compartments. When does a matter fall
under the ambit of the maintenance of international
peace and security? Obviously the lines are very
difficult to define, but it is equally unacceptable that
the issue not be addressed. Roles have been defined
very narrowly and therefore issues are left out that
should have been addressed, such as that I touched on
earlier regarding democratization.
I want to be brief. In my concluding remarks, I
would like, once again, to commend Mr. Guterres for
his exemplary leadership which he has shown, as usual,
in addressing these issues.

