Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank the President for
organizing today's important debate. We appreciate
the commitment of the delegation of Peru to the cause
of counter-terrorism. We are grateful to the President
for consistently highlighting the linkages of terrorism
and organized crime in his work in the Security
Council, especially as the Chair of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. I also thank the briefers for their
informative and insightful inputs.

While it is axiomatic to portray the linkages between
terrorism and organized crime as symbiotic, let us not
forget that terrorism itself is a crime in most national
jurisdictions. This situation has existed at least since
the Security Council adopted resolution 1373 (2001), by
which, for the first time, it required all Member States
to domestically criminalize terrorism and the financing
thereof. In addition, terrorism and organized crime
are both manifestly malicious organisms, drawing
sustenance from the same deadly swamp. At times, they
coexist. At other times, they cooperate. And in some
instances, they converge. As the world becomes more
interconnected, these menacing networks are becoming
increasingly intertwined.

The nature of the relationship between terrorist
and criminal groups may vary according to a variety
of factors. However, both rely on strategic recourse
to unsanctioned and illegitimate use of violence to
undermine governance and development. Both lead
to destabilizing established State structures, thereby
undermining and threatening international peace
and security.
Terrorist organizations are increasingly involved
in lucrative criminal activities, such as trading in
natural resources and human trafficking, to raise funds.
Similarly, criminal groups are joining hands with
terrorists and providing services, such as counterfeiting,
illicit financing, arms dealing, drug trafficking and
smuggling terrorists across borders. The activities ofthe
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Shabaab
and Boko Haram, such as extortion, human trafficking,
resource extraction, trade in cultural artefacts and illicit
taxation in areas they control, manifest in myriad ways
the process of the blurring of lines at the intersections
between crime and terror.

In our own region, we have seen the mutation of
Dawood Ibrahim's criminal syndicate into a terrorist
network known as the D-Company. The D-Company's
illegitimate economic activities may be little known
outside our region, but for us, activities such as gold
smuggling, the counterfeiting of currency and arms
and drug trafficking from a safe haven that declines
to acknowledge even his existence are a real and
present danger.

The success of collective action to denude ISIL
is a pointer that the Council's focussed attention can
and does yield results. A similar degree of interest
in addressing the threats posed by proscribed
individuals - such as Dawood Ibrahim and his
D-Company, as well as proscribed entities, including the
so-called Jaish-e-Mohammed and Lashkar-e-Tayyiba,
which are listed as affiliates of Al-Qaida under
the sanctions regime of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities - will serve all of us well.

Revenues generated by the illicit activities of
terrorist and criminal groups are moved across borders
and exchanged through open networks. That flow of
resources, meant to produce violence and terror, needs
to be stopped by States working together. Collective
inter-State efforts are required, including at the regional
and subregional levels. We also need to sensitize the
private and public enterprises involved in facilitating
legitimate transboundary financial flows. We should
harness their support so that they do not fall prey to
malevolent actors in the vein of Osama Bin Laden's
string of retail honey shops.

Normative efforts at the United Nations need to be
coordinated through collaboration with other forums,
such as the Financial Action Task Force. We believe that
the Task Force is playing a significant role in setting
global standards for preventing and combating money-
laundering and terrorist financing. The United Nations
needs to increase cooperation with such bodies.

With the emergence of new technologies and
uncharted frontiers, our challenges in identifying
new terrorist trends, mapping links between terrorists
and criminal groups, and sharing information more
effectively are growing. The Security Council has
identified, over the years, various aspects of the issue
of addressing terrorist financing. We hope that the draft
resolution under discussion in the Council during the
Peruvian presidency on the linkages between terrorism
and organized crime will advance that cause further.

Finally, our collective commitment to implementing
what we agree upon in the Council will go a long way
in acting as a catalyst in pursuit of our common good.

