The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by the two countries that co-led the Security
Council mission to Africa, namely, France and Angola.

I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity on the Security Council's mission to the
Central African Republic.

First, on the context: from 9 to 13 March, the
Security Council visited Africa. We stopped in the
Central African Republic; Addis Ababa, with the
African Union; and Burundi. I had the pleasure of
co-leading this visit with the Angolan Ambassador,
Mr. Ismael Gaspar Martins, for the entire mission, and
with the United States Ambassador, Ms. Samantha
Power, for the Burundi segment.

Regarding the Central African Republic, I should
like to highlight the following points.

This was the first visit of the Security Council
to the Central African Republic. We spent about two
very busy days on the ground. We met with many
stakeholders, including the transition authorities. We
met with the President and most of her Government,
the National Transitional Council and the National
Electoral Authority - so the transition authorities;
representatives of Central African Republic civil
society, including organizations representing women,
youth and religious authorities; and the international
forces deployed in Central African Republic, namely,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), Sangaris and the European Union military
operation in the Central African Republic (EUF OR).

We also went to Bria and held talks with the local
authorities, that is, prefects, magistrates, the gendarmerie
and the police, representatives of civil society, religious

leaders and ex-Seleka representatives. We also visited
the Cambodian contingent of MINUSCA.
During this visit, the Security Council wanted first
and foremost to get an idea of the situation in the Central
African Republic, nearly a year after the adoption of
resolution 2149 (2014). We found that the situation that
remains tenuous and precarious on the humanitarian
and security fronts, but we also saw encouraging
signs, such as stabilization, thanks to the deployment
of MINUSCA and the excellent work done by EUFOR
and Sangaris; and a deep and mostly shared desire to
stop the conflict; refugees and displaced persons who
have begun returning to their homes, even if that is not
the case across the board. The Security Council also
noted a trend among political leaders, who hope to
successfully complete the transition process.

What we saw and heard will be invaluable for
our forthcoming initiatives on the Central African
Republic, a review of the troop ceiling for MINUSCA
and the renewal of the mandate by the end of April.

Of course, we also used this visit to convey at
every stage a message from the Security Council.
We encouraged the authorities of the Central African
Republic to spare no effort in conducting the transition,
including local consultations, which have almost
concluded; the Bangui Forum, which is key; and then
the elections, with the goal ofmeeting the set deadlines.
We noted the progressive re-establishment of State
authority across the territory, with the deployment
of administrative teams, and stressed the need to
resolutely continue along this path. We encouraged all
of our interlocutors to work towards reconciliation and
to lay down their weapons.

Finally, I would underscore that the impression we
got from this trip was one of a fragile situation, but
also of a positive trend that must be encouraged and
supported. There are significant challenges are great, but
international commitment must remain commensurate.
This means in particular that financing is necessary for
the immediate priority of elections, for humanitarian
appeals, for the reform and reconstruction programmes
that are to follow and that will begin swiftly with the
deployment of the European Union Military Advisory
Mission in the Central African Republic Europeanin
in the armed forces sector. We encourage the United
Nations as a whole to contribute to this collective effort.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Gaspar Martins.

