Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
today's briefers - Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, and Ambassador Joao Vale de Almeida - for
their respective, very informative briefings. Allow me
also to thank Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve
for his work as Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015). Poland supports the procurement
channel and the Procurement Working Group, as well
as the coordinating role of the European Union.

Poland welcomes the seventh report of the
Secretary General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2231 (S/2019/492). Similar to
previous reports, it is a thorough and balanced
document. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA), which constitutes an integral part of the
resolution, is an important achievement of multilateral
diplomacy, a key element of the global nuclear
non-proliferation architecture.

We welcome the International Atomic Energy
Agency's efforts to strictly monitor and verify the
commitments of the Islamic Republic of Iran in
order to guarantee the peaceful nature of the Iranian
nuclear programme, in line with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the JCPOA.

We note that the International Atomic Energy
Agency has reported that Iran is effectively
implementing its nuclear-related commitments under
the Plan and the fact that the Agency itself continues
to verify the non-diversion of declared nuclear material
and the absence of undeclared nuclear material and
activities in Iran. However, in that context, we are
extremely concerned about Iran's announcement that
it will not commit itself to respecting the limits on
enriched uranium and heavy water reserves and that
it will furthermore suspend compliance with uranium
enrichment limits and measures to modernize the Arak
heavy water reactor. We share the Secretary-General's
view that such an ultimatum is counterproductive and
may not help preserve the Plan or the interests of the
Iranian people. It will be difficult for the international
community to defend the JCPOA after Iran ceases to
fully implement it.

We call on Iran to refrain from actions that could
undermine further implementation of both the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015), which is even more
important now, as it refers not only to the activities
under the scope of annex B. We urge Iran to uphold
its commitment never to seek, develop or acquire any
nuclear weapons and to continue to apply the additional
protocol to its Safeguards Agreement and formally
ratify the protocol in the near future.

The restrictive measures described in annex B
constitute an integral part of resolution 2231 (2015) and
need to be implemented thoroughly. We believe that
more needs to be done by all regional actors to find
lasting, peaceful solutions to regional conflicts, given
the fact that the high level of confrontation across the
region can have extremely dangerous repercussions not
only in the region, but elsewhere as well. In that regard,
we note Iran's engagement in the provision of military,
financial and political support to non-State actors across
the region. Bearing in mind Iran's important role in the
region, we encourage Iranian authorities to cooperate
closely and constructively with the international
community in efforts aimed at de-escalating the current
tensions in the Middle East.

Iran's ballistic missile activity, especially as related
to long-range missiles, goes far beyond its defence
purposes. Ballistic missile launches are inconsistent
with the provisions of resolutions 1540 (2004), 2216
(2015) and 2231 (2015). Together with other members
of the European Union, we underline that tensions
and distrust in the Middle East should not be further
exacerbated. We call on Iran to play a constructive role
in that regard and avoid unhelpful rhetoric.

