Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I wish to thank Secretary-General Guterres for
his briefing today.

Conflict prevention and resolution are the sacred
responsibility entrusted to the Security Council by
the Charter of the United Nations. Given the new
developments in the international context, causes of
conflicts across the world are becoming more complex
and diverse, with different, intertwined factors. As a
result, the ideas and means for conflict resolution must
also evolve in order to be systematic, comprehensive
and targeted. I wish to make the following observations.

First, efforts should be focused on building a more
favourable international environment for conflict
prevention. The target for conflict prevention is to build
a world with universal security. However, the security
of individual countries is interdependent. No nation can
seek absolute security on its own and no country can
harvest stability from turmoil in other countries. All
nations must establish the concept of a common, shared
future and advocate for a global governance concept
based on the principle of engaging wider consultation,
making joint contributions and shared benefits in order
to build a global partnership based on dialogue and
partnership rather than confrontation and alliances. We
need to insist on common, comprehensive, cooperative
and sustainable security and carry it throughout
the entire process of conflict prevention in order to
build a favourable global environment for conflict
prevention. It is necessary to coordinate and maintain
security in conventional and non-conventional fields.
We must advance sustainable security with sustainable
development in order to eliminate the root causes
of conflicts.

Secondly, we feel that disputes among countries
need to be addressed appropriately through dialogue
and consultation. All countries need to abide by
the principles and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations and follow the basic norms governing
international relations, such as respect for the principles
of sovereignty and the territorial integrity of nations,
non-aggression and peaceful settlement of disputes. It
is important to insist on good-neighbourly relations,
advocate inclusiveness and cooperation and effectively
manage differences and conflicts in order to resolve
disputes through peaceful means, such as dialogue
and consultation. The goal of conflict prevention is to
realize peace. Any non-peaceful means are undesirable.

Thirdly, we are committed to addressing the
root causes of conflicts. Conflicts have many deep
root causes, such as extreme poverty, unbalanced
development, shortage of resources and ethnic and
tribal conflicts. Conflict prevention needs to take
into account the root causes of conflict. All countries
should make development their top priority and jointly
forge ahead with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development in order to realize the goal of eliminating
poverty from the world at an early date and build
capacities for autonomous development in order to
provide impetus for conflict prevention.

The international community should fully
respect the wills of the countries involved and resolve
conflicts, with the countries involved taking the
lead. The international community should provide
constructive assistance in the process of political and
national reconciliation. We need to make greater efforts
to promote civilizational and cultural exchanges that
are diverse, harmonious, inclusive and all-embracing.
We need to carry out dialogue and enhance mutual
understanding in order to turn differences into driving
forces for exchange and integration, rather than leave
them as potential causes for conflict.

In areas plagued by armed conflicts, the threat
of terrorism is especially acute. The international
community should strengthen the unified global
counter-terrorism front and prioritize counter-terrorism
cooperation on the international security agenda.
Special measures need to be taken in order to prevent
the erosion of peoples' minds by the ideologies of
terrorism and extremism, thereby eliminating breeding
grounds for terrorism.

Fourthly, we need to give full responsibility to
regional and subregional organizations, as they have
geographical, historical and cultural advantages.
They know the regional circumstances and specific
causes of conflicts best. The international community
should support regional and subregional organizations
in capitalizing on their advantages in order to make
greater contributions to conflict prevention in those
regions.

In recent years, African regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union, have
been committed to the joint self-development and
improvement of African countries, and have actively
carried out activities related to conflict prevention and
pushed for African solutions to African issues. They
have played a very active role in safeguarding peace
and stability on the African continent. The United
Nations should further strengthen its cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union, and provide more targeted assistance so
as to allow them to play a greater and more unique role
in dialogue, consultation, good offices and mediation to
address the hotspot issues in Africa.

