Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for making a special
trip to New York to preside over today's meeting. We
welcome the report of the Secretary-General

(8/2009/304) and wish to thank him for his presence
and his presentation. Our thanks also go to
Ambassador Mufioz and Mr. McKechnie for their
respective briefings.

Peacebuilding is a new concept that appeared
following the end of the cold war. In 1992, former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, in An
Agenda for Peace (S/24111), for the first time
introduced the concept of peacebuilding. That was
another milestone in the collective security system of
the United Nations following the establishment of
peacekeeping operations. It shows that the international
community has realized that the end of a conflict does
not necessarily mean the arrival of peace. Post-conflict
peacebuilding is highly relevant to durable peace and
security in countries that are emerging from conflict.

Over the past decade and before, the United
Nations has played a very significant role in post-
conflict peacebuilding with notable achievements and
has also accumulated rich experience. When the
Peacebuilding Commission was established in 2005,
that signalled a very important step forward in
peacebuilding.

However, the United Nations is also faced with
many challenges with regard to peacebuilding. Under
certain circumstances, national ownership is not fully
recognized, intervention in post-conflict peacebuilding
is not timely, financial contributions are inadequate and
multilateral and bilateral coordination are insufficient.

China supports the efforts to further strengthen
the capacity and leading role of the United Nations in
peacebuilding and the coordination and coherence of
peacebuilding activities.

I wish to make the following four points. First,
respect for national ownership is the cardinal principle
of post-conflict peacebuilding. The primary task of
peacebuilding is to restore the governance mechanisms
of the nations concerned. The nations involved and
their political leaders should put national interests
above everything else. They should respect and
effectively implement peace agreements and resolve
their differences through dialogue and consultation,
based on a commitment to national reconciliation,
democratic reconstruction and economic rehabilitation
and development.

When the international community is involved in
peacebuilding efforts, it should listen to the views of
the Governments and peoples of the countries involved
and fully respect the political, cultural, legal and
religious traditions of the affected countries.
International assistance strategies should be tailored to
the specific needs of the countries affected and should
fully consider the priorities established by those
countries.

It is not possible for peacebuilding to have a one-
size-fits-all standard. A peacebuilding strategy should
be tailored to the specific conditions of the affected
country. Attention should be paid to enhanced capacity-
building and to the training of personnel during the
implementation of peacebuilding processes. Priority
should be given to existing personnel and expertise of
the countries affected.

Secondly, adequate funding is a fundamental
guarantee of effective post-conflict peacebuilding.
Post-conflict countries are mostly war-torn and in a
chaotic state, with inadequate governance and
development capacities. Swift and timely support and
assistance by the international community are
indispensable. The Peacebuilding Fund and other
bilateral and multilateral donors have played a very
important role and have provided many resources, but
they remain unable to meet genuine needs. China
supports improving the operation of the Peacebuilding
Fund, expediting disbursements and strengthening
outcome evaluation and accountability.

The Secretary-General has recommended that, in
the light of the special needs of the countries
concerned, donors should transform their thinking on
assistance in order to create a flexible, rapid assistance
model with predictable funding, and that they should
consider the establishment of innovative funding
channels such as country-specific funds. Those
recommendations merit serious consideration.

Thirdly, coordinated activities at different stages
of peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding are
necessary to create durable peace for the countries
affected. Conflicts in the world today are increasingly
complex and diverse. The objectives of peacebuilding
require an integrated systematic strategy.
Peacebuilding should be taken into account beginning
at the stage of peacemaking. Only when the security
situation has been stabilized, when a highly
representative Government is in place and when
national reconciliation is being promoted can the
environment for economic reconstruction and

rehabilitation exist. Only when economic
reconstruction and rehabilitation are possible, can the
people share in the peace dividend and the peace
process be built on a solid political basis. Justice and
the rule of law are the necessary conditions for the
stability and development of countries and regions
emerging from conflict. But without development,
justice and the rule of law will only be castles in the
air. Combating impunity must be consistent with the
overall need for political dialogue and expedited
national reconciliation.

F ourthly, strengthened coordination and
coherence among multilateral institutions and donor
countries is an important channel to create synergies
within the international community on post-conflict
peacebuilding. The United Nations should continue to
play a leading role in the area of peacebuilding and
should establish and coordinate stable and coordinated
relations with the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and other international partners and
fully consolidate assistance resources from the various
funds. United Nations agencies and entities should
have a clear division of responsibility to strengthen
cooperation. The Peacebuilding Commission, as the
primary body for coordinating United Nations
peacebuilding endeavours, should play a greater role in
coordinating international peacebuilding efforts.

At present, Africa is not only an important
continent for United Nations peacekeeping operations,
but also a focus of United Nations peacebuilding
efforts. The international community should strengthen
its assistance to peacebuilding in Africa in order to
help affected countries strengthen their peacebuilding,
rehabilitation and reconstruction capacities.

China supports a greater role in peacebuilding
efforts for the African Union. We call upon the
international community to continue to provide Africa
with assistance in order to help its countries emerge
from conflict and turbulence and achieve stability and
development.
The failure or success of peacebuilding efforts in
Africa will be a litmus test for United Nations
peacebuilding mechanisms. We hope that the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, the Secretary-General and other
relevant entities and bodies will work together to
steadily scale up United Nations peacebuilding
capacity and make positive contributions to the
maintenance of world peace.

