Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish first of all to thank the Secretary-General for his
report and for his very clear and concise briefing.

The Security Council's oil-for-food programme, which
has been in place for more than three years, has yielded
some achievements, but on the whole is far from
satisfactory. As observed in paragraph 204 of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2000/208), "improvements in the
humanitarian situation have been below expectations". This,
I believe, is a view shared by the majority of Member
States. Improving the humanitarian situation in Iraq is not
as simple as allowing Iraq to import food and
pharmaceutical and medical supplies. Rather, it is an
operation involving all dimensions. For all the reviews the
Security Council has conducted and the constructive
proposals by Council members and the Secretariat in this
regard, the enormous amount of attention and input has not
yet yielded the expected results. What is the real problem?
That is a question that deserves pondering.

The Secretary-General's report cites many factors that
have affected or even exacerbated humanitarian suffering in
Iraq. Here, I would like to focus on Iraq's oil export
capability and on the issue of holds on contracts.

It is essential to maintain Iraq's oil production and
export capability, because it is the basis for implementing
the oil-for-food programme. Furthermore, only by
maximizing Iraqi export revenues can the programme be
better funded and executed. To that end, the Security
Council decided by resolution 1284 (1999) to lift the ceiling
on Iraq's oil exports. Nevertheless, oil production in Iraq
has recently decreased rather than increased. On several
occasions, the Saybolt expert group has underlined its
professional conclusion that the Iraqi oil sector is outdated
by a decade, and has noted the urgent need for it to be
upgraded.

It is both necessary and practical for Iraq to have the
funds earmarked for the procurement of oil spare parts
increased from $300 million to $600 million. Otherwise, not
only will unpredictable disasters occur in the Iraqi oil
sector, but security and the environment in the entire Gulf
region will be affected as well. Since last year, the
Secretary-General has repeatedly asked the Security Council
to approve that additional allocation; he reiterates the same
request in his current report. We believe that the Security
Council should take immediate action to resolve this long-
outstanding issue.
Coupled with the underlying weaknesses of the oil-
for-food programme, the increasingly serious problem of
holds on contracts has exacerbated the deplorable
humanitarian situation in Iraq. The Secretary-General's
report of last October (S/ 1999/1086) indicated that 572
projects with a total contracted value of some $700
million had been put on hold. The report before us today
says in paragraph 205 that by the end of January the total
value of contracts on hold had exceeded $1.5 billion.
According to the Office of the Iraq Programme's weekly
report, by 6 March the number of contracts on hold from
phase IV to phase VII had already exceeded 1,150, with
a total value of more than $1.7 billion. Thus, in less than
half a year, the number of contracts on hold doubled
while their total value more than doubled. These figures
alone reveal the seriousness of the problem.

The Security Council has repeatedly debated this
problem, which is not really a complicated one, yet to
date no effective solution has been adopted. But where
the crux of the problem lies is crystal clear to many
people.

One of the reasons given for putting holds on
applications is that they involve dual-use items. Security
Council resolutions strictly prohibit Member States from
exporting any materials or equipment to Iraq for military
purposes; to date there has been no evidence of violations
in this regard by Member States in their exports to Iraq.
The Secretary-General, when approving the distribution
plans submitted by the Iraqi Government, also carries out
a strict examination and check on all items to be procured
so as to eliminate all items to be used for military
purposes.

Thus, we believe that all contracts scrutinized by the
Office of the Iraq Programme and submitted for approval
by the sanctions Committee should be considered as
conforming to all the relevant United Nations stipulations.
But some members still ask exporting companies for
additional technical specifications and other information.
China has always provided positive cooperation with such
unilateral requests, with the aim of facilitating the
improvement of the humanitarian situation in Iraq. But
members that have put holds on contracts do not respond
in an efficient way. In July 1999, a Chinese company,
which was going to export surgery microscopes to Iraq,
provided detailed technical and end-user information in a
timely manner. The purchaser and the supplier have not

 

yet been informed of the outcome, despite repeated appeals
by both parties for a response. Nobody knows how many
patients in Iraq have suffered from the delay caused by the
hold on this contract.

In another case, last year's drought in Iraq created an
urgent need for the import of water pipes. But to this day,
an application submitted by a Chinese company in 1998 has
not been approved, merely because the contract includes
pipe cutters.

Many contracts in the petroleum, power-generating,
water-treatment and other sectors are interrelated. Under
such circumstances, as long as one contract is on hold, even
if the others have been approved, it is as if none of the
related contracts had been approved either. For instance,
Iraq has been permitted to import power generators, but the
import of electricity cables is denied. It is common sense
that without those cables none of the generators, with a
total value of hundreds of millions of dollars, can serve any
useful purpose, even though the installation might have
been completed and the generators might be running.

Moreover, the Secretariat and other agencies operating
in Iraq are all of the view that telecommunications in that
country should be immediately improved to achieve better
performance and results from the "oil-for-food" programme.
However, although the Secretary-General has approved
relevant procurement plans, and suppliers and purchasers
have all more than once provided all of the required
information and the necessary explanations to the members
placing holds, almost 100 per cent of the contracts in this
sector have been put on hold. In this context, the technical
excuses for putting these holds on contracts are far from
convincing.

Paragraph 203 states that to date the total amount of
funds made available for the implementation of the
programme has reached $13.2 billion, but the total value of
the supplies delivered to Iraq is only $6.7 billion. In other
words, almost half of the available funds have not really
been utilized for the progranune. Any unbiased party would
agree that improving the oil-for-food programme is an
immediate priority of the highest degree of urgency.

My purpose in citing so many figures and examples is
only to make today's discussions conducive to the
improvement of the oil-for-food programme, so that the
Iraqi people can reap greater benefits from it. Here, I would
like to make the following comments and suggestions.

First, the sanctions against Iraq have been in effect
for 10 years, and their humanitarian consequences have
been both broad and profound. According to a United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) survey last summer,
in the past five years child mortality in Iraq has doubled,
and maternal mortality has also increased greatly. A
report of the International Committee of the Red Cross
states that the average monthly salary in Iraq is only $2,
unemployment is as high as 50 per cent, a large part of
the Iraqi population lacks clean drinking water, and the
public sanitation and health-care systems have been
reduced to near-ineffectiveness. Stories and statistics of
this kind abound. Unfortunately, to date the United
Nations has not been able to launch a comprehensive
review of the negative impact of the 10-year sanctions on
Iraq in the economic, social, cultural, religious, human
rights and other areas. China believes that the Security
Council should address the Iraqi humanitarian issue,
especially the impact of the sanctions, with a
comprehensive and integrated approach and from a
long-term perspective. We strongly believe that the
Secretariat should prepare and submit such a
comprehensive review report to the Security Council as
soon as possible.

Secondly, as stated in the Secretary-General's report,
the United Nations Office of the Humanitarian
Coordinator for Iraq and other agencies in Iraq have
conducted tens of thousands of inspections and checks on
goods exported to Iraq. My delegation would like to be
informed of the results therefrom in a timely manner. At
the same time, we believe that enhancing the observation
and monitoring capability of the Office of the
Humanitarian Coordinator for Iraq may reassure some
Council members as to the use of those goods, so that the
holds may be released expeditiously. The
Secretary-General has already issued directives to the
Office of the Iraq Programme in this regard, and we hope
that that Office will be able to devise a concrete
implementing plan very soon.

Thirdly, the efficiency of the sanctions committee is
also pivotal to the better performance of the oil-for-food
programme. Recently, many Member States have urged
the Committee to improve its work with respect to
contract approval, as current performance is less than
satisfactory. I believe this should receive the serious
attention of the Security Council. On the one hand, the
relevant Committee members should expedite the release
of holds. On the other hand, the sanctions Committee may
also discuss modification of its working procedures in the

 

general context of improving the overall performance of the
sanctions Committees.

Moreover, the limited revenues from Iraqi oil exports
should be used to the extent possible to purchase
humanitarian supplies, rather than for administration or
other expenditures. In this connection, how to optimize the
division of labour within the Office of the Iraq Programme
and the Office of the Humanitarian Coordinator for Iraq is
a question worth considering. The Secretariat could
approach the Iraqi side and discuss this matter with it.

Fifthly, we have always maintained that sanctions
against Iraq will not help solve the problem. On the
contrary, they will lead to tremendous humanitarian
consequences. As a matter of fact, the 10-year sanctions
have brought incalculable suffering to innocent Iraqi
civilians. This is an objective and incontrovertible fact. This
is by no means the original intention and purpose of the
Security Council in imposing the sanctions. As the
Secretary-General has repeatedly stated, the oil-for-food
programme has been unable, and will be unlikely, to
resolve the humanitarian crisis in Iraq. In our view, a
fundamental solution lies in the timely lifting of the
sanctions. Differences among Council members regarding
the policy on the Iraqi issue are difficult to avoid, but
innocent civilians, especially women and children, should
never be victimized because of political differences.

I wish also to point out that certain countries have
undertaken military actions in the no-fly zone that were not
authorized by the Security Council. These have already
exacerbated the Iraqi humanitarian crisis. We request the
countries concerned to immediately cease all military
actions and to rescind the no-fly zone.

In recent years, the Security Council has focused
increasing attention on humanitarian issues and has held
debates on humanitarian crises occurring in many areas, and
in some cases relevant United Nations operations have been
authorized and conducted. We believe that the Security
Council, in addressing humanitarian issues, should proceed
in accordance with the same standards and apply the same
criteria to all regions and countries, avoiding both
politicization and any kind of double standard. The same
attention and input should be given to every case, be it the
humanitarian crisis in Iraq, Kosovo, East Timor, African
countries or elsewhere.

