Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Your presence
here, as you preside over this session, Sir, proves the
importance and relevance of the theme under
consideration today by the Security Council. In fact,
the issue of justice and the rule of law is at the core of
the United Nations activities and focuses the objectives
of the international community on building a world
that is more just, equitable and peaceful.

We thank the Secretary-General for his important
statement and welcome the participation this morning
of his Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.

The Secretary-General's report before us
(S/2004/616) underlines the essential role played by
justice and the rule of law in the maintenance of peace
and in promoting development and long-term national
reconciliation. We fully share the principled views
expressed in the report that justice, peace and
democracy are mutually reinforcing imperatives and
that the international community should base its
approach on the assessment of specific national needs
and on national ownership of these processes.

The last decade witnessed a number of important
landmarks with regard to transitional justice and the
rule of law, particularly concerning its codification.
The African countries, through their engagement in
peacekeeping efforts and particularly through the entry
into force of the Protocol to the African Charter on
Human and Peoples' Rights on the Establishment of an
African Court on Human and People's Rights, took a
huge step forward in the fight against impunity on the
continent, in applying international humanitarian law
and in the promotion and respect of human rights. It is
our hope that such efforts - along with additional
components of the national healing processes such as
truth and reconciliation commissions - will succeed
in helping post-conflict societies to foster
accountability, render justice to victims, discourage
further crimes and contribute to the restoration of
peace by promoting long-term reconciliation.

Despite the significant progress so far achieved,
much remains to be done. It is our conviction that only
the establishment of sustainable democratic societies
will ensure the primacy of justice and the rule of law
on the African continent.

As a country that recently emerged from a long
period of conflict and war, we are deeply committed to
justice and to the establishment of the rule of law as
indispensable prerequisites for a sustained process of
peace and national reconciliation. Our experience has
confirmed that a piecemeal approach to the issues of
the rule of law and transitional justice does not bring
about satisfactory results. Strategies for the
implementation of an effective rule of law must stem
from the grassroots level. They must encompass
popular participation and must be comprehensive in
engaging all of the relevant social, cultural, economic
and judicial institutions.

Our experience has also confirmed that the
financing of reconstruction and peace-building
processes, including the creation of national capacities,
new security and judicial structures, as well as
renovated law enforcement capacities, constitutes a
critical threshold in long-term national reconciliation
and development processes.

In order to address the issues of justice and the
rule of law in a comprehensive and coordinated
manner, a long-term commitment by the international
community is essential, since it is a shared
responsibility to ensure justice for crimes under
international law, which are, after all, crimes against
the international community as a whole. While aware
that the proposition is not to build international
substitutes for national judicial capacities, we see
international cooperation as a fundamental prerequisite
for the effectiveness of justice and the rule of law and
for the consolidation of peace and long-term national
reconciliation.

To conclude, we again welcome the Secretary-
General's report. We endorse his recommendations
defining the way forward, contained in paragraphs 64
and 65. We stress the importance of the creation of a
roster of justice and transitional justice experts, and we
fully support the call by the Secretary-General
regarding the need to ensure a viable and sustainable
funding mechanism to provide adequate resources for
restoring the rule of law and establishing transitional
justice, supplemented by appropriate multilateral and
bilateral funding approaches.

