Mr. Egeland (spoke in French): Mr. President,
thank you once again for your presence here and for
this significant debate. I would like to express my
appreciation to Security Council members and to all
others who have spoken for their dedication to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I am greatly
encouraged by the ongoing interest that the Council
has expressed during this meeting. A number of
speakers have emphasized the critical role of civilian
protection in their activities, and we are very grateful
for that. I am also very touched by the unanimous
support for the road map, as represented by the 10
action points.

(spoke in English)

I am also pleased that the Council shares the
common view that properly meeting protection needs is
fundamental to the achievement of international peace
and security and the Millennium Development Goals.
The review in September next year will provide an
important opportunity to move forward concretely, and
I will therefore wish to have developed, in advance of
the review, concrete proposals and actions that can
contribute to strengthening the framework within
which we operate.

Speakers have rightly pointed out that the picture
presented today has been a bleak one. We agree on the
problems and on the fact that we have not taken
adequate action to address those problems. The future
now depends on our ability to take this consensus
forward and to translate it into tangible results. Such an
operationalization of our commitment to the protection
of civilians can result only from a joint effort.
Many Council members, including Pakistan,
France, Germany and the United Kingdom, as well as
the European Union, underlined the critical importance
of better coordination of the protection response,
particularly in the field. I will report to the Council in
June on the message that we have been able to
implement in response to these calls.

Many speakers, including Canada, Nigeria, the
United States of America, Japan and Switzerland
rightly underlined that attention must be directed
towards holding military and political leaders
accountable for their acts. The climate of impunity for
attacks against civilians and humanitarian workers is
intolerable. Our question, therefore, is how, concretely,
we can end impunity, and the answer clearly is, by
using individually targeted sanctions, by initiating
criminal investigations, by referring cases to the
International Criminal Court and by robustly and
swiftly deploying police, security forces and judicial
support structures to crisis areas.

If the Security Council is to act effectively in the
support of the protection of civilians, it needs to be
properly and regularly informed. In this context, I
welcome the willingness of a number of members of
the Council to request more briefings on the protection
of civilians and on country-specific situations as they
arise. Their invitation to me to brief the Council on
Darfur, northern Uganda and other issues earlier this
year clearly helped to bring attention and resources to
those neglected emergencies. We have taken note of
the many excellent suggestions made here today and
will incorporate them into the action programme for
the next briefing. I also welcome the support expressed
for an enhanced information reporting mechanism, on
which I will report to the Council in June.

The Permanent Representative of the Philippines
asked for a periodic assessment of the progress made
by the various United Nations organs and agencies in
the discharge of their mandates in the area of the
protection of civilians, using the road map and other
tools. I will respond to that request in conjunction with
my agency colleagues.

I also welcome the unanimous concern expressed
in the debate on the issue of sexual and gender-based
violence against women and children and the
recognition of the need for measures to deal more
effectively with that problem. This is an urgent issue
on which we must take immediate action. First of all, I
would hope that there is sufficient international
commitment over the next six months to specifically
address the difficult issue of impunity and to transform
the principle of individual responsibility into a reality.
For our part, where such violence is taking place, we
will work with our colleagues in the agencies to
establish more detailed and systematic reporting to
facilitate appropriate action. Further actions are already
being taken to ensure that all individuals working
under the United Nations flag, whether civilian or
military personnel, never abuse or exploit the civilians
they are sent to protect. Clearly, great efforts must be
devoted to internally addressing this extremely
important protection concern in our Organization.

We need to recognize the limits of the
humanitarian organizations' own ability to provide
protection to civilians. For that reason, I fully
acknowledge that more must be done to develop
national and local capacities for protection. We must
also find the means to better develop and draw upon
the support that can be given by regional organizations
such as the African Union. That too will require the
active support of Security Council members.

A number of Security Council members also
underlined today the importance of engagement with
non-State entities in order to secure access to and
protection for civilians in areas under their control or
when non-State armed groups actively target civilians.
As many speakers pointed out, when non-State armed
groups control or influence access to populations in
need of humanitarian assistance or actively target
civilians, the humanitarian imperative may demand our
engagement with them. Clearly, any engagement with
non-State armed groups must be conducted mutually
and impartially in a manner that does not in any way
legitimize the armed group concerned.

(spoke in Spanish)

Several speakers, including Spain, China, New
Zealand and others, said that they give full support to
our humanitarian work and underlined the need for us
to better protect our humanitarian workers in the field.
We cannot tolerate further attacks against our staff on
the ground. More killings of humanitarian workers in
Darfur or in other places of humanitarian crisis would
immediately lead to paralysis of our work, resulting in
hunger, epidemics and thousands of deaths. We hope to
continue the dialogue with the Council on how to
confront and put an end to this security crisis for
humanitarian personnel, including by taking immediate
actions to identify and prosecute those who are
responsible.

(spoke in English)
It is very positive to have today an agreed vision
of the problems and the actual situation in crisis areas.
Our main challenge, now and in our future work, is to
agree on what we should specifically do to protect
civilians and save lives, how we should make our
response more operational, what actions should be
taken by whom, etc. It is only by focusing on how to
operationalize our response that we will be able to
return to the Council in June with a report that, I hope,
will provide an indication of more positive trends and
fewer negative ones.

Finally, I wish to express my gratitude to the
Algerian presidency of the Security Council for its
leadership on this critically important issue. I
particularly welcome the initiative of the President in
leading the negotiations on a new presidential
statement on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I trust that, once endorsed, that presidential
statement will reinforce our ongoing efforts to make a
tangible difference in the lives of the millions of men,
women and children who are in desperate need of our
protection.

