Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We are still stunned by the unprecedented situation in
Haiti in the face of the terrible catastrophe of
12 January, with its tragic material and, above all,
human cost to the Government and people of Haiti and
the United Nations. It was undoubtedly a watershed
moment that requires us to reflect on everything related
to Haiti, including the United Nations Mission, in
terms of the needs generated by the new situation.

One matter that remains abundantly clear is that
if a possible exit strategy for the Mission was starting
to be considered prior to 12 January, from that date we
have had to focus on how to strengthen it and to
consider making adjustments to its mandate. The
immediate background is characterized by a sudden
weakening of the national institutional structure and an
exponential increase in the demand for the civilian and
security services provided by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) since its
establishment.

Given that scenario, we thank the Secretary-
General for his report on the realities on the ground
(S/2010/200), as well as his proposals for addressing
the situation in the coming months. We also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Edmond Mulet, for his briefing and convey to him our
admiration and respect for having accepted the
enormous challenge that he and his colleagues are
confronting in helping the Haitian people and
Government to overcome the difficult situation they
are now facing. We are proud to have participated in
MINUSTAH since its establishment and, as the report
points out, Guatemala was one of the first countries to
respond to the request contained in resolution 1908
(2010) for additional troops.

I would like to make the following brief remarks
regarding the Secretary-General's report.

First, identifying the key areas referred to in the
report is a significant starting point. However, we note
that those five key areas are not new, but recurring and
unique to the specific Haitian situation. Fulfilling them
will require intense coordination among the various
national and international actors and will be subject to
different development and implementation phases. In
that regard, we should also seek to ensure the
appropriate timing and sequencing among those
priorities within an integrated strategic framework.

Secondly, once priorities have been set, we also
need to ensure that there are resources to back them up.
In particular, the pledges made at the 31 March
international donors conference must be fulfilled, along
with those made in response to the Flash Appeal for
Haiti. We must not forget how important it is to follow
up on these commitments; the next summit of heads of
State or Government, to be held in Santo Domingo,
will be an opportunity to do so.

Thirdly, with regard to the future role of
MINUSTAH, we believe that, without losing sight of
its fundamental objectives, the Mission can undertake
additional reconstruction tasks and intensify its
complementary role in recovery activities. But the
Mission cannot and should not replace the State in its
primary role and responsibilities. We must recall that
without political will at the national level any United
Nations involvement will face major obstacles in
achieving success and in maintaining a safe and secure
environment. For that reason, political stability is
absolutely crucial. We believe that the country should
resume the national dialogue that was under way
before the earthquake, in order to build trust and
political consensus, including with respect to the
preparation of successful elections.

Fourthly, the report sets out interesting proposals
in the sphere of the rule of law and security
institutions. Possibly, the existing mandate might not
allow for the implementation of all of them. Hence, we
recognize that restoring the rule of law is a
precondition for the Government to guarantee full
enjoyment of the Haitian people's human rights. But
we warn against yielding to the temptation to create
new mechanisms unless they are absolutely necessary.
Rather, we should build on our experience of what
works and build our capacity to ensure a more
predictable, coherent and effective approach to support.

Finally, we are encouraged by the conclusion
reached by the United Nations Haiti Integrated
Strategic Planning Group, that the January earthquake
had not destroyed the gains made in the past few years,
but that it had damaged them and created new
obstacles. We are especially concerned about the
situation of internally displaced persons and about the
coming rainy season. But it is undeniable that the
United Nations presence in Haiti has once again made
a crucial difference to that country.

In conclusion, I wish to acknowledge the
outstanding performance of the outgoing Force
Commander, Major General Floriano Peixoto Vieira
Neto, and to welcome the new Force Commander,
Major General Luiz Guilherme Paul Cruz. We reaffirm
our full support for MINUSTAH and urge us all to stay
the course for the sake of Haiti and of the United
Nations itself.

