Mr. Minton (United States of America): The
United States also lends support to the decision by the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) for two additional
months, through 15 December. However, our support
for extending the Mission is tempered by our deep
concern about international peacekeeping efforts in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the light of the
continued reluctance of the parties to implement the
Lusaka Agreement.

There can be no peace in the Congo unless and
until the parties to the conflict uphold their Lusaka
commitments. There will be no further deployment of
United Nations personnel as long as volatile
confrontations between the belligerent parties continue.

Our collective efforts to restore peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
further eroded by the severe restrictions imposed on
MONUC personnel already deployed in the region. As
noted in the Secretary-General's report of 21
September, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has yet to implement an
acceptable arrangement to permit unimpeded
movement of United Nations officials. There can also
be no peace as long as MONUC continues to be the
target of inflammatory propaganda condoned by the
Congolese Government.

The critical humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot be properly
addressed either - despite our collective efforts - as
long as humanitarian agencies are denied safety and
freedom of access to all areas, including the eastern
part of the country. Emergency assistance cannot be
delivered to the 1.8 million Congolese who have been
displaced from their homes and to the 16 million
persons who are in immediate need of food for
survival. All belligerent parties in the Congo must
permit full, safe access at once to all humanitarian
workers in order to prevent further human suffering
and tragedy.

We have just 60 days in which to renew our own
efforts to encourage a recommitment by the parties to
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. If efforts to block MONUC's mission continue,
and should the parties fail to demonstrate their
commitment to the peace process, we will have little
choice but to review closely the utility and purpose of a
continued United Nations presence as defined in
MONUC's current concept of operations. We therefore
call on all the parties to use this short-term extension of
the Mission to relaunch the peace process and
demonstrate their firm commitment to renewed
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

