Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I asked
for the floor to very briefly clarify a few facts
regarding, first, the incomplete description of the
situation in Darfur and the Sudan in general. Such a
description will neither advance political settlement
nor help our people in Darfur, the people of the Sudan
in general or the continent as a whole. Talking about
the Sudan and its leadership as if decisions are being
taken by an individual is a flagrant violation of
diplomatic norms and indeed a deviation from the
Charter of this Organization.
09-27501

Decisions in the Sudan are taken by institutions.
The Sudan is not a failed State. It is a country that has
institutions, and the competent institutions responsible
for non-governmental organizations in the Sudan
carefully studied the situation and made their decision
after having obtained evidence that established beyond
a reasonable doubt that those organizations had crossed
the line, as my colleague stated earlier.

We expected this Council to deliberate today on
the extent to which those non-governmental
organizations violated the resolutions of the General
Assembly that regulate humanitarian work, most
notably resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991. This
Council knows that encroaching on the sovereignty of
Member States is a violation of the Charter. That is the
first issue.

The second issue is that the statements of all the
member States here reached one conclusion. All of
them are waiting for the conclusion of the joint
evaluation mission, which is composed of
representatives of the United Nations and the Sudan
and is still conducting its investigation in Darfur. What,
then, is behind all this hurry and commotion? Why is
the Council meeting today, before the relevant
committee comes back with its report? We can only
deduce that the non-governmental organizations that
are the source of all this commotion are not normal
organizations. These are organizations that have
crossed the line, and this is the irrevocable decision of
the Government of the Sudan.

