Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I have the honour to speak on behalf of Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Ireland, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Spain, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, the United Kingdom and my own country, Portugal. Those 27 countries are all members of the European Union (EU). Peace and stability in the Middle East remain imperative for the peoples of the region and are in the fundamental and strategic interests of the European Union. The European Union's position remains unchanged and centred on our firm commitment to a just and comprehensive resolution of the Israeli- Palestinian conflict through a negotiated two-State solution. In particular, our goal is to fulfil the legitimate aspirations of both parties, including Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian aspirations to statehood and sovereignty, end the occupation that began in 1967 and resolve all final status issueson the basis of international law, the internationally agreed parameters and the relevant Security Council resolutions. Ultimately, we want to see the State of Israel and a sovereign, independent, democratic, contiguous and viable Palestinian State living side by side in peace and security. Such an outcome is also in the interests of the parties themselves and would provide the basis for a democratic and prosperous future for Palestine and Israel alike. The Middle East peace process remains at a stalemate amid continuing political uncertainty in both Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory. At the same time, the situation on the ground continues to deteriorate, threatening the very viability of the two- State solution and prospects for a sustainable peace. One area of concern is that of continuous Israeli settlement planning and construction. At the beginning of January, the Israeli authorities approved the advancement of almost 2,000 additional units, including the retroactive approval of already existing constructions, some of which were built on private Palestinian land. That decision follows other settlement- related developments in recent months, including, in particular, sensitive places such as East Jerusalem and Hebron. The EU position on settlement policy is clear - Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, are illegal under international law, an obstacle to peace and a development that threatens to make a two-State solution impossible. The EU has also made clear that it will not recognize any changes to the pre-1967 borders, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties. We expect both parties, including any future Israeli or Palestinian Government, to act in accordance with international law. The Israeli authorities should fully meet their obligations as an occupying Power under international humanitarian law and cease the policy of settlement construction and expansion. Moreover, there have been recent calls made for annexation, which would constitute a serious violation of international law. The EU is also closely following the continuing demolition and seizure of Palestinian-owned structures across the occupied West Bank. Recent months have seen a significant increase in such demolitions, notably in East Jerusalem and a significant number of those demolitions include humanitarian projects funded by the EU and its member States. For its part, the EU remains strongly opposed to such demolitions, confiscations and forced transfers and evictions, as well as other actions taken in the context of Israel's settlement policy. Building strong, inclusive, accountable and functioning democratic Palestinian institutions, based on respect for the rule of law and human rights, is vital for the two-State solution. A strong, accountable, inclusive and functioning Palestinian Government, based on respect for the rule of law and human rights, is also vital for the two-State solution. In that context and taking note of the announcement made by President Abbas last September, the EU reiterates its call for a date to be set for the holding of elections in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and in Gaza. Such elections could represent an important building block for the reunification of the West Bank and Gaza, as well as a positive step in terms of democratic legitimacy and accountability. The EU once again calls upon all Palestinian factions to unequivocally commit to democratic principles prior to such elections. A further area of significant concern is the ongoing threat of violence, terrorist attacks against civilians and incitement to violence and hatred on both sides. We are concerned at reports of an increased number of attacks by settlers. The EU calls on Israel to fulfil its obligations, in line with its responsibilities as an occupying Power, to protect Palestinian civilians and to ensure accountability for any human rights violations. In Gaza, a serious escalation occurred in November 2019, when over 450 rockets were fired indiscriminately at Israel and 34 Palestinians, including 8 children, were reported to have been killed as a result of strikes by the Israeli military. More broadly, the political and security situation in Gaza remains highly volatile, while the humanitarian situation and the suffering of ordinary people are also of deep concern. Last November's upsurge in violence reminds us that restoring a political horizon for peace remains as essential as ever. The EU reiterates its condemnation of the firing of rockets from Gaza into Israel and the indiscriminate targeting of civilians. The EU also continues to oppose and condemn all forms of terror and firmly rejects any incitement to violence and hatred, which are fundamentally incompatible with advancing a peaceful two-State solution. We once again call upon all parties to take urgent steps, in line with resolution 2334 (2016), towards afundamental change in the humanitarian, political, security and economic situation in Gaza, including through an end to the closure policy, full opening of the crossing points and unimpeded access for humanitarian actors, while addressing Israel's legitimate security concerns. Such steps would also contribute to the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) and increase the chances for a two-State solution. One of the fundamental parameters for peace in the Middle East is a just, fair, agreed and realistic solution to the Palestinian refugee issue, in accordance with international law. Until such a solution is reached, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) remains crucial for providing the necessary protection and essential services for Palestinian refugees and we will continue to support UNRWA in all its fields of operations, including in East Jerusalem. It is of the utmost importance that UNRWA can continue to provide Palestinian refugees with the necessary protection and essential services. The work of UNRWA is also important for the stability of the region. Progress towards a solution to that conflict, based on an end to the occupation and a two-State solution, can also have a positive impact on efforts to resolve other crises in the region. In the absence of a renewed effort, the situation is likely to deteriorate further in the period ahead. We reiterate our readiness to work with both parties and our partners in the region and the international community towards the resumption of meaningful negotiations to resolve all final status issues and achieve a just and lasting peace. Please allow me to now turn to the situation in Syria. The conflict is now in its ninth year and has led to the death of half a million Syrians and the displacement of half of the Syrian population. It has also had profound repercussions on the overall stability of the Middle East and has provided fertile ground for the rise of the so- called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Da'esh. The situation in Syria remains highly volatile. The EU remains greatly concerned by the continued escalation of violence in north-west Syria and its devastating impact on civilians. The ongoing regime offensive has led to over 1,400 civilian deaths and has caused yet another wave of displacement, affecting more than | million Syrians. Only days after the announcement of the latest ceasefire, we have seen renewed attacks by the Syrian regime, including aerial strikes on Idlib, leading to numerous civilian casualties. The presence of United Nations-listed terrorist groups in the area is a common threat that has to be addressed. However, fighting those groups, as authorized by the United Nations, does not permit violations of international humanitarian law, such as the targeting of civilians. The EU continues to call upon the Syrian regime and its allies to permanently cease indiscriminate air strikes and shelling of civilians and to respect international humanitarian law. In north-east Syria, volatility and insecurity persist, following Turkey's unilateral incursion in October 2019. The EU has firmly condemned that military operation, which has caused renewed civilian suffering and further displacement, and has called for an immediate cessation of hostilities and the withdrawal of Turkish forces. We welcome the significant reduction in fighting. The incursion has threatened the progress achieved to date by the Global Coalition to Defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and risks having a negative impact on the United Nations-facilitated political process in Geneva. The EU has underlined on many occasions that Turkey's security concerns in north-east Syria should be addressed by political and diplomatic means and in full accordance with international law and international humanitarian law. Throughout last year, we witnessed persistent and grave violations of international law and human rights across Syria, a worsening of the humanitarian crisis and a growing risk of Da'esh resurgence. For those reasons, the EU remains convinced that only a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive political transition, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), can lead to sustainable peace and stability in Syria. In September 2019, the EU welcomed the establishment of the Syrian-led, Syrian-owned Constitutional Committee, under United Nations auspices. Regrettably, the second round of meetings of the drafting committee in November was unable to agree on an agenda for the joint discussions and no progress could be reached. Furthermore, no third round has yet been convened, largely due to preconditions requested by the delegation of the Syrian regime, which are in clear violation of the Constitutional Committee's rules of procedure.While the Constitutional Committee could serve to open the door to a broader political process, all elements of resolution 2254 (2015) are vital to achieving an inclusive political transition and must be implemented, including the release of detainees, a nationwide ceasefire and the establishment of a safe and neutral environment in order for free and fair elections to be held, under United Nations supervision. As so many years of war have demonstrated, we need to reiterate once again that there can be no military solution to the Syrian crisis. Europe will continue to maintain the Syrian crisis high on the agenda of the international community by promoting dialogue and mobilizing international humanitarian support for the Syrian people. In that regard, we welcome the decision by the Security Council on 10 January (see S/PV.8700) to extend the authorization for cross-border humanitarian assistance to people in need in Syria. In the light of the huge humanitarian needs in northern Syria, a failure by the Council to agree on an extension would have had catastrophic consequences. However, the EU regrets the exclusion of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing point, between Iraq and north- east Syria, where unmet needs persist on a large scale, and looks forward to the upcoming report of the Secretary-General on alternative modalities in order to ensure the delivery of critical medicine and medical equipment to north-east Syria. Meeting acute humanitarian needs requires sustained and predictable access, and the Council must continue to act to safeguard meeting the humanitarian needs of the people in need in Syria. The EU will also continue to strongly support the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General's efforts to unblock the political process. In accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), we will continue to promote a genuine political transition to pave the way for free and fair elections; support Syrian civil society, with particular attention to women's equitable and meaningful engagement in the political process; and identify confidence-building measures among the parties to the conflict, including on the issue of detainees and missing persons. Promoting accountability and justice and combating impunity remain a high priority for the EU, as a fundamental part of any future process of national reconciliation in Syria. For that reason, we reiterate our support for the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, and welcome that the Mechanism will from 2020 onwards be financed in its entirety under the United Nations regular budget. Our position on returns has not changed. As everywhere in the world, in Syria as well, we support the right of refugees and internally displaced persons to a safe, voluntary and dignified return. However, we consider that the conditions necessary for their return, as defined by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, are still not in place. We also wish to reiterate our well-known position on reconstruction. We will be ready to assist in the reconstruction of Syria only when a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive political transition, negotiated by the Syrian parties to the conflict on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communique, is firmly under way. The EU has also reiterated that it will not provide stabilization or development assistance in areas where the rights of local populations are ignored or violated.
