Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me join previous speakers in thanking the Permanent
Representative of Colombia, Ambassador Nestor
Osorio, for his comprehensive briefing. At the same
time, we wish to express our acknowledgement of his
demonstrated leadership at the head of the activities of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).

We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2049 (2012), adopted last week, which extended the
mandate of the Panel of Experts that deals with the
sanctions imposed on the Islamic Republic of Iran. As
we have stated on several occasions, we believe that
the Panel of Experts is an indispensable component of
the sanctions regime applied to the Islamic Republic
of Iran. Similarly, it does useful and practical work
in support of the 1737 Committee. Its mandate, under
the guidance of the Committee, to collect, analyse and
verify information provided by States is important.

Allow me to briefly highlight some points on the
90 day report. First, our primary focus must continue
to be the effective implementation of the resolution
adopted by the Council. The designation during the
reporting period of two individuals and an additional
entity involved in incidents of non-compliance, as
reported to the Committee, show us that the mandate is
being correctly implemented.

Secondly, we commend the outreach activities for
Member States, conducted by the Panel of Experts in the
framework of visits, information on issues relating to
the application of sanctions, monitoring the application
of sanctions and an analysis of trends and best practices,
as well as participation in seminars around the world.

Thirdly, we take note of the final report of the Panel
of Experts, whose recommendations we support. We
hope that the report will be published, in the interests of
transparency.

Fourthly, we note that during the reporting period
the Committee received notifications from Member
States on reports of alleged violations. We wish to
commend the Committee, which, with the support of the
Panel of Experts, responded to those reports at the same
time as it stepped up its outreach activities in order to
prevent future sanctions violations.

Fifthly, we support the holding of an open briefing
of the Committee, with the participation of the Panel of
Experts, on 9 July.

With respect to the current political situation, we
deem highly positive the dialogue and rounds of talks
that began in Istanbul in April, continued in Baghdad
last month and will go on in Moscow this month between
Iran and the 3+3 group.

We strongly support the dual-track approach and
hope for the creation of a favourable environment
and for a genuine commitment to finding a negotiated
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue.

Finally, Guatemala reaffirms the importance of
the balanced application of the three pillars of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons:
non-proliferation, disarmament and the use of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. The Treaty lays the
groundwork for what must be a serious commitment to
ensuring that Iran complies with its obligations under
the agreement, while ensuring also that its right to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes is respected.

