Ms. Wilson (Australia): Water gives life, supports
human development and enables sustainable economic
growth. Yet water crises are ranked by the World
Economic Forum as one of the top 10 global risks.
Climate change has the potential to exacerbate water
crises, which could in turn lead to or intensify conflicts
and fuel forced migration.

Australia is concerned about the increasing risks to
peace and security created by extreme weather events,
including water scarcity. Cities, towns and peri-urban
areas require functional water supply and sanitation
systems. Failure to provide such services often leads
to community tension and instability and can easily
result in conflict. We see improved water governance
as a key component in adapting to climate change,
while planning for a growing population and ensuring
economic development.

Good water governance is also essential to
achieving many of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) - most directly SDG 6, on ensuring the
availability and sustainable management of water and
sanitation for all. The 21 September joint statement of
the High-Level Panel on Water called for a fundamental
shift in the way the world looks at water. The Panel
presented a transformative agenda to deliver change
in water management and to increase investment on
a global scale to build more resilient economies and
societies. For Australia - a dry continent prone to
highly variable rainfall - effective water management
is critical to our economy. It has allowed us to make
the most efficient use of our scarce water resources
and to enable investment to meet the growing needs
of agriculture, industry and urban communities, while
ensuring there is water for the environment.

Through the High-Level Panel on Water, Australia
has committed to a number of practical initiatives
aimed at strengthening the capacity of countries facing
water crises. We are preparing a guide to improved
water management, drawing on experience from within
Australia and in our region, to help other countries
effectively allocate water among competing users. That
will have flow-on effects for food production, health
outcomes and economic development. We have also
established the Australian Water Partnership to assist
countries to improve their water governance. It is a
practical way to improve water resources management
in partnership with countries and the United
Nations system.

Australia also believes that the effective
implementation of SDG 6 requires explicit attention
to gender equality and social inclusion. Women and
vulnerable populations face an increased risk of
violence where water and sanitation services are only
available outside the home, often in unsafe locations.
Furthermore, we need to deliberately and proactively
engage women and marginalized people and encourage
their participation in strengthening water governance.

Australia is committed to encouraging and
supporting sound water governance at the highest
levels. That is why Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull
is an active member of the High-Level Panel on Water,
and it is why Australia will continue to work with
countries in our region and beyond to protect precious
water resources - in peace and in conflict.

