Mr. Yamamoto: It is a time for important
decisions in Afghanistan. These decisions will affect
the fundamental fabric of the society and the future of
Afghanistan. The Afghan people are scheduled to cast
their votes on 20 October to choose their parliamentary
representatives for the first time since 2010. Strategic
decisions, underpinned by a national consensus, will
need to be taken to guide the next steps towards peace.

On 28 November in Geneva, the Government of
Afghanistan and the United Nations will co-chair a
ministerial conference on Afghanistan, at which all
aspects of civilian efforts in the country will be placed
on the table for review and mutual commitment.

Just over a month from now, the Afghan people
are scheduled to go to the polls. I have met many
Afghans across the country who have impressed upon
me their desire to exercise their right to elect their
representatives. Many will face considerable risks to
do that. Operationally and technically, the preparations
are on track, yet I remain very concerned that political
challenges couldjeopardize the tight timelines and derail
the elections unless all political leaders are engaged
constructively and peacefully to ensure that elections
are held on time. Security is also a serious concern.

From a technical point of view alone, elections are
possible. The candidate lists were finalized in time to
enable the printing ofballot papers to meet the deadline.
The recruitment ofthe election officials is on track. The
Independent Election Commission (IEC) announced
that more than 9 million people had registered to vote.
Many opposition parties remain sceptical about that
number, citing both the security concerns that would
have prevented many people from registering and
alleging fraud. Several safeguards for the verification of
voter lists and fraud prevention measures are being put
in place. Despite those measures, scepticism remains.
Over the past few days, supporters of a coalition of
political parties have started to block several provincial
election commission offices, demanding that additional
safeguards be put in place. Such actions hinder the work
of the IEC and jeopardize the holding of the elections
on time. Political concerns must be addressed through
institutional mechanisms, not through blockades.

Regardless of the reforms that are being
implemented, the parliamentary elections will
undoubtedly be a major test for Afghanistan's
young democratic institutions. Almost one-third of
Afghanistan's more than 7,000 polling centres will
not open due to insecurity. That raises concerns about
inclusivity. The main question is therefore not whether
the elections will be imperfect but how Afghanistan's
electoral institutions will manage such limitations.

In my communications with the political actors
in Afghanistan, I have consistently stressed three key
points. First, continued international support should
not be taken for granted. That is also true for the
continuation of the constitutional order. Secondly, there
must be an awareness that the parliamentary elections
have implications beyond selecting parliamentarians,

including for the presidential election in April 2019. We
are aware ofthe real possibility of fraud taking place, as
well as allegations of fraud, which may have the tactical
purpose of discrediting the already difficult elections.
The Afghan institutions must combat both. Thirdly, I
urge all political actors and institutions to perform their
duties, to act responsibly and to think of the Afghan
people, bearing in mind the country's bitter past.

At this critical juncture, the Independent Election
Commission, as the lead institution on elections,
will be expected to discharge its function with the
highest degree of integrity, with professionalism and
with full accountability to the Afghan people. The
Afghan institutions and political leaders have a shared
responsibility for the success of the elections. I also
urge the IEC to redouble its efforts to reach out to the
public in order to raise awareness of that important
process. The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) will do everything possible
within its mandate and with the resources available to
support a successful electoral process.

President Ghani's offer to the Taliban in February
this year to engage in talks without preconditions
created unprecedented political space for peace,
culminating in a temporary ceasefire in June. It showed
that reconciliation was possible. That newfound
momentum was further supported by numerous
citizen mobilizations, demonstrating the desire for
a peaceful future. The second ceasefire, proposed
by the Government in August, was unfortunately not
reciprocated by the Taliban. Peace processes rarely
move along straight lines. Setbacks were to be expected.
However, I believe that all actors recognized the craving
of the Afghan people for peace and the undeniable need
for a peace process. Whatever setbacks may lie ahead,
we are in a better position now than at any time in the
past 17 years to commence a process leading to talks
for a negotiated end to the conflict.

The most difficult phases lie ahead. They will
require resilience and persistence on the part of all
sides. The efforts of the Afghan Government, which
we hope will be reciprocated by the Taliban, need
to be reinforced by the coordinated approach of the
regional and other key countries to move forward. I
urge all sides to agree on concrete measures to build
confidence towards more structured talks. Such key
confidence-building steps could include prisoner
releases and their treatment, as well as measures at the
technical level in fields such as agriculture, education
and health in contested areas. They could lead to the
cessation of violence, or at least a significant reduction.
All sides must realize that there is no military solution
to the conflict. I also wish to underline the importance
of ensuring the equal participation and full involvement
of women in all efforts for the promotion, establishment
and maintenance of peace and security.

The recent attack on the provincial capital of
Ghazni and the frequent suicide attacks in Kabul and
elsewhere remind us of the terrible toll on civilian lives
and livelihoods. In the first six months of this year,
UNAMA recorded the highest number of civilian deaths
since the Mission started to track civilian casualties. In
recent weeks, we have also seen a continuation of the
disturbing pattern of attacks targeting the Shia Muslim
community. Each death is an individual tragedy, but it is
also a tragedy for the country. Reconciliation becomes
harder with each life lost.

Insecurity is also taking its toll on journalists
and aid workers. This year alone, 13 journalists have
lost their lives and many more have been wounded.
That is the highest number of deaths in any country.
I urge the Government to take additional measures to
enhance their protection. Also this year, 23 aid workers
have lost their lives, 37 have been injured and 74 have
been abducted, making Afghanistan the second most
dangerous country in which the profession conducts its
work, while 2.2 million people are suffering from the
country's worst drought in years.

Two months from now, the Afghan Government
and its international partners will gather in Geneva
at the ministerial level in order to discuss all aspects
of civilian efforts in Afghanistan. That is the biennial
opportunity, at the ministerial level, to follow up on the
mutual commitment made in Bonn in 2011. The Geneva
ministerial conference will be held at the mid-point of
the transformation decade, which ends in 2024. Together
with the long-term international commitments in the
security field, the Geneva ministerial conference will
signal sustained political commitment to Afghanistan
provided that the Afghan side lives up to its commitment
to reforms and development. The Afghan Government
committed to the delivery of six benchmarks, namely,
first, the holding of parliamentary elections; secondly,
advancing its anti-corruption efforts; thirdly, reforming
the security sector; fourthly, meeting the International
Monetary Fund benchmarks; fifthly, promoting private
sector development; and, sixthly, the development of
national priority programmes. The Geneva conference
will also provide an opportunity for the international
community to further clarify its expectations regarding
the peace process and the ways in which it can support
such a process.

We recently lost an icon of the international
community. In 2001, former Secretary-General Kofi
Annan began his Nobel Peace Prize speech with a few
simple words. He said: "Today, in Afghanistan, a girl
will be born." That girl is now almost a woman who
will soon be old enough to vote, to attend university
and to pursue the vocation of her dreams. Will she be
able to? I am sure that that girl will be watching closely
the developments of the next few months.

