Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-
General Jeffrey Feltman and the Secretary General of
INTERPOL, Mr. Jiirgen Stock, for their briefings.

Mr. President, as stressed in the concept note
(S/2014/793, annex) that your delegation prepared for
this meeting, the role of sanctions in the collective
security framework enshrined in the Charter has
evolved significantly over the past 25 years, as has the
way in which the Council uses them. Sanctions have
become measures targeted against individuals and
entities with particular responsibility for the situation
that the Council seeks to address. Likewise, the Council
is increasingly aware of the need to avoid consequences
for the population at large.

We deem it important to bear in mind that sanctions
are a tool that the Charter provided to the Council in
given circumstances that threaten international peace
and security. They are therefore temporary in nature,
since they are designed to be lifted when the objective
sought in each case in achieved.

Argentina considers that, as the Security Council
moves more decisively towards the use of sanctions to
fulfil its mandate to maintain international peace and
security, it must comprehensively deal with the need to
improve the administration, design and monitoring of
sanctions policies.
We are grateful for and welcome Australia's
initiative to convene this meeting, which gives us
the opportunity to address the issue of sanctions in a
comprehensive manner. We believe that the Council
should continue to consider the issue periodically to
assess the impact of the measures, the challenges faced
in terms of implementation and improvements that
could contribute to increasing their effectiveness and
ensure respect for due process. We also believe that the
debate on this issue should be extended to all Member
States, which, ultimately, are responsible for applying
the measures imposed by the Council.

Argentina has repeatedly expressed its firm
conviction that the maintenance of international peace
and security should take place in the framework of the
rule of law and respect for due process. The measures
that the Council adopts to maintain international peace
and security, including sanctions, must fully respect
international law, especially international human
rights law, international humanitarian law and the
rights of refugees. Such measures should also respect
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, such as sovereignty, territorial
integrity, the political independence of States and the
principle of non-intervention in domestic affairs.

Likewise, Argentina advocates respect for due
process in the work of the Council. That is why
resolution 1904 (2009) deserves special mention,
which established the Office of the Ombudsperson as
an independent and impartial figure that considers the
requests of persons, groups, companies and entities
that wish to be removed from the list drawn up by the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning AI-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities. The establishment of
the Office of the Ombudsperson represented substantive
progress in terms of due process, but Members of the
Organization continue to have concerns with regard to
the procedural guarantees of sanctions regimes.

One of the most important causes for concern is
the fact that the mandate of the Ombudperson includes
only individuals appearing on the list of the Al-Qaida
sanctions Committee. Of even greater concern is the
fact that, as the Ombudsperson indicated during the
debate on working methods held on 23 October,

"there is no evident rationale as to why an
independent review mechanism is made available to
one set of individuals subject to targeted sanctions,
but not to others. That is particularly the case when
the matter is considered from the perspective of
those subject to the sanctions" (S/PV7285, p. 2).
As we also noted during the aforementioned
debate, Argentina advocates extending the mandate of
that Office to all sanctions committees of the Council,
adapting its structure to the need to address a larger
number of cases. We understand that the Council should
discuss the issue of due process in sanctions with the
intention of improving it, both to enhance respect for
individual rights of those subject to those measures and
to strengthen the credibility of the various regimes and
advance their implementation by Member States.

In improving due process in the sanctions regimes,
while recognizing the existence of the mechanism of
the focal point, we believe that by its very nature and
structure it does not have the basic features needed
to serve as a mechanism for independent review.
We therefore believe that the Council should seek
to strengthen the Office of the Ombudsperson and
ensure that it has the necessary resources to carry
out its work. In that context, we understand that, even
from a structural point of view, the Office must have
administrative and contractual arrangements that in
practice provide institutional safeguards that ensure its
necessary independence.

I wish to refer to the process for the selection

of experts who are part of groups that support the

committees in carrying out their work. We believe
people with experience and the necessary training
should be selected so that each committee may fulfil its
mandate and that geographical distribution and gender
balance should be respected. We also understand that the
process to identify the most qualified candidates should
be transparent. As in other aspects, transparency in the
selection of experts will bring greater credibility to their
work and to the sanctions committees. Therefore, we
are convinced that the various committees should know
which candidates have been submitted and should have
the relevant information about their experience and
training. In addition, we believe that the committees
should participate in the selection of experts after a first
intervention by the Secretariat and take the decision on
each available opening, as in the case of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) .

In closing, I wish to reiterate that Argentina strongly
opposes the use of unilateral coercive measures, the
extraterritorial application of domestic trade laws
and the adoption of discriminatory trade practices, as
they are measures in violation of the United Nations
Charter, the rules of international law and the spirit of
multilateralism. Therefore I want to recall that it is the
United Nations that has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security as
the cornerstone of the multilateral system. Argentina is
convinced that multilateral action through the United
Nations, in conformity with the principles of the
Organization, will allow us to address the threats to the
international peace and security in an effective manner
and to achieve a safer world for all.

