Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like to thank Qatar
for convening this open debate today. The Canadian
Government wishes to pay tribute to Jan Egeland for
the great commitment and very strong leadership he
has brought to protecting civilians worldwide.

All people should live in reasonable expectation
that they will not be subject to serious violations of
human rights or international humanitarian law. People
should not live in daily fear that they will be
deliberately targeted. Yet millions of people around the
world are targeted and remain displaced and
dispossessed. In Darfur, Sri Lanka, Iraq, the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Afghanistan and
northern Uganda, men, women and children face daily
threats including threats to the very right to life.

Today, I would like to focus on three themes.
First, the Security Council must demonstrate
courageous leadership and unwavering political will to
ensure that populations at risk have access to the
greatest protection possible. Secondly, continued
emphasis must be placed on ending impunity.
Perpetrators of attacks against civilians in violation of
international law must be held accountable for their

06-6406]

actions. Thirdly, we all share in the responsibility to
advance a culture of protection. The Council, the
United Nations Secretariat and agencies and Member
States must make advocacy, monitoring and capacity-
building watchwords for our efforts.

Since the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict was first brought onto the Security
Council agenda, important and practical progress has
been made. In the field, agencies are devoting greater
attention to refining their abilities to meet protection
needs. United Nations missions are authorized to use
force to deter and respond to attacks on civilians and
some are organizing themselves so that civilian
protection acts as a unifying cross-mission theme. In
addition, new sanctions regimes have been more
attentive to the need to target their impact so as to
mitigate unintended humanitarian consequences.

Canada very much welcomes the adoption of
resolution 1674 (2006) earlier this year. Nevertheless,
efforts to date suggest that international action,
including by the Council, remains uneven. We need
look no further than the grave humanitarian situation in
Darfur to understand that our vigilance must not wane.
Canada is deeply concerned by the continuing violence
and the persistent culture of impunity in Darfur. We
condemn persistent violence, in particular sexual and
gender-based violence committed by all parties,
including in internally displaced persons camps, where
rape continues to be used as a weapon of war. Canada
continues to call for an immediate end to the ongoing
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in Darfur and an end to the persistent
culture of impunity there. We urge the Government of
Sudan to prevent further violations, to ensure
perpetrators are brought to justice in accordance with
international law, and to facilitate humanitarian action.

Similarly, the recent shelling of an internally
displaced persons camp near Vakarai in Sri Lanka
highlights the heavy price paid by civilians in that
long-standing conflict, particularly where perceptions
of civilians have grown ambiguous, and thus their
targeting, recruitment as child soldiers, or denial of
assistance to them, is no longer viewed as taboo by
some. We urge the parties to the conflict to exercise the
utmost restraint and to fulfil their obligations under
international humanitarian law, including by promoting
the protection of civilians and facilitating safe and
unhindered access for humanitarian agencies to
civilians in need.

The linkage between civilian protection and the
maintenance of international peace and security is well
established. The Council has a direct role to play in
encouraging and promoting the protection of civilians.
Council members have repeatedly pledged that they
and the wider international community will take steps
in this regard. We applaud this leadership and we will
continue to support and monitor the implementation of
the Council's commitments.

Looking ahead, the Council must be more
proactive in responding to situations where civilians
are at risk. Greater focus should be given to timely,
credible preventative measures, in addition to
restorative actions. That means drawing on the many
levers at the Council's disposal, including good offices,
envoys and monitoring missions. The Council should
show leadership by demonstrating a greater willingness
to draw on the United Nations human rights
mechanisms for early warning, while promoting
preventative deployments, targeted sanctions,
diplomatic initiatives and adherence to international
legal instruments in support of affected populations.

In that, strong and consistent Security Council
resolutions are critical. Where peace support operations
are given protection mandates, these mandates must be
unambiguous and backed up by adequate financial and
human resources.

Effective action also requires consistent follow-
up. The Council must be proactive in monitoring the
implementation of its protection-related commitments.
That means drawing on lessons learned from missions
with protection mandates, as well as being prepared to
rethink and readjust policy approaches. The Council
should outline specific actions to be taken by parties to
a conflict, monitor their implementation and apply
penalties if actions are not taken. The message must be
unequivocal - perpetrators of abuse will be held
accountable for their actions.

On Darfur, the Council and the wider
international community has been divided and
inconsistent. There must be consequences for countries
that violate the arms embargo and for all parties that
continue to Violate the peace agreements and human
rights in Darfur.
We urge all parties to adhere to the principles
agreed to in Addis Ababa, including the need to
re-energize the political process, to establish a
strengthened ceasefire, and to find a way forward for

peacekeeping in Darfur. The Darfur crisis can only be
resolved through a political process, not through
violence.

Field visits by the Council are also key. Council
missions provide an indispensable opportunity to urge
parties to a conflict to allow safe and unimpeded access
by aid workers to those in need, to reinforce that there
will be no impunity for genocide and war crimes, and
to ensure that United Nations missions are being
vigilant in protecting civilians and meeting the needs
of displaced populations.

There can be no impunity. States must prosecute
those who commit genocide, crimes against humanity,
war crimes or other serious human rights violations.
No amnesty should be granted for international crimes.

The Council and the broader United Nations
membership have a particular responsibility to ensure
that those who commit serious Violations of
international law are brought to justice. Canada is also
concerned by deadly attacks on United Nations and
associated personnel. A recent study has highlighted
that attacks against aid workers are increasingly
politically motivated and that national staff are more at
risk than ever before. Canada urges Member States to
sign or ratify the 1994 Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel and its
Optional Protocol. Member States must show the
willingness to investigate and prosecute the
perpetrators of acts against United Nations and
associated personnel.

Let me also underscore the importance of
protecting and promoting the right to freedom of
opinion and expression. In that respect, the security of
journalists - particularly in armed conflict - requires
our ongoing attention. The United Nations must also
address hate media in its own mission planning and
operations. If left unchecked, hate media can further
fan the flames of conflict and put populations at greater
risk. Early efforts by the United Nations to counter
hate media and to ensure that those who propagate
hatred are brought to justice are important preventive
steps.

(spoke in French)
While the leadership of the Security Council is
essential to strengthen the protection of civilians, it is a
responsibility that must be shared by all of us: the
Council, the Secretariat, United Nations agencies and

06-6406]
Member States. Canada encourages the Secretariat and
United Nations agencies to leave no room for
ambiguity in their assessments, because previous
resolutions have authorized them to indicate to
Member States situations that require their attention to
protect civilians. It is essential to provide the Council
and other competent bodies with concrete advice and
recommendations.

The effectiveness of United Nations action
depends on the capacity of United Nations country
teams on the ground. Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General, Humanitarian and Resident
Coordinators and individual staff must be in a position
to indicate protection concerns to parties to conflict.
Progress in this area has been only modest; we must
further strengthen this capacity. In addition, those
deployed with a Security Council mandate to protect
civilians must better understand what is expected of
them and take a joint approach. For example, it is
essential that all actors cooperate to ensure that the
predeployment training of military and civilian police
includes a specific focus on civilian protection when
such a mandate is entrusted to them.

The lO-point plan proposed by Mr. Egeland
requires our sustained support. Each point represents a
concrete and essential component. Canada
wholeheartedly endorses this programme.

A strong framework now exists for the protection
of civilians. Resolutions 1265 (1999), 1296 (2000) and
1674 (2006), together with resolutions on conflict
prevention, women and peace and security, children
and armed conflict, the safety of humanitarian workers,
impunity and the exploitation of natural resources are a
clear set of mutually reinforcing Council commitments.
To the extent that they create a framework for Council
action, those resolutions also establish criteria that all
Member States can apply to hold the Council
accountable when it is slow to act.

The most direct measures of success are the
number of lives saved, the number of displacements
avoided and the mitigation and settlement of conflicts.
In the last analysis, the Council, the United Nations as
a whole and the Member States that constitute it will
be judged in terms of their willingness to make a real
difference in the lives of the people who need our help
most. Our actions must be concrete, and we must make
flexible and pragmatic use of the tools at our disposal.

06-6406]
The Council can continue to rely on Canada's support
in overcoming these difficulties.

