Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I shall deliver a shorter
version of my statement, while the full text is being
circulated in the Chamber.

I wish to commend the Azerbaijani presidency on
its initiative to convene today's meeting on the working
methods of the Security Council.

Malaysia wishes to align itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Malaysia welcomed the note by the President of the
Security Council contained in document S/2010/507,
which remains a landmark document aimed at
developing and improving the work of the Council.
Malaysia recognizes that the Council's working methods
have continued to evolve. The most recent note on its
working methods, issued on 28 August (S/2013/515),
focuses on ways to improve the Council's dialogue with
non-Council members and bodies. The note continues
the series of commitments on the part of the Council
that include making more effective use of public
meetings, expanding consultation and cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, providing
opportunities to hear the broader membership's views
on the Council's working methods, including in open
debates, maintaining regular communication with the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and its country-
specific configurations, convening wrap-up meetings
and informal briefings and improving consultations
with police- and troop-contributing countries (TCCs).

One critical issue that has marked much of the
discourse on working methods between the Council and
the membership at large is the debate concerning Article
30 of the Charter of the United Nations, which stipulates
that the Council shall adopt its rules of procedure. On
the other hand, Article 10 of the Charter states that the
General Assembly may make recommendations to the
Council on its powers and functions. A key to resolving
that debate is whether all Members are willing to case
that tension and work together to help make the Council
function more effectively. Members must be prepared
to leave their entrenched national interests behind in
order to enable the matter to progress and make the
Council an organ that serves the wider membership.

In taking steps to increase transparency and improve
the efficiency of its working methods, the Council
must also address shortcomings raised by non-Council
members, as it has done with such past issues as the
early distribution of draft Council documents to
non-members, the convening of more public meetings
and increases in the frequency and types of formats
used for informal interactions with non-members.

Malaysia appreciates the practical measures the
Council has taken to provide frequent dialogues and
exchanges between it and non-members. In that regard,
we welcome the holding of Arria Formula meetings as
a means to ensure closer interaction with non-Council
members and regional and subregional organizations.
We also commend the Council for its ongoing briefings
and consultations with TCCs. The Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations should involve TCCs more
frequently in its deliberations through timely and
regular interaction. The Council's request, in resolution
2076 (2012), that the Secretary-General consult with
countries contributing troops to the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, is a clear example of the benefits of
consulting TCCs.

Malaysia is of the view that given the linkages
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding, the Council
has benefited tremendously from its increased
interaction with the PBC. Due to the advisory nature
of the PBC's role, its views should be duly considered
when the peacekeeping mandates are discussed.

In conclusion, Malaysia believes that more steps
will have to be taken to improve the Council's working
methods, and will require Member States, particularly
the permanent members of the Council, to display
the necessary political will. It is incumbent upon all
of us to put aside our individual political agendas and
work for practical, attainable changes. The reform of
working methods is part of a larger, comprehensive
reform. What is required is structural reform of the
Council - reform that makes it more representative
of the United Nations membership, thereby ensuring
greater effectiveness and legitimacy in its work.

