The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Azerbaijan.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for presenting the forty-first report on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina (see S/2012/307).

Azerbaijan welcomes the progress registered
during the reporting period, including the resumption
of political dialogue and the conclusion of a number of
significant agreements by the leaders of six political
parties. The positive developments also included
important steps towards meeting some of the objectives
for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative.

At the same time, we are concerned about a
number of remaining threats to the General Framework
Agreement for Peace. Azerbaijan condemns any action
to challenge the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and attempts to roll back past
reforms related to the implementation of the Peace
Agreement.

As the High Representative notes in his report,
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia was satisfactory during the
reporting period.

The economic and social situation in the country
is still complex. At the same time, we note with
satisfaction that the economic data for 2011 showed
some signs of improvement compared to 2010. We call
on all political factions of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
focus on its economic and development priorities.

We take positive note of the joint declaration
signed in November 2011 by the Foreign Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro and
Serbia committing their respective Governments to
cooperate in a spirit of good faith to protect and
promote the rights of refugees, returnees and internally
displaced persons, to end their displacement, and to
enable them to live as equal citizens in those four
countries. In that regard, it is of the utmost importance
to address and to resolve all outstanding problems, in
particular those relating to property, in a way as to
ensure that the inalienable rights of returnees are fully
guaranteed and implemented.

I resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting.

