Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to speak
in my capacity as the representative of the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

Like previous speakers, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, Mr. Ivo
Petrov, for the excellent report and for the successful
work accomplished by the United Nations Mission in
Tajikistan.

Since Austria acceded to the chairmanship of the
OSCE at the beginning of this year, Central Asia has
become a major priority of the organization's work. To
this end, the OSCE Secretary General, Jan Kubis, was
appointed Personal Representative of the
Chairperson-in-Office for the region this January. In the
meantime, Mr. Kubis has met with the Presidents and
Foreign Ministers of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan. His expertise as former
Special Representative of the United Nations
Secretary-General for Tajikistan and Head of the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) is
an enormous asset which enabled the OSCE to enter into
a substantial, action-oriented dialogue, not only with
Dushanbe but also with Astana, Bishkek, Ashgabat and
Tashkent.

Let me now say a few words about the OSCE
Mission to Tajikistan. It was established at the 1993
Rome Ministerial Council meeting. Today, apart from the
main office in Dushanbe, there are field offices in
Kurgan-Tyube, Shaartuz, Dusti, Garm and, since
February, Khujand. In this context, I would like to pay
tribute to the untiring efforts of the current Head of the
Mission, Ambassador Buhoara.

The Mission received a broad and flexible mandate
to support political reconciliation, democracy-building and
respect for human rights. Much of the Mission's work is
focused on the human dimension. The range of activities
covers human rights monitoring and support for the
establishment of democratic institutions, free media and
civil society. The mandate also provides for assistance in
legislative reform and the establishment of the rule of
law, as well as support for gender equality programmes.

I would also like here to commend the excellent
cooperation between the OSCE and the United Nations in

 

monitoring the implementation of the General Agreement
on the Establishment of Peace and National Accord in
Tajikistan, concluded on 27 June 1997. In this context, both
the OSCE and the United Nations served as observers in
the elections. Although concerns had been raised regarding
the independence of the media and election commissions,
as well as the transparency of the counting and tabulation
procedures, the elections are undoubtedly a significant step
forward in the process of democratization.

Today, the main goals of the peace Agreement,
namely, to establish peace and security and to enable
national reconciliation, have been accomplished, as was
pointed out by the representative of Tajikistan. On 31
March, the OSCE Troika welcomed the formal end of the
transition period and the implementation of the General
Agreement on Peace as an important benchmark in the
process of national reconciliation and a move towards
implementing reforms.

There are still many issues in the transformation
process in Tajikistan which need further improvement: the
democratization process, the human rights situation, the
freedom of the media, the refugee situation, the
establishment of civil society, the fight against organized
crime and the support for economic transformation, which
is very important. In his keynote speech at the Eighth
OSCE Economic Forum in April, President Rakhmonov
highlighted the many economic challenges which Tajikistan
is facing.

In addition to the political and economic challenges,
there are also environmental issues. The Istanbul OSCE
Summit Declaration highlighted the risks of potential
conflicts arising from environmental issues, in particular
transboundary water issues, in Central Asia. Regional
management of transboundary water resources can be a tool
for promoting cooperation and improving economic and
social development. The OSCE Chairperson-in-Office, the
Austrian Foreign Minister, Mrs. Ferrero-Waldner, has taken
up a proposal of the British Foreign Minister to intensify
the dialogue among the Central Asian States with regard to
these issues. The need of Central Asian States to accept
responsibility for these problems and to seek solutions
through regional cooperation will be emphasized.

The OSCE values the efforts of both Tajik sides and
the achievements made so far. As has just been pointed out
by the representative of the European Union, after the
termination of UNMOT, the OSCE will be the focal point
for the efforts of the international community in assisting
Tajikistan. In this respect, the OSCE hopes to continue the
excellent cooperation with UNDP, the United Nations
Office for Project Services, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United
Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention
and the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. A good example of this cooperation
is the fight against international terrorism, violent
extremism, organized crime and drug and arms
trafficking. In October, the OSCE, together with the
Vienna-based United Nations Office for Drug Control and
Crime Prevention, will organize a conference in the
region. This conference will address the complex
interrelationships between drug trafficking, organized
crime and terrorism, with special emphasis on the rule of
law, good governance and human rights.

In conclusion, I should like to inform the members
of the Council that Mrs. Ferrero-Waldner, the Austrian
Foreign Minister and Chairperson-in-Office, intends to
visit Tajikistan in the near future to determine how the
OSCE can further help in the transformation process. I
can assure the Council that the Austrian Chair will spare
no effort to strengthen the cooperation between the OSCE
and the United Nations in our common goal to assist
Tajikistan and its people.

