Mr. Belle (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of
all, my delegation welcomes the presence in the
Chamber of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan and Pakistan. Allow me also to welcome
Mr. Eide, who has made his first briefing to the
Security Council since he assumed his responsibilities.
In three and a half months, he has already done
remarkable work in meeting expectations of him,
which I must say are very great. Belgium commends
him and encourages him to continue in that direction.
My country has always believed in a central role for
the United Nations in guiding international efforts and
coordinating the actions of the Government of
Afghanistan and its international partners.

While my delegation fully associates itself with
the statement just delivered by the Ambassador of
France on behalf of the European Union, we should
like to make the following comments.

Belgium generally agrees with the observations
contained in the report (S/2008/434) of the Secretary-
General. The strengthened mandate for the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
set out in resolution 1806 (2008) continues to be
completely appropriate. However, more resources are
needed to carry out that mandate and address the
priorities identified at the Paris Conference.

My country welcomes the announcement of the
opening of six new regional provincial offices by the

summer of 2009, with the initial phase taking place in
the provinces of Uruzgan and Baghlan. A greater
United Nations presence is in fact vital, but in order for
the value added of our Organization to be completely
effective, adequate funds will need to be made
available in terms of both personnel and security.
Mr. Eide reminded us of that a few moments ago.

My delegation fully supports the list in section III
of the report (S/2008/434) of issues to which more
attention must be paid. The requests for extra personnel
for the elections, for support for the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy, for aid effectiveness,
for the establishment of institutions and for the
rendering of humanitarian assistance are now very
legitimate and must be fully supported.

With regard to the internal organization of
UNAMA, Belgium supports any reform proposed by
Mr. Eide that would allow him to better meet his
responsibilities. The drafting of United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for Afghanistan is
also to be encouraged to improve the coherence and the
effectiveness of the United Nations response.

My delegation would also like to welcome the
presence of Mr. Holmes and thank him for the briefing
that he gave us on his recent visit to Afghanistan. The
Humanitarian Action Plan that will now be developed
should allow us to do a better job in meeting the
humanitarian needs, which are still very real. Belgium
shares his concern with respect to the growing number
of civilian casualties, mostly caused by those opposing
the Afghan Government. Monday's suicide attack on
the Indian Embassy in Kabul has once again shown
that tragically. In that regard, I wish to offer Belgium's
condolences to the families of the victims and to the
Governments of Afghanistan and India.

My delegation welcomes the participation in this
debate of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan and Pakistan. For Belgium, regional
cooperation has a key role to play in the process of the
stabilization and reconstruction of Afghanistan. As
already stated by President Karzai and President
Musharraf, the fates of the two countries are tightly
linked. The events of these last few weeks have
reminded us of that once again. We therefore
encourage Kabul and Islamabad to spare no efforts in
cooperating closely, also in terms of economic
cooperation. What we have heard today has been
encouraging in that respect.

A month ago, Afghanistan and the international
community reaffirmed in Paris their partnership to
implement the Afghanistan Compact and the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy under the
leadership of the Afghans. Belgium welcomes the
pledges of aid by the international community and the
commitment by the Government of Afghanistan to
pursue political and economic reforms. Within that
joint responsibility progress is crucial to fight
corruption and drugs and to promote good governance
and the rule of law. Improving the lives of Afghan men
and women - which, as the Secretary-General and the
Special Representative have reminded us, is our
collective objective - depends on that.

In conclusion, in Paris wishes were also
expressed for a greater role on the part of the United
Nations in terms of coordination. The United Nations,
in particular UNAMA and at its head Special
Representative Eide, have the intention and
determination to meet the expectations of the
international community. We need to give them the
space and the means, both human and financial, that
are necessary to do that.

