Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretaries-General Zerihoun and Simonovic
for their briefings.
Recently, some areas in Ukraine have experienced
continuous unrest, armed conflict and frequent
violence, resulting in heavy tolls on people and property.
China is deeply troubled by that situation. Conflict
and violence have led to an increase in the internal
displacement of persons in Ukraine and a shortage of
water, electricity and food. We hope the United Nations
and the international human rights and humanitarian
agencies will adhere to the principles of neutrality and
objectivity in their work.

On the question of Ukraine, I would like to
highlight the following points. First, a political solution
is the only way to resolve the crisis in Ukraine. We take
note of the fact that President Poroshenko announced a
peace plan and declared a unilateral ceasefire, and that
the armed groups have also declared a ceasefire. China
welcomes any efforts that would de-escalate tensions
in Ukraine and hopes that all parties will keep calm
and exercise restraint, take this opportunity to enhance
mutual trust and implement the ceasefire in conflict
areas in a practical manner so as to create favourable
conditions for a political solution.

Secondly, the crisis in Ukraine has historical roots
and a very real complexity. A comprehensive solution of
the crisis calls for consideration of the overall situation.
The solution should be long-lasting and balanced and
take into account the legitimate rights, interests and
demands of all regions and people in Ukraine, address
the legitimate concerns of all and strike a balance of the
interests of all sides.

Thirdly, relevant actors of the international
community are actively engaged with each other on the
question of Ukraine. That is conducive to addressing
the concerns and differences of all parties through
peaceful and political means and avoiding conflict and
confrontation. Such momentum should be sustained.
The Geneva four-party joint diplomatic statement and
the road map of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, which reflect the wisdom and
good will of all sides, should be implemented effectively
and comprehensively.

Fourthly, a swift and proper solution of the crisis
in Ukraine is not only in the interest of the country and
its people but also in the interest of regional peace and
stability. China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity ofall countries, including Ukraine, and we will
continue to hold a fair and objective position in actively
taking part in the consideration of any proposals and
initiatives for the casing of tensions and for finding a
political solution. We will play a constructive role in
that process.
