The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on their behalf:

"As the United Nations Operation in C6te
d'lvoire (UNOCI) completes its mandate on
30 June 2017, the Security Council commends the
remarkable achievements made by C6te d'lvoire
since 2004.

"The Security Council takes note of the oral
report delivered by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in C6te d'lvoire at the 7957th meeting
of the Security Council, held on 2 June 2017,
entitled "The situation in C6te d'Ivoire",
including the assessments, lessons learned and the
recommendations contained therein. The Security
Council expresses its intention to take them into
account in the framework of its ongoing work
to enhance the overall effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping.

"Recalling its resolution 2284 (2016), the
Security Council welcomes the notable progress
made by Cote d'lvoire to consolidate lasting peace
and stability, as well as economic prosperity. It
underlines the improvements in strengthening
national reconciliation and social cohesion, as well
as the overall security and humanitarian situation,
and progress on respect for human rights, which
play crucial roles in promoting peace and stability.

"The Security Council also welcomes the
successful presidential and legislative elections,
conducted respectively in 2015 and 2016, which
have helped to consolidate Cote d'Ivoire's
democratic institutions. The Security Council
further welcomes the constitutional referendum
held in 2016.

"The Security Council recognizes the
important contribution of UNOCI in promoting
peace, stability and development in Cote d'lvoire
throughout its 13 years of existence. The Security
Council expresses its appreciation for the efforts of
the Operation and the United Nations country team,
under the leadership of the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General. The Security Council
commends the contribution of troop- and
police-contributing countries and donors to
UNOCI, and welcomes the support provided by the
French forces. It welcomes the good cooperation
between UNOCI and the Government of Cote
d'Ivoire, as well as with bilateral partners, regional
and international organizations.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to undertake within a year, and within
existing resources, a comprehensive study of the
role of UNOCI in the settlement of the situation in
Cote d'lvoire since its establishment, taking into
account the contributions of political mediation,
the sanctions regime, as well as other relevant
factors as appropriate, that allowed for the
successful completion of UNOCl's mandate. The
Security Council looks forward to the results of
this study, including further lessons learned and
recommendations, and expresses its intention to
consider options for taking them into account in the
context of its ongoing work to enhance the overall
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping.

"The Security Council recalls the primary
responsibility of the Government of cote d'Ivoire
for ensuring peace, stability and the protection
of civilians in C6te d'Ivoire. It welcomes the
commitment of the Government of C6te d'lvoire to
stability in the region and to countering terrorism
and violent extremism, which can be conducive
to terrorism. It also welcomes the commitment of
the Government of Cote d'lvoire to fight against
all forms of transnational organized crime. It
stresses the importance for Cote d'Ivoire's long-
term stability of ensuring a peaceful, credible and
transparent electoral process in 2020.

"The Security Council stresses that there is
important work ahead to further advance peace and
justice and to secure equitable prosperity for the
benefit of all Ivorians. It underlines the importance
of action by the Government of Cote d'Ivoire to
tackle the remaining challenges in this regard,

supported as appropriate by the United Nations
country team and the international community.
"The Security Council stresses the need
for continued progress, following UNOCl's
withdrawal, in the fight against impunity, the
advancement of national reconciliation and social
cohesion, the full and equal participation of
women in Government and public institutions, the
reform of the security sector, the promotion and
protection of human rights, including through the
work conducted by the National Human Rights
Commission, as well as the management of refugee
returns, statelessness and land tenure.

"Taking note of recent incidents involving
members of the security forces, as well as former
combatants, the Security Council reaffirms in
particular the necessity to prioritize without delay
and accelerate the complete implementation of its
national security sector reform strategy in order
to further strengthen the professionalization and
cohesion of the national security services and
to enhance confidence within and between the
security forces and the population. The Security
Council also stresses the importance ofaccelerating
and consolidating efforts to develop and implement
sustainable reintegration opportunities for former
Ivorian combatants, as well as of continuing efforts
to improve the monitoring and management of
weapons in order to reduce the number of illicit
weapons in circulation. The Security Council
underlines the crucial contribution of security
sector reform to the stability of the country, as
well as to continued progress in security, national
reconciliation and social cohesion.

"The Security Council notes that the
Government of C6te d'Ivoire has indicated that the
United Nations will continue to be an important
partner in the next phase of the development
of the country. The departure of UNOCI does
not mark the end of the support of the United
Nations to sustaining peace in C6te d'lvoire. The
Security Council therefore welcomes the ongoing
engagement of the Secretary-General and United
Nations country team in support of the efforts
of the Government of Cete d'lvoire as it seeks to
preserve and consolidate its peacebuilding gains
and in order to promote sustainable development,
the rule of law and the strengthening of human
rights protections and institutions, as well as
to tackle other remaining challenges related to
security and development. The Security Council
recalls in this regard the transition plan presented
by the Government of Cete d'Ivoire, UNOCI and
the United Nations country team, which outlines
programmes aimed at contributing to tackling
remaining challenges faced by the country. The
Security Council encourages the international
community, including bilateral and multilateral
donors, to assist with the activities of the country
team, including by considering providing funding
to this transition plan.

"The Security Council reiterates its request
in resolution 2284 (2016) that the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel make
available its good offices, as necessary, to the
Government of Cote d'Ivoire and the United
Nations Resident Coordinator.

"The Security Council commends the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States and the Mano River Union for their efforts to
consolidate peace and stability in Cote d'Ivoire and
the subregion, and encourages them to continue
to support the Ivorian authorities in addressing
key challenges.

"The Security Council underscores the
importance of continued support to Cote d'Ivoire
as it embarks on the next stage of its development,
beyond UNOCI, and welcomes the willingness of
the United Nations and bilateral and multilateral
partners to continue, as requested by the Ivorian
authorities, to play a significant role in this regard."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2017/8.

The meeting rose at10,40 a.m.
