Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, allow me
to join others in thanking the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Burundi, Mr. Michel Kafando,
and the Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Jiirg Lauber,
for their very comprehensive briefings. We welcome
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Burundi (S/2019/837). Wejoin in his hope for Burundi to
be able to take its place in the region and the international
community. Allow me to also take this opportunity to
extend our appreciation to the Special Envoy for his
invaluable work over the past two and a half years. We
wish him the best in his future endeavours. I would like
to make the following pertinent points.

First, long-lasting peace in Burundi can be attained
only through mutual respect, inclusive dialogue and
accommodation in the best interests of Burundi and its
people, which includes inter-Burundian dialogue led
by the East African Community (EAC). We note the
Secretary-General's proposal to foster an environment
conducive to political dialogue and to continue
supporting regional efforts. We adhere to his call for
the continuation of consultations among the Burundian
parties, the United Nations, the EAC, the African Union
and other partners. Dialogue is indeed necessary for the
building of trust, including the trust of the international
community. We join the Secretary-General in stressing
the importance of creating the conditions conducive
to the preparation of the upcoming elections in 2020.
All efforts should be taken to ensure transparent and
inclusive elections.

Secondly, Indonesia calls for increased

humanitarian assistance to Burundi. It is worrisome
that there are still 1.8 million people currently in need
of humanitarian assistance. Around 116,000 Burundian
refugees were expected to return this year. Food
insecurity affects 47 per cent of households, 15 per cent
of which are experiencing severe food insecurity.

There have also been sharp increases in malaria
and cholera, with more than 6.5 million cases reported
in the first eight months of the year - a number that
represents a 125 per cent increase over last year. It is
heartbreaking that, despite these increases, the Burundi
regional refugee response plan is among the least-funded
appeals in the world. I urge countries to continue their
support and deliver on their commitments to Burundi.

Thirdly, we must ensure that Burundi does not
relapse into conflict, including beyond 2020. The
role the Peacebuilding Commission plays is crucial in
that regard. We welcome the recommendations of the
Peacebuilding Commission that encourage Burundi
to work together with the United Nations and other
partners to create an environment conducive to the
upcoming elections, and we call on all Member States to
increase their support to projects and initiatives aimed
at reducing violence and mitigating tension, including
at the community level. We also urge Member States to
give maximum support to the 2019 joint refugee return
and reintegration plan.

