Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the convening of today's meeting and appreciate the
briefings by Special Representative Jose Viegas Filho,
Ambassadors Anatolio Ndong Mba and Mauro Vieira,
and Ms. Tavares Pinto. We would like to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Aristides Gomes, Prime Minister
of Guinea-Bissau, and to take the opportunity of his
presence here to highlight the political progress that
has been made in recent months in Guinea-Bissau. We
welcome his appointment by consensus, the formation
of an inclusive Government, the reopening of the
National Assembly and the establishment of the date of
18 November for holding legislative elections.

We believe that those developments are encouraging
and should make it possible to move forward with the
full implementation of the Conakry Agreement and
the Guinea-Bissau six-point road map, established to
resolve the political crisis in the country. We would
also like to take advantage of this meeting to emphasize
three specific aspects where we believe we must
redouble our efforts in order to consolidate the progress
that has been made and achieve a sustainable peace in
Guinea-Bissau.

The first is the holding of legislative elections
in November. Establishing a free, transparent and
inclusive electoral process will help to ensure the
normal conduct of the 2019 presidential elections. That
involves promoting a democratic climate and ensuring
the broad participation of citizens, particularly women
and young people, and of all the country's political
forces. It will be essential to take special care of the
technical, logistical and financial aspects of organizing
the elections. We welcome the support provided by
the United Nations Development Programme in that
regard, and we note the importance of ensuring that the
international community continues to cooperate with
the process.

My second point is about the fight against organized
crime. As the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and several of my colleagues who spoke
before me have already made clear, we are concerned
about the presence in the country of transnational
organizations involved in illicit activities, in particular
the increase in activities such as drug trafficking
that undermine the social fabric and the institutions
required to build a sustainable peace. We appreciate
the work being done by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in Guinea-Bissau, together with the
United Nations Integrated Office for the Consolidation
of Peace in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), to overcome
those challenges, including the reactivation of the
Transnational Crime Unit.

Third is comprehensive attention to the root causes
of the conflict. In that regard, we believe that in the
future it will be essential, first and foremost, to work
to strengthen the rule of law and establish inclusive
democratic institutions in Guinea-Bissau, as well as
to promote national reconciliation and sustainable
development. It is also crucial that the various efforts,
initiatives and mechanisms deployed in the field
can maintain political and operational coherence,
reflecting and responding to the needs and priorities
of all sectors of the population. To that end, increasing
the involvement of women and young people in the
political life of the country is vital. In that regard, we
would like to welcome the establishment of the Bissau-
Guinean Council ofWomen, which seeks to improve the
participation of women in peacebuilding, reconciliation
and the political processes at the national level.

In conclusion, I would like to underline the
importance of maintaining and strengthening the
support and assistance of international and regional
communities in these efforts. We particularly want to
highlight the coordination between the Peacebuilding
Commission and UNIOGBIS, as well as the involvement
of the Economic Community of West African States, the
African Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries and the European Union, among others.

