Mr. Sana (Rwanda): Allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this important open
debate on the working methods ofthe Security Council.

Rwanda aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Sierra Leone on behalf of
the African Group, the statement delivered by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, and the statement delivered by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)

group.

This year marks important milestones for the
United Nations and its wider membership. From
socioeconomic development, with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, to the review of peace
operations, peacebuilding, and women and peace and
security, Member States and different organizations
have acknowledged the importance of adjusting the
activities of the United Nations to the context of the
world we live in today. There is no doubt that this
is a welcome step that, hopefully, will lead to the
measurable achievement of sustainable development,
with a tangible impact on peace and security.
That is the reason why Rwanda is a strong believer
in a collective and inclusive approach when it comes to
peacebuilding and development, which are intrinsically
linked to security and stability. Peacebuilding and the
Economic and Social Council are therefore partners of

the Security Council and should actively participate in
its meetings and fulfil their mission accordingly.

Today's debate offers an opportunity to discuss how
the Security Council can improve its working methods,
70 years after its establishment, in order to reflect the
current realities of the world.

Among the many elements raised today by various
speakers, allow me to mention a few that we believe can
help improve the effectiveness of the Security Council.

Despite the current positive trends in the working
methods of the Security Council, we have yet to live up
to the expectations of the 2005 World Summit, mainly
on efficiency and effectiveness, on transparency and
accountability, and on the implementation of Council
decisions. In this regard, we hope that the Council will
make tangible progress on the issue of penholdership
on the basis of the note by the President contained in
document S/2014/268, which recognized the right of
any Council member to be a penholder. This reform
would allow Council members representing the regions
affected by conflicts on the Council's agenda to at least
share the pen with the current penholders.

On relations with and the role of the General
Assembly, let me say that if one person is expected to
work for more than 7 billion people, the people that the
United Nations represents should have also their say
in his or her selection. The selection of the Secretary-
General should be characterized by transparency and
inclusiveness, in the interests of the credibility of
the Organization. Along these lines, we welcome the
adoption by consensus on 11 September of resolution
69/321, on the revitalization of the General Assembly.
We hope that the recommendations contained in the
resolution will be fully implemented. The joint letter
calling for a nomination by the President of the General
Assembly and the President of the Security Council,
as well as the conduct of dialogues or meetings with
candidates for the position of Secretary-General,
is worthy of note and will definitely enhance the
transparency and inclusivity of the selection process.

On issues related to the use of the veto, Rwanda
believes that there is a need to reform the use of the
veto right, as proposed by the ACT group and the
France-Mexico and Elders initiatives. Indeed, given
the recent history of the Council and its past failures,
permanent members should agree on how to refrain
from exercising the veto in cases of mass atrocities
and genocide. We call on the Permanent Five to
remember the unique responsibility entrusted to them
by the Charter and to ensure that their decisions are
always guided by the quest for a sustainable solution
to conflicts instead of their own geostrategic interests.

Enhancing interaction and dialogue with the wider
membership of the United Nations through Arria-
Formula meetings or informal interactive dialogues
also remains critical in increasing the effectiveness and
transparency of the Council. These are very important
tools that can be used in order to have a frank exchange
of views with a concerned party. In the same vein,
consultations among the Council, the Secretariat and the
troop- and police-contributing countries, and dialogue
with non-Council members, among other things,
are critical to the swift implementation of Council
resolutions. In addition, it is of great added value for the
Council to maintain regular consultations with regional
and subregional organizations, including countries that
are on the agenda of the Council, for a better outcome
in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and prevention. This
kind of partnership will help the Security Council move
from a culture of the daily management of crises to that
of the effective prevention of conflicts.

The Council should also take stock of the wrap-
up session in the format of a public briefing, which
can provide feedback to Member States. Member
States are also strongly encouraged to participate in
these important meetings, which are dedicated to the
assessment of the activities of the Council, including
the progress made, the challenges facing it and its
effectiveness.

With regard to the annual report of the Security
Council, we hope that in the future the Security
Council will consider improving its annual reports by
introducing a section dedicated to the assessment of
its effectiveness in the reporting period with concrete
recommendations on how to act better and faster while
maintaining international peace and security.

While we acknowledge the progress achieved so
far with regard to the working methods of the Council,
much more remains to be done. While waiting for the
adoption of a definitive rule of procedures, Rwanda
believes that various notes on the working methods of
the Council will greatly contribute to a more transparent,
democratic and effective Security Council, provided
that they are implemented in good faith, which will
uphold the equal sovereignty of States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations.
Let me conclude by reiterating Rwanda's position
on Security Council reform. As a member of both the
African Group and the L.69 group and given our two-
year experience in the Council, we believe, more than
ever, that the Security Council should be expanded in
both categories, with the same rights and privileges,
including the right to veto, as long as it exists. In the
meantime, it is critical for the Security Council to
continue improving its working methods, with a focus
on transparency, effectiveness, inclusiveness and
fairness.

After all, the Council calls, in every one of its
decisions, for human rights, democracy and the rule of
law. This is a real test for this body: to reflect exactly
what it preaches. Therefore, walk the talk, dear Council
members.

