Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): We
deeply regret that the draft resolution (S/2016/1026)
submitted by Egypt, Spain and New Zealand could
not be adopted. Given the extremely grave situation in
Syria, it was and is the responsibility of the members of
the Security Council to give their unreserved support
to everything that would enable us to save lives. That is
what France did today, alongside the large majority of
the members of the Council, aware of the overwhelming
responsibility that we have to maintain international
peace and security.

The draft text submitted to us was not, by definition,
perfect. It was the result of compromise. However, had
it been adopted, it would have reconstituted a fragile
ray of hope, admittedly partial and late in arrival, that
would have allowed us to work, and work together, to
save lives, put an end to the tragedy of Aleppo and seek
the conditions for a political solution.

In demanding a total halt to attacks for a renewable
seven-day period so as to allow humanitarian actors to
meet the urgent needs in eastern Aleppo, we were not
asking for a concession. It was the minimal response
to the repeated demands from the United Nations
and humanitarian actors, which for months have
been relayed by members of the Council, beginning
with France. It was the minimal delay necessary to
allow access for humanitarian assistance and medical
evacuations under the responsibility of the United
Nations, in accordance - it should be recalled - with
obligations under international humanitarian law. We
were only demanding that the regime and those who
support it finally conform to the obligations that they
have under international humanitarian law.

By delaying the negotiations as long as possible,
and then opposing a very moderate draft text, Russia
chose to remain deaf to the appeals of the international
community and to continue its support, with that of
Iran, for the efforts of the Syrian regime seeking to
take Aleppo regardless of the human cost. That is the
meaning of those successive vetoes.

Since the beginning of the Syrian crisis, France
has defended an unchanging position, that is, the
primacy of a negotiated solution, given that a military
solution is impossible, as only a political solution will
allow us to meet the aspirations of the Syrian people,
ensure lasting peace and combat terrorism. France
is convinced that the headlong military rush by the
regime and its supporters is not simply a moral fault but
also a strategic error - a strategic error that, beyond
Syria, endangers the international community as a
whole. Without a political solution, Syria will remain
what it is today: a devastated and divided country,
prey to incessant fighting and the foremost bastion of
international terrorism.

However, France is not resigned to the deadlock
that we see here again today. As I have said, the only
solution to the Syrian conflict is political. Nothing will
cause France to deviate from that conviction. Nothing
will make us deviate from the road map that was agreed
to by the international community - a political solution
based on the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex)
and resolution 2254 (2015), with the establishment of a
transition authority having full executive power. That
is not an ideological position; it is the only possible
solution imposed by the reality in Syria.

We have noted that the limited-format discussions
in Lausanne and Geneva have not made it possible
to halt the current offensive. For that reason, France
calls for the immediate relaunching of a credible and
inclusive international dialogue that brings together
all actors involved in the Syrian conflict to save the
martyred population of Aleppo from destruction.
France hopes that the initiative brought by Canada to
the General Assembly demanding the stopping of all
attacks can be carried out.
In such dark hours for Aleppo and Syria, which,
if we are not mistaken, challenge the credibility of the
Council, we have no right to give up. We have the moral
and political obligation to take action, and therefore to
come together to put an end to the tragedy in Aleppo and
seek the conditions for a political solution, which, once
again, is the only possible solution to the Syrian tragedy.
That will be the essence behind all of France's efforts.

