Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): Mr. President, I would like
to extend my congratulations to you and the People's
Republic of China for assuming the presidency of
the Security Council during the month of April and
to express my gratitude for organizing this highly
important debate. My delegation aligns itself with
the statement made by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, who spoke on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

My delegation shares the concerns expressed by
many delegations at the Council today. Every day, we
are faced with images of violent extremism and terrorist
action. The self-proclaimed Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and its horrendous crimes are menacing peace,
stability and human security worldwide. The Royal
Government of Cambodia firmly condemns every act
of violence that this terrorist organization has visited
on religious and ethnic minorities, and in particular on
women and children, including its brutal executions of
the innocent.

The rapid spread of terrorist threats is indeed
disturbing. While the scourge of terrorism has spread
too fast and too far, it can be defeated by a sustained,
comprehensive approach. The unpredictability,
frequency and potency of terrorist attacks demand
increased international solidarity and cooperation,
with the United Nations taking a central role in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
As we work together on that, the Royal Government
of Cambodia would like to reaffirm its strong
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. The principles of
respect for territorial integrity, sovereign equality,
independence and non-interference in domestic affairs
must play an integral role in the global fight against
terrorism. This is essential if we are to ensure universal
respect for the principles of justice as outlined in the
Charter, and it is very important for the three pillars
of the Organization's work - peace and security,
development and human rights.

Counter-terrorism action must follow a
comprehensive approach. In line with resolution 2178
(2014), the global community must focus on combating
radicalization and terrorist recruitment by countering
terrorist propaganda and preventing terrorists from
exploiting social media and Internet communications
technologies for incitement and the propagation of violent
extremist messages. To fight terrorism successfully,
we must eradicate the root causes of conflict. Conflict
prevention is a prerequisite for sustainable peace and
respect for human rights. Poverty, discrimination, a
lack of education, social exclusion and inequality only
perpetuate the cycle of violence. We can undercut the
recruitment of terrorists and terrorism's global spread
through the adequate and stable improvement of social,
political and economic conditions. We must all take this
on board, because we can never succeed in attaining our
sustainable development agenda without first securing
a safe and prosperous future for our children.

In that connection, it is absolutely essential that
we safeguard and preserve the cultural heritage
of humankind for future generations. The Royal
Government of Cambodia is deeply disturbed by
terrorists' deliberate destruction of cultural heritage
sites and thefts of priceless ancient artifacts. Such
unspeakable practices erode the historic fabric of our
society. Cambodia will stand with the international
community in our global efforts to keep our ancient
history alive. My delegation therefore fully supports
resolutions 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015), which aim to
suppress terrorist financing and thus prevent terrorist
groups and their supporters from compromising
international peace and security.

The spread of terrorism undermines our efforts to
strengthen the global economy and ensure sustainable
growth and development for all. In order to fight it, the
international community must act decisively and in a
unified and well-coordinated manner. The fight against
terrorism must be consistent with international law and
conducted in full accord with the purposes and principles
of the Charter. In that regard, I would like once again
to stress that the principles of the Charter are vital to
global peace and security, economic development, the
rule of law, social progress and the protection of human
rights. In that context, my delegation looks forward
to the review of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy to be conducted in June. We will
work productively with other Member States and United
Nations agencies in our efforts to further strengthen the
global counter-terrorism response.

