The Secretary-General: It is wonderful to see
you here, Mr. Minister, presiding over the Council at
this meeting.

Thank you, Mr. President, for your timely
initiative in arranging this important meeting. We are
clearly at a crucial juncture in the development of
international relations, and I am pleased to see
representatives of so many regional organizations here.
This demonstrates our joint interest in forging common
strategies to address the challenges we all face.

The feeling of global insecurity has seldom, if
ever, been greater than it is today. Equally, there has
never been a more keenly felt desire among peoples
and nations for a peace and security framework based
firmly on the international rule of law. That framework
must be capable of responding swiftly and effectively
to the challenges of our rapidly changing world.

We live in a world where unprecedented wealth
coexists with terrible deprivation. Globalization brings
opportunities for some, but excludes far too many.
Interdependence and open borders knit us closer
together, while intolerance drives us apart. Science
offers unprecedented promise, yet AIDS kills one child
every minute. Technological progress enables us to
communicate in a split second across thousands of
miles, but has given international terrorists tools that
can help them in their plans to obliterate thousands of
people in the same split second.

I could go on with this catalogue, but I do not
intend to. It must be clear to all of us that in the
twenty-first century many of the challenges we face are
global. From the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction to trafficking in small arms, from climate
change to the emergence of new, deadly viruses - all
have the potential to threaten not only our stability, but
our survival.

These issues are not new to the United Nations
agenda. But for many, they were brought into more
acute and painful focus after the events of 11
September 2001 - and now even more so by the war
in Iraq, which people across the globe have been
following in real time on their television screens.

Yet despite the sense of vulnerability and
uncertainty that pervades the global consciousness,
people and nations retain the hope of strengthening the
foundations of stability and uniting around our
common humanity. People look for institutions and
systems to uphold shared principles and ensure
multilateral solutions. They look to the United Nations.
They look for ways to translate into reality the ideals
expressed in the United Nations Charter, which
established the fundamental principles of international
law. Those principles are the outcome of the long and
often tragic history of humankind.

Our Organization - for all its imperfections, real
and perceived - has built up unique experience in
dealing with a range of crises, by bringing
humanitarian relief to millions in need, helping people
rebuild their countries from the ruins of armed conflict,
promoting human rights and the rule of law, and
engaging in many other activities that have come to be
seen as essential parts of peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peace-building.

In all these endeavours, the United Nations has
relied, to a greater or lesser extent, on regional partners
in Africa, Asia, Europe and Latin America. Together,
through all the turbulent years of the past few decades,
we have learnt a great deal about the need to transform
a sense of collective insecurity into a system of
collective security. That is precisely the purpose of
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter, which
guides and inspires the Council's meeting today.

Now we need to redouble our efforts to find
common ground and purpose again. We need to move
towards creating a network of effective and mutually
reinforcing mechanisms - regional and global - that
are flexible and responsive to the reality we live in
today.

The United Nations stands ready to work together
with you, the regional organizations, in that cardinal
mission. This meeting today promises to inject new
momentum into our partnership. For the sake of the
world's people, we must make that partnership
succeed.

