Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): At the outset, I
wish to thank Mr. Djibrill Bassole, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso, who is with us today
as representative of the Facilitator, President
Compaore, for his statement on the development of the
peace process in Cote d'Ivoire. We also wish to thank
the Principal Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Abou Moussa, for his briefing
and to the Secretary-General for his report on the
situation in Cote d'Ivoire (S/2007/593).

We are mindful of the positive political
atmosphere that has prevailed in cote d'Ivoire since
the signing of the Ouagadougou Agreement. However,
we are somewhat discouraged by the possible
implications of lapses in the timelines for the
implementation of important tasks identified in the
Agreement, as referred to by previous speakers.

We recognize the importance of the planning and
financial and logistical resources necessary to ensure
an accelerated and sustained implementation of the
Agreement. Continued international support for
capacity-building, including its timely channelling, is
therefore essential. However, it is important to
underline the special responsibility of the Government
of Cote d'Ivoire to give added impetus to the
implementation of the Ouagadougou Agreement.

A key to progress in the implementation of the
Agreement is a secure security situation. We are
encouraged to note the Secretary-General's assessment
that the country has remained generally calm since the
signing of the Agreement in March 2007. At the same
time, we are mindful of the continued fragile nature of
the security situation, as evidenced, inter alia, by the
29 June 2007 incident and the situation in the north of
the country. We commend the efforts by President
Gbagbo and Prime Minister Soro in overcoming any
attempts to disrupt the peace process. Continued
international support in enhancing the security
conditions through the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) is critical.

My delegation is also deeply troubled by reports
of trafficking of children for labour and prostitution, as
part of the growing problem of human trafficking for
forced prostitution and labour in the country. Support
for the enhancement of national capacities to deal with
those issues should be a priority.

We also deem it important that issues regarding
the conduct of personnel and discipline in UNOCI, as
mentioned in the report, be fully addressed.

We concur with the view of the Secretary-General
that, since progress on the two key benchmarks to
review the mandate and troop levels of UNOCI has not
yet been achieved, we should maintain the current
troop levels.

We have consistently been of the view that the
United Nations must remain closely engaged with and
supportive of the people and the Government of Cote
d'Ivoire in their difficult journey towards a peaceful
and prosperous country. We are therefore extremely
pleased to be informed of the appointment of Mr. Choi
Young-jin as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for C6te d'Ivoire.

