Mr. Bassil (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to thank France, which has always worked
to protect minorities. We extend our heartfelt thanks
for the initiatives and ideas that have been proposed
today. We warmly greet Patriarch Sako and our sister
Mrs. Vian Dakhil, who is the model of the courageous
activist Arab woman.

I have come to this meeting today after cutting short
my participation in the meeting of the League of Arab
States. I was the only one among all the Ministers who
left that meeting in order to be here with my colleagues
in the Security Council to find ways to end the cultural
genocide that is occurring in our region. Once this
meeting has been adjourned, I will immediately
return to my home region, and my roots, where I will
actively strive to ensure that the region continues to
encompass Civilizations united by more than language
alone. No matter how much the international and Arab
communities disappoint us, we will continue to work
and our people will continue the struggle to save to the
soul of Lebanon and the Middle East and our culture
from danger. We are the children of a nation that has
witnessed the greatest travails of history. We have been
resilient, depending not on material power, but only on
our culture.

We are are descendants of the Phoenician civilization
that invented the alphabet and exported it around
the world through our commercial ports. We are of
an eastern identity that has moulded the heavenly
religions in one land and in one human being. We are
the descendants of a Lebanese formula unique in terms
of power-sharing in governance between Christians
and Muslims. We are the descendants of a great nation
that is a martyr in its own land, a people that has sent
out a message of hope when it was able to withstand
and showed resilience on its own land, a people that has
carried along with it the message of humanity when it
was forcibly displaced from its land.

We come here from the land of divine messages
and from the home of the message, Lebanon. It is the
message of tolerance, coexistence and the safeguard
of others. It is a message of humanity in the face of
Daesh, the inhuman. We are the descendants of the
messengers and prophets. We come from the wombs
that brought forth Moses, Jesus and Mohammed. We
are the grandchildren of those who were born and grew
up in the Middle East, emigrated to and integrated and
lived in Lebanon and coexisted with the East and the
West. That is why we have been persecuted. Our only
guilt is that, by the coefficient of coincidence, we were
born into confessional communities. We believed that
the United Nations was created to protect people like
us, but the rise of Daesh represents a major setback for
the global security regime.

The apostolic guidance directed us not to ask for
any privileges and we do not seek any. Nevertheless, we
want to ask: What has happened to the characteristics
of our region? What has become of the Mesopotamian
country of Iraq? What has become of Syria, the country
of the two caliphates? What has become of Lebanon,
the country of two civilizations? One cannot but
wonder why our principles have been sacrificed on the
altar of alien interests, and we now find ourselves being
killed by Daesh and Israel, in the full glare of the world,
which only records events and reports. We therefore
wonder whether this twofold attack will continue to
fuel tensions in the world. We also wonder about what
remains of international law, international justice and
the Security Council, while we no longer have the rule
of law, justice or security in our region.

Speaking of minorities, one might ask: What
remains of the minorities dignity if they live at the
mercy of the majority's ideolog? If their numbers are
decreasing, this will lead to their culture isolation. And
what if their existence has become the shortest way to
their disappearance? What remains of a minority if it
has declined from 2 million to 300,000 in Iraq and in
Turkey from 15 per cent to 1 per cent? In Bethlehem,
the minority has declined from 85 to 12 per cent, and
in Jerusalem from 52 to 2 per cent. Seven hundred
thousand Christians and Yazidis were forcibly displaced
from Mosul in one fell swoop and two bishops were
kidnapped, without provoking any response. What will
remain of the dignity of minorities if Assyrians are
forcibly displaced as a result of this silence, and if the
sculpture of Sargon of Akkadi, in Mosul, is destroyed?
Moreover, what use is it if the authority of the Lebanese
presidency has been transmuted and the candidates are
scorned to a degree that they become accessible only to
people whose political conscience is not free? Will any
be minority spared if a State is allowed to be created
in the name of Islam, while it is a radical and distorted
interpretation of Islam?

In the light of all this, is it not worthwhile to
operationalize the military option, and something
more than mere air strikes, such as support for those
armies, including our heroic Lebanese army, that are
fighting and dying on the ground? Is it not worthy to
operationalize the mechanism of international justice,
something more than mere a statement, and to truly
support Lebanon's endeavours at the International
Criminal Court? Is that not worth something more than
a meeting of the Security Council? In this respect, we
thank France, whose level of representation reflects the
international concern for safeguarding minorities and
maintaining the dialogue among civilizations.

We are not here to defend groups or religions; we are
here to defend principles and ways of life. Christianity is
a culture of life and a set of human values that belong to
all persons. Do we believe that Christianity can survive
throughout the world in the absence of Christians on
the land of Christ? Can a river continue to flow if its
sources dry up? Can Islam continue if it is distorted in
our region, demonized in the West and is hastily being
massacred in the four corners of the world? Do we
believe that Judaism, if it adopts an insular entity that
is closed off to others, can defend against evil by itself?
Do we believe that freedom means only accepting
those who mock Mary and Jesus and publish cartoons
depicting Mohammad being ravished, while anyone
who uses anti-Semitic slurs is prosecuted?

Do we believe that the notion of integrity is
limited to a mere simulacrum of the Middle Easterners
in the West and the return of Muslims to the Middle
East? Is it not that the very origin of the Violence
among civilizations lies along the two civilization
on the shores of the Mediterranean? The value of
Middle Easterners is resides in their remaining in
the Middle East, thereby preserving its plurality and
diversity. Additionally, that would prevent the various
confessions from being transformed into isolated,
homogenous sects, losing their original identities and
rejecting their humane message, and stop them from
fighting among themselves and clashing collectively
with the West. Such Middle Easterners would not be a
demographic burden to the West. If all the embassies,
interior ministries and airports welcomed the people of
the Middle East, that would protect their them nor their
receivers. Only resistance on their own territory will
preserve our common civilization and community.

We have come here today to ask for more than the
issuing a mere statement; we ask the presidency to
prepare an international draft resolution that would truly
protect the minorities of the Middle East and lay down
geographic and moral red lines. Its implementation
mechanism must include all States, while deterring all
problematic groups. We ask for more than an end to
the encouragement of the constituent communities of
Armenians, Kurds, Turkomans, Circassians, Syriacs,
Assyrians, Yazidis, Shabaks, Sabians and Druzes to
emigrate. We even demand the return of all of those
who were forced to flee from their homes at the hands
of all the extremists since the nineteenth century.

Furthermore, we demand more than contributions
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and more than a trust fund for construction
projects. We demand that an international fund be
established by the United Nations for the reconstruction
of the civilizations that have been destroyed, the return
of peoples who have been forcibly displaced, and
the restoration of cultural heritage damaged in the
laboratory of realpolitik. Leaving home is like cutting
off one's roots. Emigration is isolation from one's
original roots, and we are the roots, the trunk and the
link to our region. We are not ready to be separated
from ourselves.

Israel has been the legitimate father of Daesh for
decades and the one who has instigated war among us,
the builders of civilization and advocates of peace. We
need the Council's help in safeguarding our civilization,
our culture and our identity, and in moving beyond
the focus on our oil and resources. Our friendship,
love, affection, goodness and peace must be won. Our
presence in our own land is an act of faith. We are the
children of faith, yet the Satan Daesh will not defeat us.

