Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank His Excellency the President of
Portugal for presiding over this meeting. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Spoerri,
Ms. Bragg and Ms. Pillay for their respective briefings.

In modern conflicts, all parties in the opposing
camp are seen as the enemy. Therefore, each and every
civilian is directly propelled to the front lines and
threatened with injury or death in a conflict not of his
or her choosing. Protecting civilians against such
dangers is a considerable challenge that individual
States and the international community as a whole
must strive to meet by making the necessary efforts.

The international community has made
substantial progress in the protection of civilians, in
particular by establishing regulatory frameworks. In
practice, however, numerous challenges remain.
Though it is true that effective protection requires a
comprehensive strategy in cooperation with the main
humanitarian actors, the concerned State itself bears
the primary responsibility for protecting civilians. The
State also assumes the main responsibility in ensuring
accountability for serious violations of international
humanitarian law. The international community and the
United Nations must therefore pursue their efforts to
build local capacities so as to help national authorities
to fulfil their relevant obligations to the best of their
ability.

The Security Council has a range of known tools
at its disposal in order to do the job, but it must select
them judiciously, carefully and on a case-by-case basis,
using timely, objective and reliable information.
Indeed, that is what enabled the Council to act quickly
to protect civilians in Libya through its adoption of
resolution 1973 (2011), which was truly exceptional
and a last resort in efforts to confront an imminent
threat.

Lebanon believes that accountability is essential
to ensuring reconciliation among all members of a
society once a conflict ends. We therefore support
efforts to establish the truth in Libya and to punish the
perpetrators of serious violations of international
humanitarian law and the human rights of the Libyan
people. Justice must be done, not only for the sake of
the victims and to help the country leave its culture of
impunity behind, but also to deter future such
violations.

We suggest that international and regional
organizations be given the opportunity to play an
active role in preventing conflicts whenever possible.
That may be the most effective tool for protecting
civilians. It can be done in a number of ways, including
mediation, negotiation and preventive diplomacy.

The fact remains that lasting protection of
civilians can be brought about only by dealing not just
with the symptoms of a conflict, but also with the
underlying reasons for or causes of a conflict. That is
done by supporting national efforts for inclusive
dialogue concerning reconciliation and reintegration.
We also need to concentrate on the assistance to be
provided to States emerging from conflict to help them
reconstruct their security and judicial institutions, as
that can have a positive impact on the rule of law and
the promotion of a culture of protection.

In September, Lebanon hosted the Second
Meeting of States Parties to the Convention on Cluster
Munitions, under the banner "Together for a safer life".
The holding of the Meeting in a country that has been
affected by these weapons, as Lebanon has been,
enables us to highlight the exorbitant humanitarian cost
of cluster munitions to civilians. This cluster munitions
gathering was a space for more than 140 States to
meet. They all participated in the preparation of the
Beirut Declaration, which will contribute to promoting
responsibility and will make heard the voices of the
victims of these destructive weapons used by Israel
against Lebanon in its destructive war of 2006.

In that regard, we reiterate the need to compel
Israel to compensate Lebanon for the losses caused by
these weapons. To date they remain a kind of sword of
Damocles hanging over Lebanese civilians in their
fields and in the daily lives of their children.
