Mr. Van Dunem "Mbinda" (Angola): I will be very
brief. My delegation begs your indulgence, Mr. President,
to speak again because there is some speculation regarding
the alleged official involvement of the Angolan Government
in the Zaire conflict. Some members of this Council this
morning, and others this afternoon, mentioned the question
of Zaire. That is why we feel compelled to provide
clarification to this body.

From the very beginning of the civil unrest in Zaire,
the Angolan Government pleaded for its rapid resolution
and appealed very strongly to the parties involved to choose
the negotiating table as a means to settle their differences.
We also wish to state that this is an internal matter and it
is up to the Zairians themselves to find the appropriate
solution in order to restore peace and security without any
external interference.

Angola has a long record of joining all efforts carried
out regionally in order to resolve and prevent conflicts on
our continent due to their disastrous consequences for the
stability of countries and the well-being of other peoples.

As is well known - and this Council shares these
views - the involvement and contributions of the Angolan
Government in Sao Tome and Principe have helped restore
the interrupted democracy and the State machinery. We
have never been involved in any way whatsoever in other
countries' internal affairs.

Therefore, we strongly oppose and reject the latest
reports suggesting Angola's interference in the internal
affairs of Zaire. We would also like to remind this body
that there were well-known border-crossing activities
before July and August 1975, including the naked
intervention of the Zairian Government alongside the
National Front for the Liberation of Angola (FMLA), to
prevent the proclamation of independence of Angola.
Everyone also knows of the Zairian Govemment' s support
for UNITA to fight against the Government of Angola
ever since Angola became independent, and everyone
knows of the resolutions of this body asking for non-
interference by Zaire in Angolan internal affairs. This
Council has the sustainable proof of this blatant
interference.

The Government of Angola does not think that this
is the time to raise these questions about the Zairian civil
conflict, because the Council is seized of the Angolan
peace process, in which everyone - international public
opinion and the Angolan people in particular - is
congratulating himself on the victory achieved up to now.
We ask the Council to stick to the Angolan question and
leave the question of Zaire, as it is an internal conflict of
that country.

