Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): First of all, let me
join others in paying a very special tribute to the
extraordinary initiative and leadership provided by the
United States during its presidency and by you, Mr.
President, in your capacity as President of the Council. I
believe we have achieved a lot during this presidency.

My delegation would like to give special thanks for
this morning's presentations by President Chiluba,
Foreign Minister Dlamini-Zuma and Ambassador Baali,
in his capacity as representative of the Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity. We also appreciate the
very important statement made by Deputy Secretary-
General Frechette.

 

We believe that the commitment that has been
reaffirmed in this Council Chamber time and again during
the month of January needs to be followed up. Bangladesh
is honoured and proud to be a part of that commitment, and
we would like to follow up on the words that we have
spoken here.

The Security Council is moving ahead well, I believe,
with regard to issues related to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Sierra Leone, but, as has been mentioned by
a number of delegations, we need to also act on the other
pending issues relating to Africa that are before the
Council.
We would like to place particular emphasis on the
follow-up to the meeting we had on 10 January on
HIV/AIDS. I thank you, Mr. President, for circulating to us
the two draft letters that you will be sending to the
President of the General Assembly and the President of the
Economic and Social Council. I believe that those contain
very useful information, including the proposal for the
special session of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS, as
proposed by the Ambassador of Ukraine, joined by other
colleagues.

We believe that the follow-up on HIV/AIDS and the
letter to the President of the Economic and Social Council
provide sufficient basis for us to perhaps convene a joint
meeting of the Economic and Social Council and the
Security Council. I think this is a long-pending idea that
has been raised again and again. I believe HIV/AIDS in
Africa is an issue that can provide us with that opportunity.

We would also like to support the appeal that you
have made, Mr. President, with regard to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for at least a symbolic contribution
by all the Council members for the Joint Military
Commission and the facilitator's office. We would very
much support this. We propose that to take that matter up
formally with our Governments, perhaps a letter from you
to all of us will facilitate our getting these contributions out
of the government process.

Finally, we have heard again and again this morning
in the Council the words "follow-up" - effective, specific
follow-up. I think Ambassador Hamer of the Netherlands
articulated that in a very effective way. We strongly support
this, and we believe we should have a time-bound, specific
follow-up. I would request both your successor as President
and all of us who will be succeeding each other to put
Africa on the agenda in each of the months to come, so that
the January "month of Africa" will be remembered as the
initiator of the "months of Africa".

