Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, allow me at the outset to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and on your exemplary performance at its helm this month.
We should also like to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Cerdenas, on his excellent work last month.

 

It is now a year to the day since the Security
Council met to debate the situation in the occupied
territories following the horrible massacre perpetrated by
an Israeli settler in the Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi mosque in
Al-Khalil. Many delegations, including mine, drew
attention then in this very Chamber to the real dangers
that the Israeli settlements presented to the peace process
in the Middle East.
The question of settlements is certainly not new. In
fact, the international community has consistently
emphasized the illegality of this practice, which the
Israelis have turned into a consistent policy, in defiance
and denial of international law and legality, in particular
of relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly, as well the Geneva Conventions.

The advent of the Middle East peace process
launched in Madrid made it possible to open the way to
what became a tuming-point in the history of the region
following the signing of the Israel-Palestinian accords and
the Peace Treaty between Israel and Jordan. A peace
dynamic thus began, quite rightly giving rise to the
highest hopes throughout the world for an overall, just
and final settlement of the question of the Middle East as
a whole. However, it is obvious that any peace
agreement, no matter how important, presupposes good-
faith implementation, an open mind and willingness for
compromise, as well as the will to achieve peace and the
right attitude. Unfortunately, the opposite has occurred
with the persistence of an attitude comprising lack of
understanding and rejection.

Israel has not stopped the settlements being built as
it ought to have, prior to dismantling the existing ones
completely. Not at all: it is going on building, extending,
developing, although its commitments require it to do the
very opposite without further delay with a view to re-
establishing the normal status quo that prevailed before
the occupation. That was what it was supposed to do in
fulfilment of its commitments within the framework of
the peace agreements and in accordance with international
treaties. And yet, assurances that have been given out by
authorized spokesmen to the effect that colonization
activities have been halted, unfortunately all too soon
contradicted by government decisions that must certainly
pander to the wishes of the very people who are opposed
to peace.

The settlements are a major but not the only obstacle
in the way of tangible progress towards the desired goal.
Others include the withdrawal of Israeli troops scheduled

 

to begin last April and the establishment of arrangements
for holding elections in the self-governing Palestinian
territories that were intended to provide them with the
necessary political institutions for civilized life. These are
the same elections that were supposed to be held last July
too.

What we have seen instead is a succession of reports
that never fail to disturb international public opinion.
Moreover, for over a month now Israel has kept its borders
with the self-governing regions of Gaza and Jericho closed,
thus imposing a veritable blockade. The closure has once
again sank the territories back into despair, with the
concomitant gloomy procession of dire effects on the
economy of the occupied territories and consequently for
the Palestinian attitude towards the peace process.

Reasons of security are adduced and who could fail to
understand such concerns, which are of course legitimate
ones for any State? However, we could well ask ourselves
whether this really is the best way to combat violence and
bring about its end. The most apt answer to this question is
provided by the developments now taking place in the
occupied territories, where the stubborn economic and
social difficulties the Palestinians must wrestle with -
aggravated by the cordon round the territories and by
continued settlement activities, are currently gelling into
frustration, bitterness and disenchantment for the people
there, opening up fertile ground for the extremists opposed
to the peace process.

In any case, the Palestinian Authority has taken
effective steps, thereby showing its determination to
shoulder its responsibilities in the struggle to combat
violence. However, that does not change the fact that the
problems must be tackled right at their roots by putting a
full and final stop to settlement activities, withdrawing the
Israeli troops from the self-governing territories, holding
elections to ground the Palestinian Authority on institutional
foundations, lifting the blockade against the territories and
freeing the political prisoners - in brief, by the
implementation of the agreements between the two parties,
all fair, square and above board. The international
community has every right to demand that Israel meet its
obligations pending an agreement on the ultimate status of
the occupied territories.

International donors and financial institutions are
obliged for their part to honour their commitments to the
Palestinians by stepping up the pace of their economic
assistance to the self-governing territories; in the short term,
this would ease the suffering of the Palestinian people and

 

allow them in time to lay the foundations for their
economy, the sine qua non for consolidating self-rule and,
later, independence.

Tunisia, a peace-loving country, supported the
Madrid process then and continues to do so now. It has
already hosted several meetings of working groups as part
of the multilateral negotiations in which it has been
participating actively. Like all nations, it had great hopes
for this process, in that it opened a new chapter in the
history of the region. Important gains have been made
that must not be lost. Nevertheless, the path to peace is
strewn with obstacles and the process now under way is
meeting various kinds of opposition that can be
neutralized only by speeding up the process towards a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement soon. The
Council and the sponsors of the peace process share the
paramount responsibility for getting it back on track in
order to safeguard the future of peace and stability in the
region.

