Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda): Once again we wish to
congratulate Canada for putting on the Security Council
agenda the consideration of important issues which Africa
wants to see addressed, namely the situation in Angola
under consideration today and the Carlsson report, which
this body examined last Friday. I offer my thanks and
appreciation to you all.

It is a coincidence that I am speaking after the
representative of Zimbabwe, from whom I was expecting an
update on the situation in the region and in his country in
particular. But I do not wish to divert you from today's
topic. May I, with your permission, Sir, welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola and wish him
well.

Knowing what Rwanda has gone through, we know
very well how hard the situation in Angola has been. It
has been a cause of concern to us all for long enough,
and the Security Council's decisive action under Canada's
leadership looks more focused than it has been so far. My
delegation wishes to commend this body and Canada for
that change for the better, as far as Africa is concerned.
We hope that this sign of change will be guided all along
by appropriate research methodology principles and
practices and the rigor they call for. However, nothing
will work if we lose momentum.

Further to, and with reference to, our statements of
15 March and our letter of 29 March, which is a Security
Council document (S/2000/283) dated 4 April containing
my delegation's comments on the report, we wish to
share with the Council that we lost no time in following
up on the allegations made against my country and
President Kagame, including those repeated by the
representative of Zimbabwe tonight. As stipulated in the
penultimate paragraph of our comments in that document,
our authorities and specialized services have thoroughly
investigated the allegations time and again and have come
to the same conclusions: our statements are still valid and
the allegations are false, especially those just made by
Zimbabwe, to include the most recent ones.

That is why, in the spirit of the new draft resolution,
we wish to suggest that further investigations be made
and subsequent updated reporting carried out to supercede
previous ones. Today's draft resolution indeed refers to
recent findings and input from States mentioned in the
report, while calling for more of them in order to gather
more information and comments. We welcome this
reference meant to balance the otherwise biased
reporting - as we said in the document I have mentioned
before. In the same vein, my delegation has no problem
with the establishment of a new team of experts as
proposed in the report, but our reservations are along the
line of our comments: we wish to see the team more
independent, more representative and professionally
unquestionable than the previous team, especially when
Zimbabwe is included.

This inclusive approach will give us all more
chances of objectively knowing the truth and allowing us
to double-check the evidence provided, as compared to
receiving just some repeated allegations as erroneous as
the ones that would mislead this Council in its
 

deliberations. Rwanda wishes to reiterate its commitment to
collaborating with the Security Council and Angola in
finding lasting solutions to the problem of reinforcing the
sanctions against UNITA. We hope that the return of peace
and security to Angola and to the region will at last be
forged through this body's wise deliberations, and we thank
you.

