Mr. Dauth (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to address the Council today.
Ordinarily, I try not to detain the Council, when I speak
here, for more than a few minutes, knowing the great
pressures on the Council's time. But I hope today you
will indulge me with a few minutes more on an issue
which, as the Council knows, is very important for my
country. But I will not be too long, I promise.

Timor-Leste has come a long way, off a very low
base, since achieving independence last year. A great
deal of credit must go to the wise leadership of Timor-
Leste and to the Timorese people, whose energy and
determination stand as the country's greatest national
asset.

The Council itself, and the broader United
Nations Membership, has good reason to be pleased
with the part played by United Nations missions in
Timor-Leste to date. In that context, it would be quite
remiss not to particularly congratulate my friend and
former colleague, Kamalesh Sharma, seated on my
right, for all the extraordinary work that he has done. I
know that he will remain committed, to the very last
day of the present mandate, to making progress in
Timor-Leste.

The United Nations engagement in Timor-Leste
stands as a benchmark and also a pointer to the crucial
work the Organization can do in conflict and post-
conflict situations. Progress achieved to date in Timor-
Leste is real, but it is fragile.

Significant challenges remain ahead of Timor-
Leste - in the security field, in institution-building
and in bringing opportunities to the Timorese people. It
is therefore important that the Council invest some
time over the coming weeks and months in reviewing
the situation in Timor-Leste and beginning to consider

how the international community, separately and
collectively, can best ensure that the progress achieved
to date in Timor-Leste is protected.

Australia welcomes the Secretary-General's
report on the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) (S/2003/944). The report is
well-crafted and well-timed. It accords closely with our
own assessment of the current situation in Timor-Leste
and of the areas that will require further international
attention in the final months of the mandate of
UNMISET and beyond.

It is the latter point I wish to focus on today.
Australia shares the Secretary-General's assessment
that it will not be possible for Timor-Leste to achieve
self-sufficiency in certain key areas of the United
Nations mandate before UNMISET's term expires in
May 2004. That much is clearly evident. Timor-Leste's
security situation has stabilized significantly, but the
legacy of decades of conflict remains and Timor-
Leste's security-related institutions are still weak.
Equally clear is that while much can and is being done
through bilateral and other donor support, there will be
a need for a modest, security-focused United Nations
mission in Timor-Leste after the current Mission's
mandate expires next year.

Members of the Council will be aware of
Australia's keen interest in Timor-Leste's stable future.
After discussion with the Government of Timor-Leste
and other partners, Australia has put forward a model
for a post-UNMISET mission, to be established for a
one-year period by a Security Council mandate. We
hope the model helps focus minds on what might be
required of the United Nations presence in Timor-Leste
after May 2004.

The post-UNMISET United Nations presence
Australia proposes would be fundamentally different in
nature from the missions that have gone before it. At
the centre of the model, in the driver's seat, are the
people of Timor-Leste themselves. The United Nations
role would not be one of traditional peacekeeping but
of providing the back-up support and advice which will
enable Timor-Leste's own institutions to evolve and
stand with confidence. The mission would complement
the ongoing work being done by the Timor-Leste
authorities and their development partners to build
sustainable capacity in Timor-Leste's essential
institutions, including its police and armed forces, and
to lay the foundations for national stability and
prosperity. Above all, it would be small, limited in
scope and focused on specific needs, underpinning the
transition to effective Timor-Leste responsibility. It
would also have a clear end point.

Turning to specifics, Australia shares the
Secretary-General's assessment that post-UNMISET
requirements will include essential support to Timor-
Leste's border security agencies, its police service and
specialized police units, its institutions of Government
and the serious crimes process. On that basis, Australia
has proposed a follow-on United Nations mission,
focused on security and comprised of the following
elements: first, military liaison officers to facilitate
liaison between security authorities across Timor-
Leste's land border and to monitor security-related
developments in the border districts; secondly, an
international police response group to provide back-up
support to Timor-Leste authorities in responding to
emergency civil unrest; thirdly, police observers
deployed lightly throughout the districts to liaise with
the Timor-Leste police and monitor security-related
developments; fourthly, a core of international advisers
to provide counsel to the Timor-Leste Government in
essential security-related areas; and lastly, international
legal experts to work in the office of Timor-Leste's
Prosecutor-General to conclude the priority crimes-
against-humanity caseload.

Australia's rough estimate suggests the cost of
such a mission would be relatively modest:
approximately one tenth the price of the current United
Nations Mission in its final year. We look forward to
seeing detailed costings from the Secretariat in due
course.

Maintaining security and stability in Timor-Leste
will present ongoing challenges for the young State.
Meeting those challenges will require continued effort
over many years, and we all have a part to play.
Essential to success will be continued far-sighted
leadership from the Government of Timor-Leste to
build the foundations of national stability. Crucial also
will be continued support from the international
community, through the United Nations and beyond,
and Australia will continue to do its part. In more
immediate terms, Timor-Leste's stability in the years
ahead will depend on early concerted action by all
parties to resolve the residual problem of Timor-Leste's
displaced people in West Timor and other border
management issues. Australia welcomes recent
renewed efforts by the Governments of Timor-Leste
and Indonesia to resolve these matters.

The history of Timor-Leste's transition to
independence has given the international community
and the Security Council a duty to acquit. The
investment we have made in East Timor could be a
case study of how the United Nations can work well,
how it can make a difference. The modest, short-term
additional commitment we are proposing could make
the difference in securing the success of that
investment. Decisions made in the Security Council
over the coming months will be crucial to preserving
that success.

In closing, I want to endorse the words of the
Secretary-General in paying tribute to the remarkable
personal contribution made to Timor-Leste by my
friend Sergio Vieira de Mello. If Timor-Leste's
transition to independence has been a success story,
that success is due in no small way to Mr. Vieira de
Mello's remarkable leadership. Australia will always
remember him for that and for many other things.

