I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS). I wish to thank you, Minister Maas, for your personal invitation to participate in today's debate. I also want to acknowledge and applaud the leadership of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and the Dominican Republic on the Council. Their work is a testament to the unique and valuable perspectives that small island developing States can bring to bear on the pressing peace and security issues of our time. For the past 30 years, AOSIS has been the single-most consistent advocate on climate. Over that span of time, we have pressed for ambitious action through the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement, which remain today the primary international forums for determining the global response to climate change. There is no doubt that we have turned a corner in our collective efforts with the Paris Agreement, but we have certainly not yet done the same for global warming. Current modelling confirms that global warming could exceed 3째C to 4째C by the end of the century and that small island developing States (SIDS) face the certain prospect of increased loss and damage, the extent of which could render some of our islands entirely uninhabitable. That is why for SIDS the climate calculus is perhaps the most relevant indicator of our development and our security. The good news is that we all have the option to do something about that calculus. In Paris we all committed to taking the emissions curve and bending it towards 1.5째C. We all committed to doing our fair share, and progressively so, with developed countries committing to taking the lead and to making good on their obligations for new and additional financing. We all agreed that we must measure our ambition against the benchmark of protecting the most vulnerable, because we believe in equity and in justice. These principles are foundational to the United Nations and its enduring objectives, which all Member States serve. They are what drive us to advance social progress in larger freedom. They are the compass for every action upon which we deliberate - from development to human rights and peace and security. As the Council deliberates today on its options for improving its capacity to integrate climate considerations into its work, on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States I wish to provide three core messages. First, it is of paramount importance that Member States reaffirm their unequivocal commitment to upholding the Paris Agreement and to taking bold and decisive action to enhance their medium-term and long-term climate plans. AOSIS would welcome a further commitment from the permanent members of the Council to delivering ambitious targets in the communication of their nationally determined contributions for 2020. Secondly, with the impacts of climate change unfolding at unprecedented rates, dealing indiscriminate consequences for the most vulnerable, the Council should promote adaptation as a prevention paradigm, as well as supporting the urgent need to strengthen the international framework for addressing loss and damage. The climate-induced risks to international peace and security and associated humanitarian consequences are emerging and escalating due to the lack of a comprehensive and robust mechanism to address these impacts, which go well beyond our limited capacities to adapt. Thirdly, time is running out and the required institutional responses are lagging. All relevant organs of the United Nations system should be informed and equipped to deal with the worst-case scenarios, respecting their respective roles and mandates. AOSIS has made three proposals for improving the Council's approach to integrating climate-related security risks into its work: apply the best available science; enhance United Nations analytical capacities to assess climate threats; and enhance multi-stakeholder coordination to enable systemic support to the most vulnerable groups in society. These are particularly important as a number of the special political missions deployed by the Department for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs are in the most climate-vulnerable countries in the world. The capacity to conduct comprehensive, in-depth analysis that is specific to the situations in each country is critical for informed decision-making. We welcome progress made across these areas, including the joint initiative to address climate-related security risks, and the toolbox developed by the Climate Security Mechanism. However, we believe there is still room for improvement, particularly in ensuring a more transparent and science-based approach in the guidance. Further actions are also still required to operationalize the four action areas for the United Nations system outlined in line with the Paris Agreement, 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. There is also scope for enhancing the Climate Security Mechanism for better coordination with all relevant stakeholders, including women, youth and indigenous communities, to ensure a more inclusive and integrated approach. I wish to make a final proposal to the Council in light of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The pandemic exposes a whole range of compounding risks that could exacerbate existing vulnerabilities and challenges, including climate change. It has completely shifted the global risk landscape, leaving us severely underprepared to deal with the repercussions. We must draw from lessons learned and adapt the United Nations system to ensure that history does not repeat itself. International research has shown that 75 per cent of ongoing infectious diseases are zoonotic in origin. Hence, we call for a cessation of irresponsible and unethical practices that may cause interruptions to the natural order of ecosystems. We wish to stress that environmental accountability and the safeguarding of our natural heritage are crucial to the survival of humankind and of the planet. Further, in light of the anticipated contraction in the gross domestic product of most countries as a result of this global pandemic, the AOSIS membership reiterates the significance of the promotion of low-emission and ocean-based economic policies as a means to revitalize the global economy. In closing, small islands developing States have expressed a firm and collective call for robust and urgent action to align COVID-19 pandemic recovery and climate action. The resilience we need and system-wide adaptation required to respond to COVID-19 are directly relevant to the resilience we need and system-wide adaptation required for climate change. Moreover, COVID-19 reminds us that human health and planetary health are inextricably linked. We further stress the need for ambitious and urgent actions from all States to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in order to address the biggest global challenge of our time, in line with the Paris Agreement goals and 1.5째C pathway. That ambition has been and remains our red line and it is reinforced by international law. We further call on our developed country partners to marshal the necessary resources so that developing countries, in particular small island developing States, can be assured access to adequate, predictable and additional finance, technology and capacity- building. It is imperative that the commitments and obligations undertaken, whether under the Paris Agreement or other international conventions relating to climate change, be fully implemented. International solidarity and cooperation, multilateralism and_ strong partnerships are more essential now than ever to overcome the multitude of crises we face. We ask all Council members to stand not behind us, but by our side, in the name of equity and justice, as we fight this battle to secure a safer and more prosperous future for the planet and its people.
