The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malaysia.

My delegation welcomes His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and
Ambassador Vlora Citaku back to New York and
thanks them for their statements. We also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zahir Tanin
for his briefing.

Malaysia congratulates Serbia on its formation
of a new Government following the recent general
elections, and His Excellency Mr. Dacic in particular
on his reappointment. We also congratulate Kosovo
for its participation in the Olympic games in Rio de
Janeiro and for winning a gold medal in its first-ever,
and memorable, participation in the Olympics.

Malaysia is encouraged by the improvements in
the political and economic situation in Kosovo. The
economy seems to be steadily recovering, following the
implementation of reform measures on the part of the
Kosovo Government. We call on the leaders of Kosovo
to remain steadfast in implementing the socioeconomic
reforms, particularly in tackling the problem of
unemployment. Those reforms are especially important
in view of Kosovo's aspiration to achieve European
integration, with a view to promoting peace, stability
and prosperity for Kosovo and the region.
On the political front, Malaysia has noted in
the report (S/2016/666) of the Secretary-General a
significant reduction in the number of violent protests
by various parties in Kosovo. Such protests had featured
prominently in prior reports of the Secretary-General.
We also welcome the progress made in the integration of
judges, prosecutors and support staff from the Serbian
judicial system into the Kosovo system, as part of the
15-point Brussels Agreement in 2013.

We urge both sides to further intensify efforts to
implement the outstanding commitments set out in
the Brussels Agreement by engaging constructively
with each other in a spirit of dialogue and cooperation.
In particular, we wish to see further progress
on establishing the association of Serb-majority
municipalities, on the energy and telecommunications
sector and on the opening of the Mitrovica bridge.

Malaysia commends the ongoing efforts by the
Kosovo Government to counter terrorism, violent
extremism and radicalization. With regard to the latest
developments during the reporting period, we welcome
the Assembly of Kosovo's adoption of the law on
preventing money-laundering and terrorist financing.
With regard to the Kosovo Specialist Chambers, based
in the Netherlands, we note that the court has not yet
started functioning, as it is currently awaiting approval
from the Netherlands Parliament.

Malaysia sees value in the call for a reduction in
the frequency of the Council's meetings on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We concur with the view that the situation
in Kosovo does not merit the current level of attention
on the part of the Council. We are also concerned at
the unproductive exchanges we often witness in the
Council Chamber regarding the issue of Kosovo, which
runs contrary to the necessary spirit of reconciliation,
constructive engagement and normalization of relations.

Lastly, I join my other colleagues in reaffirming
support for UNMIK, which continues to play a key role
in promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo. We also commend the leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the important role of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the Kosovo Force in
ensuring peace, security and the rule oflaw in Kosovo.
I now rcsumc my functions as President of the The meeting rose at 12.25p.m,
Security Council.
