Sir David Hannay (United Kingdom): I should like
to begin by extending a very warm welcome to the Foreign
Minister of Mozambique, His Excellency Mr. Leonardo
Simao. It is a great pleasure to see him here and to have
had the opportunity to listen to his important and
encouraging statement.

The holding of free and fair elections in Mozambique
in October last year represented a historic achievement for
the people of Mozambique and for the international
community. We pay tribute to the people of Mozambique,
whose will for peace overcame all the obstacles, and who
exercised their right to vote in such impressive numbers
and in such a responsible manner.

The United Nations Operation in Mozambique
(ONUMOZ) has been a success of which the United
Nations can be justly proud. Its peace-keepers, military
observers and civilian police made a vital contribution to
the sustaining of peace and security throughout the country
as it made the difficult transition from civil war to multi-
party democracy. The Electoral Division and the many
international and national electoral observers contributed to
the effectiveness and credibility of the electoral process. My
Government warmly congratulates the Secretary-General,
his Special Representative, Mr. Aldo Ajello, and the
thousands of men and women who worked within the
United Nations Operation in Mozambique on their skill and
dedication. It is important that the lessons learned and the
experience gained from ONUMOZ be put to good use in
other United Nations peace-keeping operations.

The United Kingdom is proud to have played its part
in support of the peace process, including bilaterally
through assisting in the formation and training of the new
armed forces and the provision of electoral observers, and
through the assistance offered by the European Union,
about which the Permanent Representative of France,
speaking later in this debate on behalf of the European
Union, will say more. The United Kingdom will, to the best
of its ability, continue to support the people of Mozambique
in their efforts to reconstruct the economic and social base
of their country.

The international community has done much to help
the people of Mozambique over the last two years, and its
assistance will not come to an end when ONUMOZ is
terminated on 31 January. But it can only help. It cannot
determine the future of Mozambique; only Mozambicans
can do that. If they show the same spirit of national
reconciliation as they amply demonstrated in the two
years from the signing of the Rome Accords to the
holding of the elections, then the future will be bright.
We look to both the Government and the democratic
Opposition in Mozambique to work closely together to
this end. If they do so, they can be assured of the full
backing of the international community.

In conclusion, I would offer one New Year
resolution to the new democratically elected Government
of Mozambique - namely, that never again should this
Council have on its agenda, as we have today, an item
entitled "The situation in Mozambique". That would
indeed be an achievement for the Government and people
of Mozambique and for this Council.

