Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome you, Madam President, as you preside over
this meeting which clearly has particular significance.
I believe the message is clear to all States of the
world. I also would like to join others who preceded
me in congratulating women all over the world on
International Women's Day. I would like as well to
thank the special representative of the Secretary-
General and Ms. Angelina Nyajima Simon Jial, founder
of Hope Restoration South Sudan, for their briefings. I
would like to address three basic issues.

First, with regard to the political developments,
we are pleased at the progress made by the parties to
the Revitalized Agreement for the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan. We hope that the parties to the
agreement will complete the pre-transitional process by
next May, as agreed and with the participation of all
peacemakers, including women, for whom we are today
celebrating the International Women's Day. We hope to
ensure the continuous active participation of women, but
we should not be concerned only with the participation
of women on this occasion, but all stakeholders.

We welcome the return to Juba of various political
leaders who are parties to the agreement, as well as
the reunification efforts made by factions of the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement. We look forward to
welcoming at our next meeting the joining of other
non-signatory parties to the Revitalized Agreement.

Secondly, the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), our meeting today
comes at a critical and sensitive time for UNMISS. As
the security situation continues to improve in Juba and
most parts of South Sudan, UNMISS has to continue
protecting civilians and supporting the political
process. Kuwait supports that trend and appreciates
the flexibility and cooperation of the United States
delegation during the ongoing negotiations on the draft
resolution to renew the Mission's mandate.

We cannot but to thank once again South Sudan's
neighbouring States, especially countries of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development that
have sought to achieve and support peace and want
to continue participating in the Regional Protection
Force. We welcome that participation as long as it is
within the standards that apply to any of the Mission's
troop- and police-contributing countries and under its
unified command.

Thirdly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
we welcome Mr. Shearer's reference to returns from
protection-of-civilians sites. That is a positive and
encouraging indicator that gives hope for the continued
return of displaced persons and refugees in a safe,
dignified and voluntary manner, with the support of
the Mission and its partners and with the efforts of
Ms. Jial's organization.

We condemn once again child recruitment and
sexual violence in conflict by any party, while stressing
again the need to achieve justice and support survivors
of such crimes. We are concerned at the continued
fighting in Central Equatoria. We hope that guarantees
will be forthcoming that will ensure the free movement
of the Mission, in keeping with the status-of-forces
agreement, thereby allowing it to fulfil its mandate.

Peace remains our only option. The current
Agreement represents an opportunity for South
Sudanese politicians to revive hopes in that young
country and to break the cycle of conflict and death.

