Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, I should like to extend my great appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for your distinguished role in
guiding the Security Council this month. I should like
also to thank Ambassador Wehbe of Syria for having
led the work of the Council last month.

It is indeed deplorable that the Government of
Israel is continuing to engage in inhuman practices and
repeated violations of international humanitarian law
against the Palestinian people in the occupied Arab
territories, despite the international efforts made to
consolidate stability and to put an end to the tragedy of
the conflict in the Middle East, which has now assumed
a very tragic dimension under critical and complex
international conditions.

The aerial bombing carried out by Israel two days
ago in the middle of the night took the lives of 15
martyrs, including those of nine children, injured more
than 150 innocent civilians and destroyed many houses.
It is clear evidence of the policy of collective
punishment and indiscriminate use of force by the
Israeli forces against unarmed Palestinian civilians.

Israel's continued application of its systematic
policy of destroying the infrastructure in the occupied
Palestinian territories and its killing of innocent people
is destroying the lives of the people of the region.
Israel's imposition of a curfew further exacerbated the
suffering of the people there. It did all of this under the
pretext of preserving Israel's security and combating
terrorism, even though it is actually Israel that created
and nurtured terrorism throughout the region. Israel has
continued its inhuman practices, resorting to
indiscriminate violence against unarmed civilians.

Israel's violations of international humanitarian
law continue, even after the entry into force of the
International Criminal Court earlier this month. State
terrorism by Israel falls within the mandate of the
Court. The fact that Israel is making a mockery of the
international community is a matter that should be
taken up by the Court.

The political timing of that heinous operation and
the use of combat aircraft to kill civilians, including
women and children, shows the true nature of Israel's
policy, which is to negate international efforts by the
"quartet" and by the Arab countries to arrive at a
comprehensive and just peace on the basis of
implementation of international law, including Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), the
Arab initiative approved at Beirut, the Madrid
Conference and the principle of land for peace.

Kuwait fully supports the claims of the
Palestinian people. Kuwait believes that the Council
should shoulder its responsibilities and urge Israel to
implement all the relevant resolutions of the Council as
quickly as possible, with a view to lifting the blockade
imposed by the Israeli forces on Palestinian towns and
holy sites, as well as the siege on the legitimate
Palestinian leaders, and to ensure that the Israeli
Government complies with all the agreements
concluded with the Palestinian Authority.

In this connection, we call on the "quartet" and
the international community to continue their efforts to
bring pressure to bear on Israel so that it will comply
with the relevant resolutions and with international law.

In conclusion, let me say that we should
emphasize the importance of the Security Council's
following up the question of the conflict in the Middle
East until a definitive solution is found that puts an end
to Israeli occupation of all occupied Arab territories,
including the Syrian Golan and the rest of Lebanese
territory, and leads to the creation of a Palestinian
State, with Jerusalem as its capital, since any
arrangement that does not include these particular
measures would be a threat to peace throughout the
region.

