Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Mali is grateful to you, Madam President,
for having convened this public debate on the report of
the Panel of Experts on Liberia. We welcome the fact
that Mr. Captan, Liberia's Minister for Foreign Affairs,
is participating in the debate.

We would like also to thank Ambassador Kishore
Mahbubani, Chairman of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1343 (2001) concerning Liberia,
for introducing the report. Through him, we would like
also to thank the members of the Panel of Experts for
the important work they have done. We would also like
to thank Mr. Edward Tsui of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for introducing
the Secretary-General's report of 5 October 2001.

We have studied carefully the report of the Panel
of Experts, and I should like to offer three series of
observations.

First of all, I should like to emphasize that Mali,
like other members of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), attaches special
importance to the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1343 (2001).

Our position - which is based, inter alia, on the
clear commitment by the members of ECOWAS to
promote peace and security in the subregion - has
been translated into concrete action. In accordance with
our undertaking to induce Liberia to change its conduct
at the regional level, ECOWAS sent two missions from
our Mediation and Security Council to Liberia - in
addition to a visit by its Executive Secretary - in
order to verify that measures had been taken by the
Liberian authorities to meet the demands of the
international community.

Those missions were followed up each time by
recommendations, such as the one on the establishment
of a mechanism to monitor the implementation of
sanctions. In the view of my delegation, such a
mechanism could have been very useful to the Panel of
Experts in its investigations. In this connection, we
would like to hear the views of the Panel on how useful
such a mechanism could be.

Secondly, I should like to comment on the
humanitarian situation in Liberia. The Secretary-
General's report of 5 October 2001 discusses
extensively the humanitarian situation, which is indeed
disturbing, even shocking. Eight years of a horrifying
civil war have bled the country dry, destroyed the
economic infrastructure and had a devastating impact
on the most vulnerable sectors of the Liberian
population. Did the sanctions imposed under resolution
1343 (2001) contribute to exacerbating this situation,
inter alia, through a decline in international assistance,
an absence of growth and continued fighting in Lofa
County?

In any case, the Secretary-General's report of 5
October 2001 draws attention to the impact that
eventual additional sanctions could have on Liberia,
and particularly on the most vulnerable sectors of the
population. Indeed, strengthening the current sanctions
regime through sanctions on the Liberian timber
industry, rubber sector or maritime registry could, in
the view of the Secretary-General, have a negative
impact on employment, social services and State
revenues.

Thus, to preserve the credibility of the sanctions
regime and attain the objectives sought, it is essential
that we do as the Secretary-General suggests and
envisage the creation of a mechanism that would
periodically evaluate their impact on the humanitarian
and economic situation in Liberia.

It is also essential that, as ECOWAS has
recommended, international assistance to Liberia
should resume. We fully support the proposal to hold a
constructive dialogue with the relevant funds and
programmes, and we encourage the Security Council to
maintain its engagement vis-a-vis Liberia and its
people.

We also hope that the international community
will offer its full support to strengthening the capacity
of aid organizations, including non-governmental
organizations.

Thirdly, I should like to stress the need to put in
perspective the positive developments that have taken
place in the Mano River Union area.

As the report of the Panel of Experts indicates,
encouraging diplomatic efforts are under way at the
regional level to improve bilateral relations among the
three member States of the Mano River Union.

In this connection, my delegation welcomes the
major efforts recently made by the Liberian
Government to improve its relations with Guinea and
Sierra Leone. We hope that the decisions and
recommendations emanating from the subsequent
ministerial meetings will be implemented, thereby
helping to restore confidence and stability in the
subregion.

Along those lines, it is also essential to continue
to develop a true partnership between ECOWAS and
the Security Council, thereby promoting a regional
approach to conflict settlement, for we believe that
sanctions alone cannot restore peace in West Africa, or,
indeed, anywhere else. Moreover, sanctions are not the
only means available, nor are they necessarily the best
solution available to us.

Resolution 1343 (2001) has most definitely had a
positive impact. The Security Council must now
carefully consider the conclusions and
recommendations of the Panel of Experts. In this
connection, we note that the Panel studied the diamond
industry in Liberia and called on Liberia to acquire a
credible and transparent certification scheme. We
support that recommendation, because it would
facilitate the consideration by the Security Council of a
temporary suspension of the diamond ban and also
would ease the hardship that artisanal miners, brokers
and dealers are experiencing. We encourage Liberia's
bilateral and multilateral partners to provide the
technical and financial assistance needed to set up such
a programme.

Concerning the travel ban, my delegation has
always advocated swift responses to requests made to
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1343
(2001).

With respect to the recommendation on the
continued monitoring of compliance with resolution
1343 (2001), my delegation would appreciate it if the
Panel of Experts could tell us more about how a
mechanism such as the one proposed in paragraph 66
of the Panel's report would work with the Liberia
sanctions Committee.

