Mr. Londofio-Paredes (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish): At the outset, I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We know very well that your competence and
abilities will mean success for the Council's deliberations.

We are pleased that the Security Council, on the
initiative of the delegation of Argentina, is considering the
question of consultations between it and countries that
contribute troops to peace-keeping operations. This
reflects the interest of many other States in this issue. My
delegation supports every effort to advance the search for
transparency in the work and decisions of the various
organs of the Organization, and particularly of the
Security Council.

However, we believe that, although the proposed
arrangement for consultations is a step in the direction of
addressing the urgent need of an efficient coordinating
mechanism for troop-contributing countries, it should be
seen as an interim measure pending the deeper solution of
a broader problem. Such a solution should emerge from
the Working Group on the reform of the Council or the
Working Group on the Strengthening of the United
Nations System.

In deciding to establish the Working Group on the
Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase in
the Membership of the Security Council, the Organization
recognized the need to enhance transparency within the
Security Council. Transparency is essential for ensuring
that the Council's decisions have the requisite legitimacy,
given their great importance, and transparency will, to a
large extent, determine whether the effective and efficient
implementation of mandates is viable.

In regard to the proposed consultation mechanism,
we have a few comments to make. Although the
mechanism aims at broadening the participation of
Member States in the discussions on peace-keeping
operations, it also, unfortunately, reinforces the tendency
to make them exclusive instruments of the Security
Council, thereby marginalizing other main organs of the
United Nations. We believe that efforts to enhance
transparency in the Council should proceed from the
premise that it is necessary to strengthen the role of the
General Assembly on issues of international peace and
security. It is highly unadvisable to deny an organ

 

authorized to order the deployment of peace-keeping
operations the ability to contribute to their success.

As to the Secretariat, we believe it advisable for it to
retain the role of Co-Chairman it enjoys in the current
arrangement for informal consultations. We see no
advantage at all in diminishing the role of the organ
responsible for implementing operations. We also believe
that, for reasons of cohesion and geographical
representativity, it would be advisable for the mechanism to
be co-chaired by the President of the Security Council. In
the event that this involved an excessive workload for the
President, alternatives could be considered. For example,
the Co-Chairman could be the State that had occupied the
presidency of the Council in the preceding month.

As for the proposal that the consultation mechanism
should be a subsidiary organ of the Security Council, it is
our View that it is not necessary or advisable to have
recourse to Article 29 of the Charter. A mechanism such as
the one proposed requires flexibility, and, moreover,
nothing would be gained simply by making it more formal.
It would be better for a decision of this kind to be taken
after the Working Groups have completed their work. The
consultations could then be part of a comprehensive
package of measures.

Lastly, just as the proposed mechanism provides that
its Chairman should report to the Council on the views
expressed at each meeting, we believe that he should report
also to the General Assembly, and just as regularly.
