Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Jan Kubis, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
for presenting the report (S/2013/535) of the Secretary-
General. Through him, I should like to commend all
the staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the country team for their
support for the efforts of Afghanistan. I would also like
to thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his update on
the efforts undertaken by his country to face up to the
challenges it faces.

The Secretary-General's report gives an account
of the genuine momentum on the political front as
witnessed by the preparations for the presidential and
provincial elections in 2014, which will be a prelude
to the launch of the transformation phase that will
begin with the end of the presence of the International
Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan. That will
be both a decisive stage in the history of the Afghan
people and a determining factor in the stability of the
entire region.

We welcome the progress made in the process
of organizing the elections, first and foremost the
appointment of the Chair of the Independent Election
Commission and the law governing the holding of the
elections. The Independent Election Commission's
approval, on 31 July, of the operational plan for the 2014
elections and its endorsement of the United Nations
electoral support project are important steps that should
be welcomed. The international community should
support those efforts, not just during the electoral
process but also during the post-electoral stage and in
the course of the withdrawal of international forces in
2014.

Afghanistan continues to face security challenges,
including terrorist acts as witnessed by the 23 per cent
increase from 2012 to 2013 in the number of civilians
killed, including 78 children. The Government is
pursuing its efforts to build its forces, with a view
to assuming its responsibilities in this area. That is a
burdensome and demanding task. The establishment
of a community policing force, the putting in place of
a special trust fund to support an integrated approach
to justice and the rule of law in Afghanistan, and the
expansion of the community policing programme
are concrete measures conducive to contributing to
the peaceful holding of elections and improving the
security situation in the long term.

Afghanistan's level of stability has an impact on
its neighbours. It is reassuring to see the development
of regional cooperation among the countries of the
region based on solidarity and with a view to helping
Afghanistan move towards stability, democracy
and development. Through Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif, Pakistan has given an indication of good-
neighbourliness and cooperation in addition to its
humanitarian gesture to continue to host on Pakistani
territory, until 31 December 2015, camps for registered
refugees.

The Kingdom of Morocco welcomes the efforts of
Afghanistan to integrate into the regional economic
landscape, as attested to by its joining the Energy
Charter Treaty on 7 July, thereby becoming the fifty-
fourth member, as well as the progress made with regard
to the gas pipeline project involving Turkmenistan,
Afghanistan, Pakistan and India. This is a positive
step towards regional economic integration. That
commitment to regional cooperation and integration
was also reflected at the meeting ofCouncil ofMinisters
of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, which
reaffirmed its support for an independent, peaceful,
neutral and prosperous Afghanistan that is free from
terrorism and drug crime.

My country welcomes this dynamic of regional
cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbours.
This is a major milestone in moving successfully after
2014 towards an Afghanistan that takes its destiny in
its hands and builds a democratic society where there
is reconciliation and respect for human rights. The
assumption of such responsibility by Afghanistan
nevertheless requires - as everyone who has spoken
before me has emphasized e support on the part of
the international community and the United Nations,
before and after the 2014, so as to make Afghanistan's
stability permanent.

