Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me join you,
Mr. President, in congratulating and welcoming
Ambassador Cohen. We very much look forward to
working with him closely.

We thank all three briefers for their very thorough
and factual presentations. We wish to express our
deep appreciation to them and their teams for their
tireless efforts aimed at ensuring peace and stability
in the Central African Republic, given all of the
very challenging circumstances. Their presence and
participation here in the Chamber is the best example
of the excellent cooperation we enjoy with regard to the
Central African Republic between the United Nations
and the regional organizations. It is also an excellent
example of the cooperation that can exist between the
European Union and the African Union.

Let me also offer our most sincere condolences

over the loss oflife among Blue Helmets. All attacks on
the peacekeeping personnel are unacceptable, and we
hope that the perpetrators will be identified and held
accountable. For Poland, as a Vice-Chair of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the safety and
security of peacekeeping personnel continues to be the
top priority.

Poland welcomes the progress made so far in the
political process under the leadership of President
Touadera. We applaud the support provided by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
and the African Union, as well as the engagement of
regional and subregional actors, in advancing the
mediation and reconciliation process. We consider the
African Initative for Peace and National Reconciliation
to be the main framework for resolving the crisis in the
Central African Republic. It is crucial that the process
include all political, social and ethnic groups, as well as
the representation of women. We commend the progress
made by the panel of facilitators on consultations with
armed groups, and remain positive that the Initiative
could enhance the peace process in the country and
lead to a lasting agreement.

Unfortunately, despite some positive developments,
the security and humanitarian situation in the country
has not improved. We strongly condemn repeated acts
of violence targeting civilians, humanitarian workers
and peacekeepers. We are also concerned about the
increase in incitement to ethnic and religious hatred and
violence. Such activities result in numerous casualties
and impede the peace process and economic recovery.

Poland welcomes the efforts made by the
Government and local communities to further enhance
security measures, curb criminality and support
reconciliation mechanisms, but much still remains to
be done. We commend the Central African Republic
authorities for the progress made in the establishment
of a Special Criminal Court that would investigate
allegations of war crimes and crimes against humanity
during more than a decade of ethnic and religious
conflict in the country. Those efforts bring hope for
the possibility of breaking the cycle of revenge and
violence in the Central African Republic and show
the determination of the Central African Republic
authorities in constituting a credible, legitimate and
reliable judicial system.

It is extremely important to stop impunity and
restore State control throughout the entire country.
With regard to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga's briefing, we also
welcome the progress in setting up the magistrates. In
our View, the return of public administration throughout
the country's territory is crucial for ensuring the long-
term stability of the Central African Republic, as
building institutions based on the principles of good
governance and the rule of law is key for economic,
social and political development.

The fragile situation in the Central African
Republic shows that comprehensive support from the
international community is essential. In that context, we
strongly believe that the active support of MINUSCA
for the progressive redeployment of the Central
African Armed Forces, trained by the European Union
Military Training Mission, is crucial. Transparent and
coordinated cooperation among all international forces
in the Central African Republic is a critical means for
ensuring a unified approach to the operationalization of
the Central African Armed Forces and its compliance
with the highest standards.

In conclusion, Poland praises the important work
carried out by MINUSCA, the European Union Military
Training Mission and other international partners in
the Central African Republic. I would like to assure
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga and his entire team of our full
support for his efforts.

