Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of America): I join others in thanking Under-Secretary-
General Tanaka, Director-General Pfirter, Mr.
Zlauvinen and Mr. Schmitz for their briefings today.
The activities of the international organizations they
represent contribute greatly to States' implementation
of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006), and we
hope that our discussion today strengthens the
relationships among us and furthers our collective
efforts. We appreciate the opportunity for the Council
to focus on promoting implementation of resolutions
1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006) and to highlight its
resolve to counter the proliferation of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons, their related materials and
their means of delivery.

The threat posed by weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) in the hands of terrorists or rogue States is
one of the gravest dangers facing the planet, and in
adopting resolution 1540 (2004) the Security Council
sent a warning and an ultimatum to the broad range of
facilitators of proliferation.

Unfortunately, Iran has yet to heed that warning
or make the strategic decision to cooperate with the
international community and end its pursuit of a
nuclear weapons capability. The report by the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) which the Council received yesterday makes
clear that Iran has not complied with Security Council
resolution 1737 (2006), thereby highlighting the
Iranian regime's continued defiance of the international
community. This marks the second time that Iran has
failed to comply with a resolution of the Security
Council. The report also describes Iran's failure to
cooperate fully with the IAEA's investigation and
reiterates that, in addition to Iranian cooperation being
long overdue, certain Iranian actions are hindering the
IAEA's ability to verify the purposes of Iran's nuclear
programmes.
07-24806

That is unacceptable. As resolution 1737 (2006)

indicates, the Security Council should be prepared to

take additional appropriate measures to communicate

to the Iranian regime that its non-compliance is
unacceptable and to persuade it to cooperate.

States' actions to implement fully resolution 1540
(2004) form an important part of international efforts
to deny terrorists access to weapons of mass
destruction and to ensure that States seeking to develop
a nuclear or ballistic missile capability in violation of
international obligations will not succeed. In that
regard, we also recognize and support the efforts of the
Security Council and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to promote States'
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) through
the activities set forth in resolution 1673 (2006).

We appreciate the chance to share the experience
that the United States has gained in our own
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). For
example, consistent with the resolution's requirements
concerning proliferation finance, President Bush, in
June 2005, issued Executive Order 13382, which
establishes a targeted financial sanctions programme
that blocks the assets of designated WMD proliferators
and their support networks. It also prohibits United
States nationals and others within the jurisdiction of
the United States from engaging in transactions with
those to whom the United States has applied such
sanctions. We have created a special 1540 coordinator
in the State Department, who works with many
relevant agencies on implementation. Last May we
completed a national action plan for implementing
resolution 1540 (2004).

The United States would like to ensure that 2007
is the year of 1540 implementation. To do that, States
must establish clear national priorities and develop
national implementation plans, and begin to act upon
them. We stand ready to work with other States to
identify and share lessons learned and best practices
concerning implementation. At last week's 1540
implementation workshop of the Regional Forum of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
which the United States co-sponsored along with
Canada and Singapore, we were impressed to hear
about the many developments that States in that region
are pursuing to promote their own implementation. The
United States is providing significant assistance to
States working to implement resolution 1540 (2004)
fully, and we welcome and are prepared to consider
additional requests for such assistance.

The 1540 Committee's website lists the assistance
that the United States is offering both bilaterally and
multilaterally. For example, our export control and
related border security programme has budgeted almost
$132 million since 2004 for training, equipment and
infrastructure development related to 1540
implementation. In 2007, that programme is sponsoring
workshops on resolution 1540 (2004) with outreach
partners in Oman, Kenya and Tanzania and in the
Caribbean and Central and South America. As well as
providing funding to the IAEA for its activities to
support 1540 implementation, we provide joint training
and assistance with the IAEA to IAEA member States.
Similarly, the United States and the Organisation for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) have a
long-term relationship in providing advice and
assistance to enable States parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention to comply with their obligations
under that treaty.

Today's debate also highlights the ways in which
the Security Council can enhance its cooperation with
organizations like the OPCW, the IAEA and the World
Customs Organization in promoting 1540
implementation. We urge the Council to urge United
Nations Member States which may need assistance
with 1540 implementation to avail themselves of the
assistance the IAEA and the OPCE provide to
strengthen national legal, regulatory and institutional
infrastructures related to non-proliferation, nuclear
security and chemical weapons. The Council should
encourage the 1540 Committee, the IAEA and the
OPCW to consider how they might enhance their
respective relationships, with a view to identifying
activities that could enhance States' fulfilment of their
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004).

For the IAEA, activities relating to the nuclear
security programme might be particularly appropriate.
And for OPCW, cooperation on activities such as
technical assistance visits could be especially
productive.

I thank you again, Mr. President, for organizing
today's debate and for your leadership role on this
important issue.

