Mr. Soumare: I thank you for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the situation in South
Sudan, Mr. President. Since the Council has already
had the benefit of listening to Mr. Mogae's briefing
and will soon hear from Assistant Secretary-General
Simonovic, Iwill focus my comments on key operational
developments in South Sudan and the efforts that the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) is
making to implement its mandate.

I would like to start by expressing the Mission's
concern about the outbreaks of violence at our
protection-of-civilians sites in Malakal, which have
resulted in civilian deaths. I should emphasize that the
United Nations strongly condemns any infringement
by armed elements on the civilian character of our
protection sites. As we speak, UNMISS uniformed
personnel are taking robust measures to strengthen
physical security within and around the site, while
humanitarian partners are working to resume the
delivery of essential services. Meanwhile, we are
engaged at all levels with the Government, the
opposition and the national security forces, as well as
within communities themselves, in order to address
the underlying factors and avoid a resumption of
violence. Unfortunately, civilian-on-civilian violence,
complicated by the presence of armed elements,
continues to occur frequently within these sites
and underscores the challenge the Mission faces in
sustaining them.

Violence continues in many regions of the country,
including areas that had previously been relatively
calm. A particular worry is the deteriorating security
situation in Western Bahr El Ghazal, particularly around
Wau, which has escalated during the past 48 hours.
Fighting between the Sudan People's Liberation
Army (SPLA) and organized armed groups in the area
continues to threaten civilians and has resulted in a
steady influx of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
into Wau. Meanwhile, action taken by the SPLA to
arrest and confront armed groups in Western Equatoria
in December and January has led to widespread
population displacement, with as many as 7,500 IDPs
seeking protection in the compound of an international
non-governmental organization near the UNMISS base
in Yambio at the height of the displacement.

Elsewhere, as discussed in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2016/138), the rise in
intercommunal violence in Jonglei, Warrap and Lakes
remains a concern. In Jonglei, recent weeks have also
seen a resurgence of dormant intercommunal clashes
between the Lou Nuer and the Murle. Meanwhile, an
internal leadership struggle among the Murle has led
to a number of clashes, particularly in the Pibor area.

In response to such shifting conflict dynamics,
the Mission has adopted a more agile force posture
in its efforts to protect civilians affected by violence.
UNMISS is focusing on projecting a physical presence
away from its bases in Bentiu, Bor, Juba, Malakal and
Wau through long-duration patrols and temporary
operating bases in areas where insecurity is high. That
includes the establishment oftemporary operating bases
in Leer and Mundri, which, along with the deployment
of an additional company to Yambio, have strengthened
the Mission's presence in Western Equatoria. In the
Greater Upper Nile region, the Mission plans to deploy
a regular troop presence on the west bank of the Nile,
as well as within Malakal, with a focus on creating
conditions that will enable IDPs to relocate voluntarily
from the Malakal protection site. To strengthen physical
security in Juba, the force has attempted to institute a
24/7 presence aimed at protecting civilians and United
Nations personnel. However, night patrolling within
the city has been constrained by the SPLA.

As the violence continues, the humanitarian needs
continue to rise. An estimated 6.1 million people
across South Sudan are in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance as a result of interlocking threats, including
armed conflict and intercommunal violence, economic
decline, disease and climatic shocks. Insecurity and
poor road conditions are also damaging the ability
of the United Nations to pre-position humanitarian
supplies before roads are made impassable by the
coming rainy season.

Despite the urgency of the task of meeting these
needs, the Mission and its humanitarian partners
continue to have to deal with significant constraints
on their operations, including regular instances in
which personnel are denied freedom of movement,
as well as other Violations of the Mission's status
of forces agreement with the Government, which
we have regularly reported to the Council and our
Government counterparts.

These concerns underscore the urgent need to
make progress in implementing the peace Agreement.
To that end, Ms. Loj, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, has been utilizing her good offices
to support the work of Mr. Mogae, the Chair of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (JMEC), and
to engage with the parties on establishing transitional
institutions. She has been convening a regular forum
for international partners and friends of South Sudan
aimed at consolidating support for the JMEC's efforts,
a critical need that the Chair just highlighted in his
statement. UNMISS also serves as a member of the
JMEC partners group, which seeks to strengthen
the engagement of regional and international JMEC
members. The group issued a statement on 18 February
fully supporting the decisions of the JMEC, while
calling on the parties to grant unfettered access to
humanitarian actors and ceasefire monitors.

From an operational standpoint, UNMISS has
been supporting the eight monitoring and verification
teams of the ceasefire monitoring mechanism, while
supporting the deployment of additional teams to other
critical areas. While the parties are still in the planning
phase for the establishment of the Joint Operations
Centre and Joint Integrated Police, UNMISS has
conceptualized a preliminary training regime that
can be implemented once the Joint Integrated Police
is operationalized.

As President Mogae stated, it is of critical
importance that the parties move ahead with the
formation of the Transitional Government of National
Unity. Nonetheless, we must remember that its formation
is but the first of many interlocking steps forward
towards fully implementing the peace Agreement.
Once the Transitional Government is formed, it will
need to be empowered to operationalize the institutions
of transition.

Above all, the Transitional Government must act
to put an end to the ongoing violence that continues
to displace and harm civilians, while also disrupting
the delivery of critical humanitarian assistance to the
people of South Sudan. The Transitional Government
must also take urgent action to address the impact of
economic decline, which, compounded with severe
food insecurity, has left tens ofthousands of vulnerable
people on the brink of humanitarian catastrophe. Only
the full implementation of the peace agreement, with
clear peace dividends for the people of South Sudan,
will help bring stability to the country.
