Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I commend
the presidency of Senegal for bringing to light the
asymmetrical threats that United Nations peacekeepers
face today, deployed as they are in very hostile
situations where there is no peace to keep. We strongly
condemn the deadly attack yesterday in northern Mali
that claimed the lives of Malian civilians and killed one
peacekeeper from Togo while injuring seven others. We

convey our heartfelt condolences to the Governments of
Mali and Togo in connection with this tragic loss oflife.

In our assessment, seven of the current United
Nations peacekeeping operations face a higher
incidence of asymmetric and violent threats that have
resulted in a larger number of fatalities. Today's hybrid
peacekeeping operations are all the more vulnerable
and therefore urgently require a systematized plan to
reduce the higher risk by adapting existing approaches
or creating new strategies.

The Secretary-General's report on the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) noted that United
Nations peace operations are not appropriate tools for
military counter-terrorism operations, and we agree
that the United Nations is not equipped to carry out such
operations. At the same time, it is in asymmetric threat
environments that the United Nations plays a Vital role in
protecting civilians and facilitating preventive political
processes. The test is not in delivering a decisive
military response but in supporting and strengthening
preventive multi-stakeholder interventions that avert
instability, promote good governance and sustain peace.

The key to success is thus to address head-on the
drivers of terrorism and violent extremism rather than
merely manage the symptoms. Therefore, a number
of areas for strategic and operational improvements
should be addressed so as to navigate more safely and
effectively in such hazardous environments.

To begin with, it is of key importance to improve
understanding of the political and historical context
in the planning of missions, before deploying troops.
This is all the more necessary in the case of hybrid and
multidimensional missions with numerous components
that are in demand in critical situations. These efforts
have to be accompanied by efforts to offer technical and
programmatic support to institutions in order to build
and consolidate the rule of law and reform the security
sector, in addition to the most important component
of preventive diplomacy. We are ready to share our
valuable experience in that field.

It is essential that peace operations have clear
mandates and be adequately resourced so as to ensure
safety and security. To combat asymmetric threats,
it is essential today to strengthen anti-improvised-
explosive-device training and to stress the greater
provision of anti-mine vehicles.

Missions should have the ability to adequately
monitor what happens in their environments by
deploying intelligence capacities. The introduction of
new technologies such as unmanned aerial vehicles,
used solely for surveillance purposes, situational
awareness and life-saving purposes for both United
Nations personnel and local populations, has shown
beneficial and lasting results.

Kazakhstan is a responsible Member State and one
committed to peacekeeping. It is deploying its military
personnel to the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in the Western Sahara and United Nations
Mission in Cote d'Ivoire. There are plans to augment its
contribution in the future by deploying its contingent.
My country stands ready to support the United Nations
peacekeeping operations in being effective and efficient
in fulfilling their tasks.
