Mr. LeWicki (Poland): Let me thank all our
briefers - Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller,
Assistant Secretary-General Mohamed Khaled Khiari
and Director Agnes Marcaillou. First of all, in the
context of recent developments, let me reiterate that
there is no military solution to the conflict in Syria, and
any sustainable solution to the conflict will requires
a genuine political transition. Allow me also to echo
Ms. Mueller's words in stressing that the Syrian people
deserves and expects a political solution finally to
bring an end to the violence and let them live their lives
in peace and safety.

We remain deeply concerned by the negative impact
of recent developments on the humanitarian, political
and security situation in the region, especially taking
into consideration possible impacts ofa Turkish military
operation. I will focus on those three dimensions of the
consequences of a Turkish military operation.

First, regarding the humanitarian impact, the
current situation in Syria already has dramatic
consequences for civilians, as highlighted by previous
speakers. Many civilians are trapped in the conflict.
The safety of thousands of civilians, including children
and humanitarian personnel, is under threat. There
have already been reports of civilian deaths and
injuries, including among children. Let me stress that,
according to civil society organizations operating in
the area, thousands of children are spread across three
camps in the north-east. Those children - almost
half of them under the age of 5 and the majority under
12 - rely completely and exclusively on humanitarian
aid. Any interruption to camp services, which are
already overstretched, would put their lives at risk.

Let me again to reiterate, as we have stressed
on a number of occasions in this Chamber, that all
parties must fully comply with their obligations under
international law and international humanitarian law,
including the principle of the protection of civilians,
which means, among other things, the protection of
civilian infrastructure and avoiding the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas. It is also an obligation
under international law to ensure safe and unhindered
access to humanitarian aid, as well as the free and
unhindered movement of civilians fleeing violence.

Let us also recall that summary executions, which
are reported to have happened after the incursion
started, are serious violations of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law that
may amount to war crimes. All reports of such alleged
violations should be investigated and the perpetrators
must be brought to justice.

Secondly, let me turn to the political impact. We
remain concerned about the potential impact of recent
military operations on the political process under the
auspices of the United Nations, since they have the
potential to undermine the progress achieved so far by
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Pedersen, especially his work on the Constitutional
Committee. Poland underlines its commitment to the
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian

State, which can be assured only through a genuine
political transition in keeping with resolution 2254
(2015) and the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) negotiated by the Syrian parties within the
United Nations-led Geneva process.

We take note of the agreement reached by Turkey
and Russia in Sochi and hope that its provisions will
translate into long-term de-escalation and the tangible
stabilization of the situation in north-east Syria. We
underline that the parties bear responsibility for the
safety of the civilian population in the area, including
the Kurds, in accordance with their obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law.

We also wish to stress that Turkey remains a key
partner for the European Union, a NATO ally and a
critically important actor in the Syrian crisis and the
region, including as a crucial member of the global
coalition. We expect Turkey to act responsibly and
with a long-term perspective in the context of the
Syrian conflict.

Thirdly, let me turn to the security impact. Last
but not least, we are concerned that prolonged military
escalation in north-east Syria might contribute to
the further destabilization of the broader region,
already in immense turmoil. We are receiving very
disturbing reports of the escape of an unknown number
of fighters of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) from prisons in the area. That undermines the
progress achieved by the global coalition and creates an
environment conducive to the resurgence of ISIS.

Let me now turn to the issue of mines. It goes
without saying that we commend the United Nations
Mine Action Service for its efforts aimed at alleviating
this problem in Syria. Sadly, explosive remnants of war
were recorded as the leading cause of child casualties
in Syria during the second half of 2018, accounting for
almost 500 reported deaths and injuries, which were
completely unnecessary. Explosive weapons continue
to be used indiscriminately and systematically in
populated urban and rural areas, particularly affecting
internally displaced persons and those voluntarily
returning to unsafe areas. Clearing contamination is
therefore essential and constitutes a first step towards
ensuring the safe return of a civilian population, who is
suffering the most as a result ofthis devastating conflict.

In conclusion, I want to recall Poland's position on
the safe return of Syrian refugees who have fled their
homes. A durable solution for Syria should ensure the
security of a sustainable, dignified and voluntary return
of Syrians to their country of origin, in accordance with
international law and the principle of non-refoulement.
Finally, we fully support the renewal of resolution 2449
(2018), allowing for cross-border delivery of assistance,
because, in our view, it is necessary so that all these
people in Syria can simply survive.

