Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Last month the Israeli forces, in the name of
antiterrorism, indiscriminately killed innocent civilians
in the Jenin refugee camp. They demolished houses
and infrastructure in cities, resulting in humanitarian
tragedy. The international community was deeply
shocked and has firmly demanded the establishment of
the facts surrounding events there. The Secretary-
General proposed the setting up of a fact-finding team,
which was endorsed by the Security Council. Israel
promised to cooperate fully with the team. The
Secretary-General and members of the team worked
tirelessly in preparation to go to Jenin to find out the
truth.

Regrettably, however, Israel reneged on its
promise by placing a variety of obstacles to the
dispatch of the team, thus making it impossible. Israel
must assume all the responsibility for this. As a
Member of the United Nations, Israel failed to keep
faith by flouting the purposes and principles of the
Charter and by failing to implement the Council
resolutions. China condemns Israel for this.

The violent Israeli-Palestinian conflict clearly
shows that the Middle East question, including the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, must be settled through
political negotiations and by peaceful means. Resort to
military means by countering violence with violence
will lead nowhere.

Thanks to the international community's efforts, a
viable framework for achieving a just, reasonable and
lasting settlement to the question of the Middle East
has been put forward. The framework includes, inter
alia, the restoration of the Palestinian people's
legitimate national rights and its right to establish an
independent State. The framework also includes the
guarantee of Israel's security and peaceful coexistence
between Palestine and Israel, as well as the Israeli
withdrawal from all the territories occupied since 1967
and the normalization of relations between Arab States
and Israel. The Israeli and Palestinian sides and the
international community should work together to make
the political framework a reality.

China supports the efforts of the Secretary-
General, the "quartet" and the international community
to ease the critical situation in the Middle East with a
View to promoting a political settlement. At present,
the Palestinian people are facing extreme economic
hardships and a dire humanitarian situation. The
Palestinian Authority has been subject to severe
devastation. We support the Secretary-General's appeal
to the international community to provide emergency
humanitarian and other relief to Palestine.

