Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this very important open debate on children and armed
conflict and for the submission of the concept paper
(S/2011/409) on this topic.

Azerbaijan aligns itself with the statement
delivered today on behalf of the European Union. I
would like to make a few additional remarks in our
national capacity.

We reiterate our commitment to continuing to
support the activities of existing United Nations
mechanisms and other relevant international actors
aimed at ensuring more effective protection for the
rights of children and improving the situation of
children affected by armed conflict. Azerbaijan's
determination with regard to the issue under
consideration is obvious and stems from our keen
interest to contribute to the achievement of sustainable
peace and development and from our practical
experience in addressing the impact of armed conflict
on civilians, including children.

The war unleashed against our country and the
military occupation of our territories have had a
considerable impact, inter alia on the humanitarian
aspect of the problem, and primarily affect the most
vulnerable groups. Azerbaijan continues to suffer from
having one of the highest number of refugees and
displaced persons in the world, large numbers of whom
are children. The most serious crimes of international
concern have been committed during the conflict, and
even children have not been spared.

In its relevant resolutions adopted in 1993 in
response to the occupation of Azerbaijani territories,
the Security Council referred specifically to violations
of international humanitarian law, including the forced
displacement of large numbers of civilians in
Azerbaijan. The European Court of Human Rights later
arrived at an important conclusion, qualifying the
behaviour of those carrying out the incursion into the
territory of Azerbaijan as acts of particular gravity that
could amount to war crimes or crimes against
humanity.

In spite a formal ceasefire, deliberate attacks by
the occupier against Azerbaijani civilians and civilian
objects, in contravention of applicable international
law, have become more frequent and violent over
recent years, resulting in the killing and maiming of
many inhabitants residing near the front lines,
including children.

The issue of children and armed conflict has been
inscribed firmly on the international agenda, and a
strong normative framework has been developed.
Important steps have been taken to achieve
accountability for grave child rights violations.
However, serious challenges remain. More resolute and
targeted measures are required to protect children in
situations of armed conflict and to end impunity for
genocide, crimes against humanity and other egregious
crimes perpetrated against children. Furthermore,
particular consideration should be given to internally
displaced children in the context of ensuring their
inalienable right of return, and to the implications for
22
the protection of child rights of illegal policies and
practices in situations of foreign occupation.

Another challenging issue requiring urgent action
is that of children taken hostage and reported missing
in connection with armed conflict.

Azerbaijan will continue to contribute to
identifying long-term and sustained solutions to this
problem and to focusing on the ways and means by
which the international community can address
existing challenges, including in particular violations
and abuses committed against children in situations of
armed conflict and measures aimed at bringing to
justice those responsible for such violations.

