Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States is deeply disappointed by the failure of
the Council to adopt this draft resolution. The draft
resolution would have been a strong and urgently needed
statement by the Security Council about the need for
change in Burma, whose military regime arbitrarily
arrests, tortures, rapes and executes its own people,
wages war on minorities within its own borders and
builds itself new cities, while looking the other way as
refugee flows increase, narcotics and human trafficking
grow and communicable diseases remain untreated.

The deteriorating humanitarian and political
situation in Burma affects, first and foremost, the people
of Burma. Today the United States reiterates its support
for them. However, we also believe that the situation in
Burma does pose a risk to peace and security beyond
its borders. On Monday, when the Council met with the
Secretary-General, delegations here called on the
international community - and here I borrow an
expression from one of my colleagues - to "grasp the
challenge of development, security and democracy and
human rights in a holistic manner", and for the
Security Council to act in cooperation with the other
organs of the United Nations. The draft resolution we
just voted on would, in our View, have done just that.

The draft resolution would have contributed to
stability in the region by providing its clear support for
the Secretary-General's good offices mission, which is
intended to provide a framework for constructive
dialogue between the United Nations and the Burmese
regime leading to concrete progress. Under-Secretary-
General Gambari specifically asked this body for our
support. We are disappointed that today we have been
unable to respond to his request.

However, while Council members may have
disagreed over whether this body should address the
situation in Burma, there is no disagreement over the
urgent and compelling need for tangible change in
Burma. We agree on the importance of the Secretary-
General's good offices mission in promoting peaceful
change in Burma and on the need for the Burmese
regime to take prompt and concrete action on the
requests made by Under-Secretary-General Gambari in
his two visits to Burma - specifically the initiation of
an inclusive national political dialogue representing all
parties and ethnic groups, the release of all political
prisoners, including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the
cessation of military violence against ethnic minorities
and the loosening of restrictions on the work of
international humanitarian organizations in Burma.

We count on all Council members, including
those who did not vote in favour of the draft resolution,
to use all their influence to press the Burmese regime
for change. We must all recommit to supporting the
Secretary General's good offices mission and to
convince the Burmese leadership to respond in a
concrete and positive way to these moderate and
achievable goals. If the Burmese leadership chooses to
take these steps, it will find the United States and other
Council members ready and willing to cooperate.

The problems in Burma cannot be ignored. The
United States will continue to work throughout the
United Nations system to try to address the deplorable
conditions in Burma.

