Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
thanking you, Sir, for scheduling this open debate on
the situation in Somalia. My delegation considers it
timely, particularly in view of the ongoing Somalia
National Peace Conference. Let me also thank the
Under-Secretary-General, Sir Kieran Prendergast, and
the Permanent Representative of Djibouti for updating
us on the latest developments in the Djibouti peace
process.

The prolonged suffering of the Somali people -
subjected to terror and intimidation - and the
unbridled collapse into statelessness must stop. Today,
more than 300,000 deaths, a near total destruction of
the social and economic infrastructure, a vast majority
of unschooled children and a raging famine-like
situation are the essential features of Somalia. Seen in
this context, the bold and untiring efforts of Djibouti,
led by President Guelleh, deserve our all-round support
and admiration. We fully endorse his initiative and
those of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development in seeking a political solution to the
crisis in Somalia.

President Guelleh's approach is significant in
many ways. Marking a new beginning, it has placed the
Somali people and civil society at the centre of the
peace process, as represented by various groups. As
against the previous attempts at power-sharing between
the warlords, which proved unsuccessful and yielded to
anarchy, the Djibouti initiative seeks to build on what
has been achieved. Yet, it does well not to accord a
special status to certain entities in respect of
participation in the process. The reason for taking this
course is clear, as this should be a matter for the people
of Somalia to decide. We consider this approach to be
sensible and constructive. Apart from being inclusive,
the process is also designed to glean ideas and inputs
from the Somali diaspora. We support these principles.

The Somalia National Peace Conference began on
2 May with a well-detailed plan. We are pleased to note
that the initial objective of reconciliation among the
clans through their elders was largely achieved through
informal, albeit long, consultations.

Work on the core issue has begun with the
formation of three committees to deal with issues such
as the return of illegally occupied land and property,
the election of members of Parliament, the status of
"Somaliland" and the status of Mogadishu as the
national capital.

It is disturbing to see attempts at blocking the
peace process by those whose criminal behaviour and
utter disrespect for human rights is the prime reason for
the current state of affairs in this country. We strongly
condemn the continuing attacks on the civilian
population by the warlords and their armed groups.
Fearful of losing their grip on illegal power as signs of
confidence gradually return to the Somali people, many
of the warlords have voiced opposition to the peace
process. There are reports that the movements of those
who would be willing to participate in the Peace
Conference have been hindered. We should condemn
such behaviour in one voice and call upon those
responsible to stop such attempts to scuttle the peace
process.

One factor out of many which has all along
contributed to the worsening of the situation in Somalia
is the wanton smuggling of arms. The outbreak of
conflict elsewhere in the Horn has had a catalytic effect
on the influx of illegal arms. In this regard, we call
upon all States to cooperate with the relevant sanctions
committee of the Council in making the arms embargo
more effective.

Before concluding, let me touch upon the other
problem that has long afflicted Somalia - that is, the
combined effect of drought, disease and environmental
degradation, which is perpetuating an endemic
humanitarian crisis. The international community
should do everything possible to ameliorate the
situation while the peace process moves forward,
creating conditions favourable to that end. We also
underline here the absolute need to ensure a safe
operating environment for the aid workers, who have
put their lives at risk to save those of others.

Djibouti has mounted a monumental effort from
its position as a small and developing country. The
stakes are high, and we would not like to see this fail.
We therefore call for a clear indication of support to go
out from the Council. To that end, we fully endorse the
presidential statement that we will adopt later today.

