Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his report
on Darfur (S/2006/591 and S/2006/591/Add.1). The
period covered by the report has seen significant
developments - some of them positive - that should
be taken into account by the Security Council. These
include, in particular, the Darfur Peace Agreement and
the renewal of diplomatic relations between the Sudan
and Chad. Legal and judicial measures have been taken
by the Government of the Sudan to prosecute those
who have committed crimes against humanity.
Decisions have also been taken with respect to power-
sharing, wealth-sharing, and violations of human
rights. Yet, although the Darfur Peace Agreement was
signed by the Sudanese Government and was
welcomed by the international community, some
parties have refused to sign it. Because of those
factions, violence has resumed, especially in the north,
on the borders with Chad. That poses a threat to peace
and security, as well as to the future of the Agreement.
It is also an obstacle to the provision of humanitarian
assistance by international organizations and non-
governmental organizations. All of this constitutes a
threat to peace and security in Darfur and throughout
the region.

It seems clear to us that the true obstacle to
lasting peace comes from the activities of those
factions which refuse to sign the Darfur Peace
Agreement and reject it. From the very outset, our
position has not changed; all of our statements in the
Security Council on the African Union Mission in the
Sudan (AMIS) demonstrate our support for that
mission. AMIS has done excellent work; this reflects
the concern of African Union members to find a
solution to the problem of Darfur.

We reiterate that we must increase financial and
logistical support to AMIS, making use of the
resources of the United Nations. That request received
no favourable response until the report of the
Secretary-General was issued, requesting all financial
and logistical support necessary for AMIS, so that it
would not fail due to a lack of such support. The
Security Council has been clear on that, and the
General Assembly should follow up by providing that
support, if we truly want to ensure peace and security
in Darfur and throughout the region.

The Government of the Sudan has put forward a
comprehensive plan of action for Darfur that includes
many positive elements. However, the Security Council
has completely ignored it and has not studied it
seriously. On the contrary, the plan was ignored in
resolution 1706 (2006). Once again, we call on Council
members to study the plan and to reach an agreement
with the Government of the Sudan on the situation in
Darfur. We hope for a successful initiative that will
open diplomatic channels to dialogue. We must avoid
the threat of sanctions, which would undoubtedly
complicate matters.

The situation prevailing in Darfur requires
consultations in good faith and a determination to
persuade - and to create a climate conducive to
successful negotiations and true peace in Darfur.
06-51559

Finally, I join those who have offered their
condolences to the delegation of the United States on
the fifth anniversary of the terrorist attacks of 2001.

