Mr. Al-Moualem (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to commend you, Sir, on
convening this meeting of the Security Council on the
maintenance of international peace and security under
the theme "Settlement of conflicts in the Middle East
and North Africa and countering the terrorist threat in
the region".

The Charter of the United Nations confers upon
the Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. What
has the Council done to combat terrorism, which is
seen in Syria and Iraq and now is spreading to other
countries of the world? What has the Council done to
implement its resolutions, especially resolutions 2170
(2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015), so as to help our
people, who are paying a high price with their own
lives and through the destruction of their heritage?
What has the Council done for the men, women and
children suffering from terrorism in Syria? What has it
done to stop the countries that are supporting terrorism
and facilitating the members of Daesh, Al-Nusra and
other armed groups affiliated with Al-Qaida, which are
committing atrocious crimes in Syria and Iraq? If we
compare the current situation of those groups to what it
was before those resolutions were adopted, I think we
would be right in asking whether the resolutions have
constrained their actions in any way. And the answer
to that is no. In fact, these armed groups have been
strengthened. They are more powerful, brutal and cruel
and they are better armed.

Let us review what some of the permanent members
of the Council have done in that regard, in leading
an international coalition. What has that coalition
achieved, one year after it was formed and close to a
year since it began its air strikes, which we have heard
about but whose results have not really been apparent?
The answer is that those countries are conducting their
actions in the name of a strategy that is supposedly
aimed at destroying Daesh in Iraq and Syria. But its
real aim is quite different, and the evidence for that
is that these organizations have become stronger.
They are better financed and armed and, as I have
already said, more brutal than ever. The countries
that support and finance those groups have continued
to finance, protect and support them. Those countries
include, in particular, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Qatar and
other Western countries well known to the Council.
Those who really do want to fight terrorism in Syria
should coordinate and cooperate their efforts with the
Government of Syria, whose army and military are
fighting terrorism and doing their duty by protecting
the people against the terrorist groups.

The actions of the United Kingdom and France
in Syrian air space are contrary to the Charter of
the United Nations and international law, as well as
a flagrant violation of Syria's national sovereignty.
Those who genuinely wish to combat terrorism must
coordinate their efforts with the Syrian Government.
What we heard today from the representative of France
clearly illustrates the true role that France has played in
supporting terrorism. Such sentiments are inappropriate
and should be considered unworthy of a permanent
member of the Security Council. The international
community is already aware of the destructive role that
France has played in Libya.

On the other hand, we strongly endorse the initiative
of President Putin, who has called for the creation of a
regional and international coalition to fight terrorism,
as personified by Daesh and the Al-Nusra Front,
in order to put an end to the very existence of those
groups, with, of course Syria's essential participation.
We urge the countries of the region to comply with the
Security Council's resolutions on combating terrorism,
in a preventive, defensive role, and to join with this
coalition. In that regard, I fully endorse Foreign
Minister Lavrov's comments on the launch of military
action against terrorism in Syria, at Syria's request and
again in coordination with the Government.

Syria will continue its fight against the terrorism
represented by Daesh, the Al-Nusra Front and other
Al-Qaida affiliates, regardless of the price we may
have to pay. I would like to urge the Council to fight on
the side of truth and implement its resolutions so that
we can put an end to the influx of terrorists coming to
Syria to build what they call a caliphate. That caliphate
will not end at the borders of Iraq or Syria. The leaders
of the movement have stated clearly that they want to
conquer Mecca and the whole of Europe. If we do not
confront them, their atrocious crimes will not emd at
the borders of Iraq, Syria or Libya. They will spread
everywhere, and the terrorists will come knocking at
the doors of those who supported them.

