Mr. Mammadov (Azerbaijan): Let me join
previous speakers in expressing our thanks and
appreciation to you, Madam President, for having
convened this debate, the topic of which is of particular
interest to my country. We are also grateful to Denmark
for having prepared the non-paper containing very
valuable and straight-to-the-point reflections about the
role of the Security Council in strengthening the rule of
law in international affairs.

We would like to express our appreciation to
Mr. Michel, the Under-Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs, and to Judge Higgins, President of the
International Court of Justice, for their valuable
contributions.

International law, as a set of universal norms and
principles, constitutes the very foundation of inter-
State relations. Our ultimate goal today is to achieve
peace and security, which cannot be fully attained or
guaranteed without respect for the rule of law at both
the national and international levels.

In accordance with the United Nations Charter,
the Security Council is the principal organ entrusted by
the Member States with primary responsibility for the
06-4010]
maintenance of international peace and security. Thus
the Security Council is at the forefront of strengthening
international law in the maintenance of international
peace and security, through its effective application
and implementation.

In 1993, when Azerbaijan became the object of
military aggression and when its sovereignty and
territorial integrity were violated, the Security Council
reacted promptly and decisively by adopting four
resolutions: resolution 822 (1993), resolution 853
(1993), resolution 874 (1993) and resolution 884
(1993). The Security Council reaffirmed the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, the
inviolability of its international borders and the
inadmissibility of the use of force for the acquisition of
territory. Each resolution unequivocally demanded the
immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal of
the occupying forces from all occupied territories of
Azerbaijan and the creation of safe conditions for the
return of refugees and displaced persons to their place
of permanent residence.

Azerbaijan has yet to see those resolutions of the
Security Council implemented, although their
provisions established a clear-cut mechanism for
monitoring their implementation. In particular, a
request was made to the Secretary-General, the
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Chairman
of the OSCE Minsk Conference to report to the
Council on the progress of the Minsk process and on
all aspects of the situation on the ground, in particular
on the implementation of the relevant resolutions.

Regrettably, none of the fundamental principles
of international law affirmed by the Council with
respect to the aggression and continued occupation has
ever been respected.

Azerbaijan has appealed several times for the
fulfilment of the resolutions' demands. In 1994
Azerbaijan requested the dispatch of a United Nations
fact-finding team to the occupied territories to verify
the status of the implementation of the resolutions.
However, that request has gone unanswered.

In 2003 Azerbaijan once again urgently appealed
to the Security Council and the Secretary-General to
take all necessary steps to ensure compliance with
those provisions. The Security Council has at its
disposal a wide range of tools to promote compliance
with its decisions. The fact that the Security Council
06-4010]

did not ensure the implementation of its resolutions has
resulted in the prolongation of the conflict, the
aggravation of the situation on the ground and the
further jeopardization of the peace process. The
continued occupation has profound and devastating
implications, given that illegal activities such as the
exploitation of natural resources and the destruction of
historical and cultural monuments have taken place in
the occupied territories. Moreover, the illegal transfer
of settlers has been carried out for the purpose of
changing the pre-conflict demographic situation. All
those activities represent grave violations of the norms
and principles of international law, in particular
international humanitarian law.

Azerbaijan has repeatedly provided information
about the illegal settlements, the misappropriation of
natural resources and the demolition of Azerbaijani
historical and cultural monuments in the occupied
territories.

Following the discussions held in the General
Assembly on 23 November 2004, conducted at the
initiative of Azerbaijan, the OSCE fact-finding mission
visited the occupied territories of Azerbaijan from 30
January to 5 February 2005 and confirmed the illegal
transfer and settlement of more than 17,000 people.

Despite all the difficulties it has faced and the
continued occupation, Azerbaijan has always adhered,
and continues to adhere, to the principle of a political
settlement of the conflict, on the basis of the relevant
provisions of international law, in particular Security
Council resolutions and OSCE decisions.

The role of the Security Council in strengthening
the rule of law is indispensable, especially when it
comes to the prevention and resolution of armed
conflicts. Respect for the law and its application is a
value we share and our common responsibility. The
international order must not be imperilled by the
selective application of international law. Justice and
the rule of law must not be compromised or held
hostage to narrow political interests.

