Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
strongly condemns the terrorist attacks that took
place in Egypt on 9 April and expresses its deepest
condolences to the victims. We would also like to
express our condolences to the families of the victims
and the injured. China is resolutely opposed to terrorism
in all its forms and firmly supports Egypt's efforts to
combat terrorism.

I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening today's debate. China listened carefully
to the briefing of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honore.

In February, with the support and assistance of the
international community, Haiti successfully held its
presidential election. The new Government has now
started its work smoothly. The Haitian National Police
is becoming more robust, the overall situation in Haiti
is stable and new opportunities are arising for national
development. China hopes that all parties in Haiti will
jointly maintain this positive momentum and contribute
to the overall stability and development of the country.

We hope that the new Government in Haiti will
identify a development path that fits its national
situation; accelerate infrastructure, agriculture and
other major sectors of development with a view to
eradicating poverty, creating more jobs, improving
livelihoods; and promote the fundamental resolution
of all issues in Haiti. China expects the international
community, including countries of the region, to
continue to contribute to improving the situation in
Haiti, help the Haitian Government in building the
capacities of the Haitian National Police, and support
the Government's efforts to bear responsibility for
maintaining national security and stability. At the
same time, we hope that the international community
will provide more humanitarian assistance to help
hurricane-stricken areas in Haiti to rebuild.

Recently, Secretary-General Guterres
recommended that the mandate of United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) be
extended for a final period of six months and that a
smaller, successor peacekeeping mission be established
at that time. That is recognition of the Haitian
Government's ability to maintain stability and in line
with developments on the ground and the expectations
of all parties. China supports the recommendations of
the Secretary-General and hopes that MINUSTAH will
withdraw in an orderly manner, while ensuring stability
in Haiti.

MINUSTAH has played an important role in
maintaining security and stability in Haiti since 2004.
China commends MINUSTAH'S contributions and the
positive efforts of Ms. Honore as head of MINUSTAH.
China hopes that the international community will
actively respond to the new approach of the United
Nations to cholera in order to help Haiti eradicate the
epidemic as soon as possible.

