Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): At the outset, I should like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. We are confident that, under your able
guidance, the Council will successfully undertake its
many duties and responsibilities during this final
month of what has been an astonishing year in many
respects.

Allow me to also express my appreciation to
Presidents Robinson and Khan and Prosecutors
Brammertz and J allow for their detailed reports on the
work of the Tribunals (S/201l/716 and S/201l/731)
and on the progress achieved and challenges faced in
the implementation of their completion strategies.

Furthermore, we thank Judge Patrick Robinson
for his distinguished service as President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and welcome Judge Theodor Meron
as its new President. Having known Judge Meron for a
long time, we express full confidence in his ability to
successfully master the many challenging tasks ahead
of him.

Croatia strongly supports the efforts of the
Tribunals to undertake all measures within their power
to expedite their proceedings as part of the
implementation of the completion strategy for the
finalization of their work and their transition to the
Residual Mechanisms. At the same time, that transition
must not in any way affect the Tribunals' mandates or
the due process standards on which their procedure is
based.

Croatia closely follows the possible emergence of
new jurisprudence founded on the Tribunal's
judgements, as well as the lively academic debate
about its possible effects on and consequences for
future criteria for the legitimate use of force in
preserving international peace and security. In that
respect, we would like to stress the importance of a
thorough analysis of this complex matter. As a nation
that contributes troops to United Nations- and NATO-
led operations, we care about and pay close attention to
any possible new jurisprudence that could jeopardize
the ability to wage legitimate and effective military
actions aimed at preserving or fostering international
security.

Croatia also welcomes the fact that Ratko Mladic'
and Goran Hadzie, indicted for the worst atrocities
committed in Europe since the Second World War,
have been brought to justice necessary HadZic' during
this reporting period. That represents a great
achievement not only for the Tribunal but also for
international justice in general. It is powerful
testimony to the fact that impunity for grave breaches
of international humanitarian and human rights law
will not be tolerated.

The European Parliament's acceptance on
1 December of Croatia's request to become a member
of the European Union (EU), the subsequent decision
of the European Council to welcome Croatia to the EU
and the upcoming signature of the accession treaty by
the Republic of Croatia all testify to Croatia's
readiness and ability to fully and unconditionally fulfil
all of its international obligations and commitments. In
that context, Croatia continues its unwavering
cooperation with the Tribunal, as is confirmed by the
report before us today (see S/2011/716).

With regard to the request by the Office of the
Prosecutor for missing documents, let me stress that
Croatia fully complies with the Trial Chamber's
decision on this matter. We are pleased that Prosecutor
Brammertz has recognized Croatia's cooperation
regarding the remaining cases before the ICTY by
saying that "Croatia has given timely and adequate
responses and provided access to witnesses and
evidence as required" (ibid., para. 55). We also count
on the cooperation of all relevant United Nations
bodies in the search for the sought documentation, in
line with the testimony given by United Nations
military observers in The Hague.

Croatia is deeply committed to the process of
reconciliation in the former Yugoslavia and firmly
believes that the prosecution of all those responsible
for violations of international humanitarian law is a
necessary precondition to achieving that goal.
However, such prosecutions cannot come at the
expense of the historical facts. Subversion of the facts
only leads to further division, further tension and the
creation of additional grievances.

With regard to Prosecutor Brammertz's oral
assessment earlier in this meeting, in which he claims
that "State officials at the highest level in Croatia
continue to glorify illegal wartime conduct and
question the impartiality of ICTY judgements", Croatia
categorically rejects those characterizations as
unfounded and unacceptable. At the same time, expert
opinion on this issue should be freely expressed and by
no means be seen as questioning the impartiality of
ICTY judgements.

Croatia therefore fully supports regional
cooperation in the area of war crimes. We are confident
that such cooperation should be carried out on well-
established principles of international criminal law and
in full observance of respective national jurisdictions
and competences. Likewise, cooperation should be
based on full compliance with the basic principles of
legitimate procedure and on the implementation of
internationally recognized methods for the collection
of evidence.

Finally, let me conclude by stressing that my
country has thoroughly developed its cooperation with
the Tribunal in all vital areas, and we are determined to
continue that cooperation until the fulfilment of the
Tribunal's mandate.

