Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for
his briefing and the Permanent Observer of Palestine
and the Permanent Representative of the State of Israel
for their statements.

We are holding this open debate at a time when the
situation in the Middle East continues to be of serious
concern to the international community. Regarding
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, while we welcomed
the resumption of direct negotiations between the
Israelis and the Palestinians with the aim of arriving
at a definitive settlement of the conflict, today we
remain somewhat disappointed with the slowness ofthe
negotiations. What is worse, the violence continues on
both sides, rendering the achievement of any progress
in the negotiations hypothetical.

That is why Togo urges the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities to maintain the course of the direct
negotiations and to stop resorting to acts that damage
any possibility of settling the conflict. It is why we urge
the Israeli authorities to continue to act in ways that
promote confidence, such as releasing 26 Palestinian
common-law criminals from prison on 13 August,
issuing new permits enabling Palestinian to travel in
Israel and authorizing the importation of construction
materials into Gaza, as well as easing measures
announced on 25 September by the Minister of Strategic
Affairs, regarding the lifting of some restrictions in
the occupied Palestinian territories. We also hope that
construction of new colonies will end and the embargo
on the Gaza Strip will be lifted.

By the same token, we ask Hamas, which continues
to administer the Gaza Strip, to cease all acts of
provocation and to control the armed groups that shoot
rockets into southern Israel. Hamas's engagement
alongside the Palestinian Authority in the peace process
would be an added guarantee of success in the talks on
a general settlement of the Palestinian question.

Given that the international community bases its
hopes on pursuing direct negotiations between the two
parties with the goal of achieving two viable States
living in peace and security and within internationally
recognized borders, Togo urges the friends of Israel
and Palestine, as well as all the sponsors of the peace
process, to spare no effort in supporting the current
negotiations so as to arrive at a lasting peace between
Israelis and Palestinians. In that regard, we hope that
the return of United States Secretary of State John
Kerry to the region, said to be in the next few days,
will help the two parties to make meaningful progress,
despite the obstacles that litter the road to peace.

Concerning Syria, we would like once more to
commend the newfound unity of the Security Council,
which succeeded in creating a mechanism that has
enabled a successful start to the process of dismantling
Syria's chemical arsenal. Verifying the initial
information received from the Syrian Government, and
bringing Syria's chemical weapons under international
control and destroying them, are major achievements,
and we welcome them. In that regard, Togo commends
the commitment and efforts of the Secretary-General
and the Director General of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for
establishing a Joint Mission tasked with definitively
relieving Syria of its chemical weapons, in accordance
with resolution 2118 (2013). Togo is also pleased that on
11 October the Norwegian Nobel Committee decided
to award the Nobel Peace Prize to the OPCW in
recognition of its commitment to eliminating chemical
weapons in Syria and everywhere else in the world.

The destruction of Syria's chemical weapons should
not, however, overshadow the ravages that the war
continues to inflict on the country through massacres,
arbitrary arrests and detentions and horrendous human
rights violations such as rape and sexual violence, as
well as the recruitment of children.

Togo again condemns all those acts and the
bombings in recent days, as well as the kidnappings of
humanitarian workers. It remains very concerned about
the religious nature of the conflict, which unfortunately
destroys social cohesion and renders the future of
religious minorities in Syria uncertain.

My country believes it is important that the
international community work further to put an end
to that war. The Security Council should - after
unanimously acknowledging in its resolution 2118 (2013)
that the only solution to the current crisis in the Syrian
Arab Republic is through an inclusive and Syrian-led
political process based on the Geneva communique
of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex) - encourage
the adoption of appropriate measures to facilitate the
effective organization of the conference, announced for
November.

In that regard, we urge the Secretary-General and
the Joint Special Representative of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States for Syria, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, to continue their efforts to achieve that goal.
We also believe it is urgent that countries that have
any influence with the opposition coalition to use all
that influence to convince it of the need for a political
solution to the Syrian crisis, which requires a dialogue
between the opposition and the power in Damascus.

While calling on all parties to move towards
negotiations for the settlement of the crisis, we would
also urge the friends of both parties to put pressure on
them to sign a ceasefire that would allow humanitarian
agencies to help people in difficulty throughout
the territory. It is essential that the provisions of the
presidential statement of 2 October (S/PRST/2013/15)
be implemented, in particular with regard to the
call for countries and donor agencies to increase
their contributions to Syrian refugees and internally
displaced persons.

With regard to Lebanon, the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate in that country because of the
flows of Syrian and Palestinian refugees it continues
to receive. The number of refugees, which is estimated
at over 1.3 million people and is growing by the day,
affects the country's political, social and economic
life, as well as its security. Living with refugees is
becoming increasingly difficult because the country
has exceeded its ability to receive any more people,
as President Michel Sleiman recently announced from
rostrum of the General Assembly when he was calling
for international assistance (see A/68/PV.6). While
reiterating his appeal, Togo believes that the solution
to that issue lies fundamentally in a political solution to
the conflict in Syria. And it is towards that end that the
international community, the Security Council and all
States in the region should work.

