Mr. Mendez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing on the challenges
that the security situation in the Gulf of Guinea poses
to peacebuilding. I would also like to congratulate the
Council presidency and the delegations of Angola and
Senegal for promoting today's discussion of an issue
of such importance for peace and security in West
and Central Africa, particularly the coastal countries
on the Gulf of Guinea. We believe that the Council's
adoption of a presidential statement on the subject
(S/PRST/2016/4) in the framework of this open debate
is very important, as it emphasizes its commitment to
keeping a watchful eye on developments in the Gulf of
Guinea and in West and Central Africa as a whole.

The coastal region of the Gulf of Guinea and the
States there have been affected by the threat of piracy,
transnational organized crime, the trafficking and
illicit use of natural resources such as oil and gas,
illegal fishing and trafficking in drugs and persons, all
promoted by criminal networks that have appreciably
affected economic growth. This has had a negative
impact on society, threatening the stability of the
countries of the subregion as well. This situation must
serve to mobilize international cooperation in support
of those States to address this issue.

The attention being accorded to this issue by the
Security Council, following the adoption of resolutions
2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012), is as pertinent as ever,
given the threat posed to the stability of countries
and peoples by the penetration and action of criminal
groups that threaten the achievements of that African
subregion in development and the strengthening of
political stability.

Venezuela appreciates the peacebuilding process
taking place in Africa, which is of great importance
to the work of the United Nations and regional and
subregional bodies that undertake them, both because
they represent a fundamental step towards achieving
sustainable and inclusive development in the region,
and because of their credibility and trust palced in
them by their peoples. It is therefore an inescapable
responsibility to promote all initiatives that pave the
way towards strengthening and promoting such efforts
in the social, economic and political spheres, as well as
in the field of security.

In this context, we recognize the efforts of the
States of the subregion of the Gulf of Guinea, with the
support of the international community, to coordinate,
through multiple initiatives and specific programmes,
the implementation of a strategy to counter piracy
and armed robbery. I highlight in particular the work
of the Gulf of Guinea Commission and the Maritime
Organization for West and Central Africa, and the
specific efforts of the maritime strategy of the African
Union, which have institutionalized the joint response
to the regional challenge.

Similarly, we strongly support the trust fund
established by the International Maritime Organization
(IMO) to strengthen the institutional capacities of
the States of the region. We recognize the technical,
operational, logistical and legal assistance provided
by the IMO to coastal States of the region, which has
been broad and important to the implementation of
a coordinated subregional strategy in various fields
related to commercial navigation, port security, and
professional training and safety, thereby encouraging
the participation of all stakeholders. Such cooperation,
led by States, is a point of reference to consider in
addressing security issues in Africa.

Similarly, we reaffirm the need for sustainable
financing methods for all public and private
institutional initiatives, with emphasis on the tasks
of inclusive social development that address the
local needs of the people of the region. Compliance
with financial commitments undertaken by various
partners, particularly international organizations and
countries, is urgent in order to successfully complete
the proposed projects, and in that sense we call for them
to be addressed in a comprehensive and timely manner.

Meeting the challenge of creating and strengthening
State post-conflict capacities is the essence of
sustainable peace, and all initiatives undertaken to
address the maintenance of security in the Gulf of
Guinea should be agreed in coordination with States on
the basis of cooperation, with respect for the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity.

The need for an integrated strategy is urgent. It
should include formulas to prevent the manifestations
of terrorism and organized crime that have arisen in
Africa, particularly in the Sahel - all of which were
exacerbated by the intervention in Libya in 2011 - from
expanding throughout a region that, through the efforts
of its peoples and Governments, has remained immune
to that threat.

Regional anti-piracy coordination is the answer to
combatting and eradicating the phenomenon of piracy
and insecurity in the vast area of the Gulf of Guinea
basin, and has a significant impact on the economy
of the countries of the region. In that regard, we hope
that the extraordinary meeting to be held in Lome in
October will be a significant milestone in subregional
cooperation in intergovernmental security efforts, and
we call on the international community to support it
strongly.

In the context of the United Nations, it is important
to adopt joint positions and comprehensive solutions
for preventing conflicts in politically stable countries
such as those of the subregion, whose main challenge
is oriented to sustainable development. In that regard,
we recognize the work done by the regional offices
for West and Central Africa, which still have many
challenges ahead.

Lastly, Venezuela reiterates its commitment to
peacebuilding in Africa and will continue to offer
our contributions and experiences on the basis of
interregional and international cooperation.

