Monsignor Grysa: The Holy See wishes to thank
the German presidency for convening today's open
debate to consider the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.

In his briefings to the Council, the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Nickolay
Mladenov, frequently paints a bleak picture of the
situation, in which tensions fester and intercommunity
violence has the potential to flare up at any moment. In
Gaza, a disastrous humanitarian situation feeds despair
among the Palestinian population, at times manipulated
by extremist groups that resort to violence, while fear for
Israeli security increases. Too many innocent civilians
on both sides have paid the price of the indiscriminate
use of violence and force.

The formation of a new Palestinian Government,
however, offers a glimmer of hope amid the shadows
of despair that have for far too long characterized the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Indeed, unity is essential to
a politically stable and economically viable Palestine. In
this regard, the Holy See commends the tireless efforts
of neighbouring countries in forging talks with the
various Palestinian factions and facilitating dialogue
among them. These efforts remain important in terms
of respecting the inalienable rights and achieving the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people, as well
as attaining lasting peace and security for Israel.

Real challenges, of course, remain. The
increasingly fragmented Palestinian land will, with the
passing of time, only make the two-State solution more
difficult to realize. Difficulty, however, does not mean
impossibility. It is therefore incumbent on the parties
themselves, on regional actors and on the rest of the
international community to make every effort and use
all their political and diplomatic persuasion to prevent
this difficulty from becoming an impossibility. If the
two-State solution is to become a reality, the cycle
of violence needs to be broken and both parties must
resolve to avoid unilateral actions that would undermine
the two-State solution, as we so often hear repeated in
this Chamber.

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which is
experiencing a growth in demand for its services,
continues to play an essential role not only in providing
basic services for Palestinian refugees, but also as a
critical component of wider regional development and
security. The Holy See commends those countries that
have increased their donations to enable the Agency to
carry out its work to ensure that the refugee population,
in particular children in the refugee camps, can live
with dignity.

Moves to change the identity of Jerusalem and
its status quo not only affect the already fragile
populations who live there, but also have potentially
detrimental effects on peace and stability in the region.
As mentioned by the representative of Morocco, in his
recent visit to Morocco Pope Francis and His Majesty
King Mohammed VI made a joint appeal on the
importance of preserving the Holy City of Jerusalem
as the common patrimony of humankind and especially
the followers of the three monotheistic religions,
as a place of encounter and as a symbol of peaceful
coexistence, where mutual respect and dialogue can be
cultivated. They expressed their hope that full freedom
of access to the followers of the three monotheistic
religions and their right to worship be guaranteed, so
that in Jerusalem/Al-Quds Al Sharif they may raise
their prayers to God, the Creator of all, for a future of
peace and fraternity on Earth.

I wish to conclude with a passage from the Easter
message of Pope Francis for the Middle East:

"May the light of Easter illumine all
Government leaders and peoples in the Middle
East, beginning with Israelis and Palestinians, and
spur them to alleviate such great suffering and to
pursue a future of peace and stability."

