Ms. Morrison Gonzalez (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
the briefers for their presentations today and for their
efforts in support of peace and security in the Central
African Republic.

The Dominican Republic commends the
Government and the armed groups for overcoming their
differences in order to achieve the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic and for joining their efforts, together with
civil society, to take concrete steps in the initial phase
of implementing the Political Agreement, as evidenced
by the formation of an inclusive Government. We
commend the representatives of the communities for
conducting intercommunal dialogues and concluding
intercommunal reconciliation agreements aimed
at ending hostilities, promoting peaceful dialogue
and ensuring freedom of movement. We would also
like to acknowledge the steps taken to implement
the agreement and the efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the African Union, the European
Union and the Government of the Central African
Republic to mobilize international support for the
political agreement.

We welcome the adoption of the electoral
code, which constitutes the legal framework for
the presidential, legislative, regional and municipal
elections to be held in 2020 and 2021. We hope that the
code will be enacted, and we welcome the Constitutional
Court's readiness to comply with the parity law, which
provides for a minimum representation of 35 per cent of
women in State and private institutions during a 10-year
transition period. In that spirit, we hope to see a similar
minimum representation level set for young people in
recognition of their potential to transform societies.

We are concerned about the security situation in the
country, where some armed groups that are signatories
to the agreement have been committing acts of violence
with a view to winning new concessions in the peace
process. We urge them to cease all destabilizing actions
and to surrender their weapons, as laid down in the
peace agreement, and further urge them to submit the
remaining lists of their combatants so that they can
be considered for the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration programme.

We deplore the prevailing dire humanitarian
situation in the Central African Republic, where we
continue to see unacceptable obstacles to humanitarian
access and violations of human rights. We call on all
the parties to the conflict to guarantee full, security,
sustainable and unhindered humanitarian access to
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners,
including child protection advocates, in order to enable
humanitarian assistance to be provided to the affected
populations as quickly as possible.

We commend the efforts of the Government
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) to facilitate consultations on the
legislative framework of the truth, justice, reparations
and reconciliation commission, which is so important
to transitional justice. We also want to highlight the
establishment of the legal framework of the Unites
speciales mixtes de securite, composed of members
of the national defence and security forces and
eligible members of the demobilized and disarmed
armed groups, whose deployment is necessary for the
reduction of violence in the Central African Republic.

Despite the challenging realities facing the Central
African Republic, the current political landscape also
represents a unique opportunity. We therefore urge all
political actors to put aside their differences and see
this moment of transition as an opportunity to face the
country's current challenges together. Consultations
must continue through intercommunal dialogue and
reconciliation at the local level, based on the provisions
of the national agreement, in order to provide Central
Africans with the stability and lasting peace they
all deserve.

Finally, we would like to acknowledge and support
the role played by MINUSCA, the African Union and
all the actors that are working hand in hand with the
Central African Republic in order to achieve lasting
peace and stability.

