Mrs. Junod (International Committee of the Red Cross) (interpretation from French): On behalf of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), I thank
the Security Council for this opportunity to participate in
today's debate relating to the report of the Secretary-
General on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.

The general problem of armed conflict is at the very
heart of the concerns of the ICRC, an organization which
is dedicated to preventing and alleviating suffering caused
by war. Africa is the ICRC's major field of action, as
reflected in our 19 operational and regional delegations,
nearly half of our operations budget and some 3,000 staff
members.

Needless to say, we shall not attempt today to
comment exhaustively on the excellent analysis set out in
the report of the Secretary-General. The ICRC hopes to
be able to continue the consideration of these matters in
the framework of its ongoing dialogue with the United
Nations and with the Organization of African Unity
(OAU). My statement will be limited to two major points:
first, reaffirmation of the relevance of international
humanitarian law; and secondly, the need for truly
humanitarian action on behalf of the victims of conflicts,
which can pave the way for reconstruction and make
sustainable development possible.

Along with the Secretary-General, we note the
drastic deterioration of the level of compliance with
humanitarian norms in crisis situations. Acts of brutality
and atrocities committed against civilians - and more
specifically against women and children and against
refugees and displaced, captured or imprisoned persons -
demand that all armed parties resume their respect for
universal humanitarian principles.

The ICRC therefore supports this clear analysis and
urgent appeal, given the proliferation of conflicts in those
countries in which structures have collapsed and of
confrontations over identity in which the destruction and
the annihilation of the human groups considered as rivals
are the primary objective of the struggle. This is
compounded by a new difficulty linked to the
privatization of war and the emergence of forces that
depend on individuals or private groups over which State
authorities have little or no influence.

Africa is rich in traditions of deeply rooted human
values, which are close to those of humanitarian law and
are found in the codes that traditionally govern the
waging of hostilities. Therefore, our joint challenge is to
revive these values, particularly among youth, that vital
force which constitutes three quarters of Africa's
population.

This mobilization is a long-term preventive task to
make each and every person aware that in all
circumstances there are limits to violence, and neither

 

those who order acts of violence, nor those who carry them
out, nor those who tolerate them can say, "I did not know".
All Member States of the United Nations have committed
themselves not only to respect but also to ensure respect for
treaties relating to humanitarian law. This universal
obligation of solidarity towards all the victims of conflicts
is everyone's business.

We must also emphasize the responsibility of each
State to incorporate in its national legislation adequate
measures relating to humanitarian law and to prosecute
offenders. In this regard, the African countries have become
involved in this process of legislative reform with the
technical support of the consultative services of the ICRC.

It is sad but true that most of the time war criminals
manage to escape any legal prosecution. The establishment
by the Security Council of ad hoc Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda constitute an important stage in
applying penal measures.

Today there is a need to work actively to establish a
permanent international criminal court that can contribute
to putting an end to impunity. A tribunal free from all
political pressure, one whose competence would be broadly
recognized and which would provide maximum guarantees
for equitable judgement, would thus supplement national
juridical systems. It would send the clear message to the
perpetrators of crimes of international scope and their
victims that impunity would no longer be tolerated.

The Secretary-General has emphasized the need to
have the international community use in a consistent and
coordinated fashion all the instruments available to it to
achieve global solutions to conflicts. These solutions must
take into account the political, social and economic
elements without which lasting results cannot be obtained.
The ICRC notes with increasing concern a growing
tendency on the part of some States in recent years to resort
to humanitarian action instead of political action, or indeed
military action, when this is justified within the framework
of relevant international instruments. Central Africa
provides a good illustration.

Nothing, however, can replace the political will to
address the causes of conflicts and the tragedies they cause
with all of the legitimate means available, including force.
Humanitarian assistance cannot be a substitute. It is up to
the organizations with a genuinely humanitarian mission
and means of action to provide that assistance to the
victims of conflicts. The question of the security of
refugees in the Great Lakes region provides us an obvious
example. Today we are seeing the tragic consequences.

Acknowledging the need for a strategic approach,
politicians, the military and humanitarians must harmonize
their actions. They must seek a synergy between their
actions and in their interdependence, but also in their
respective mandates and particular characteristics. This
approach, however, should not subordinate all
humanitarian action to political objectives, to the
detriment of principles of humanity, impartiality,
neutrality and independence. The interest of the victims
is always at the core of the ICRC's concerns and
operations.

This does not mean, however, that humanitarian
action has no political dimension or that it never has an
impact on the evolution of a conflict. The presence of
humanitarian organizations has sometimes turned out to
have a negative impact by serving the objectives of war.
That was the case in Liberia in 1996, when the
competition between the organizations in the field resulted
in the prolongation of the conflict, thus gravely
endangering the victims.

The ICRC is just as concerned as the Secretary-
General by emergency situations in which there are many
bodies providing assistance whose objectives and methods
of work differ. Such situations require the actors to
harmonize their actions and avoid duplication. The point
of such coordination is to make it possible to manage
various activities, in time and in space, in a context that
is often unstable and rapidly changing. The security of all
depends very much on this.

The report highlights the need to link and to
integrate concepts and actions relating to assistance,
rehabilitation, reconstruction and development. The ICRC
fully shares this point of View. In its assistance actions,
the ICRC, insofar as possible, has opted for an approach
in which the ultimate objective is to allow individuals and
the communities involved to regain their autonomy and to
break their dependence on external assistance by closely
involving the beneficiaries in the conception and
implementation of these programmes.

It is in this framework that we find the efforts
undertaken in many African situations to restore the
means of production of population groups that have fallen
victim to war, such as agriculture, livestock, fishing and
crafts. The same holds true for programmes designed to
restore basic health services, as well as for the provision

 

of equipment and prostheses for war amputees and for
repairing systems of supplying drinking water and disposing
of waste water and refuse.

In its work, the ICRC mobilizes all possible local
support. For the ICRC, as for the International Federation
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, the network of
African national associations represents enormous support.
The volunteers from these associations often work in
extremely difficult conditions. Many of them have died
during the last few months in carrying out their mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the Republic
of the Congo.

It also seems important to emphasize the other
essential element for the ICRC's action, which is
protection. To render assistance without concern for
protection would be absurd, and could even be
counterproductive. Any effective intervention for the
victims must simultaneously allow them to receive their
required material assistance, protect them from dangers that
prolong and exacerbate their suffering and ensure respect
for their dignity.

Action by the ICRC regarding protection is primarily
aimed at ensuring respect for life and the physical integrity
of individuals. Such action is inseparable from action to
promote human rights, whose ultimate goal is the
functioning of civil society and the enjoyment of civil,
political, economic, social and cultural rights.

Finally, allow me to say how greatly the security of
their personnel concerns the humanitarian organizations
working within the framework of these conflicts. In
addition to the usual threats and dangers, the changing
nature of wars, the growing numbers of individuals
engaging in violence, the diversity of their roles and
interests and the general increase in banditry are curtailing
yet further the control that authorities in the field have over
these individuals and is increasing the vulnerability of
humanitarian workers. Members will recall the murders
carried out in Rwanda and Burundi, the rapes committed in
Sierra Leone and in the former Zaire and the hostage-taking
in the Sudan.

An African proverb says, "Only man is better than
man, only man is worse than man". We are firmly
convinced - as the Secretary-General would agree - that
the best in each person is an inexhaustible source of energy
and hope. Today, 10 of our colleagues were freed after
having been held for 10 days by their kidnappers in
Somalia. I would like to share our happiness and relief
with the Council.

