The President (Spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council received a briefing
from the Secretariat on the situation in Lebanon
on 15 February 2005.

"The Security Council unequivocally
condemns the 14 February 2005 terrorist
bombing in Beirut, Lebanon, that killed former
Lebanese Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri and others
and caused serious injury to dozens of people,
including former Minister Basil Fleihan.

"The Security Council expresses its deepest
sympathy and condolences to the people and
Government of Lebanon and to the victims and
their families.

"The Council calls on the Lebanese
Government to bring to justice the perpetrators,
organizers and sponsors of this heinous terrorist
act and notes the Lebanese Government's
commitments in this regard. The Council urges
all States, in accordance with its resolutions 1566
(2004) and 1373 (2001), to cooperate fully in the
fight against terrorism.

"The Security Council is gravely concerned
by the murder of the former Prime Minister of
Lebanon and its possible impact on ongoing
efforts by the people of Lebanon to solidify
Lebanon's democracy, including during the
upcoming parliamentary elections. Such a
terrorist act should not jeopardize the holding of
these elections in transparent, free and
democratic conditions.

"The Security Council is concerned by the
potential for further destabilization of Lebanon,
and expresses hope that the Lebanese people will
be able to emerge from this terrible event united
and to use peaceful means in support of their
long-standing national aspiration to full
sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity.

"The Security Council reaffirms its previous
calls upon all parties concerned to cooperate fully
and urgently with the Security Council for the
full implementation of all relevant resolutions
concerning the restoration of the territorial
integrity, full sovereignty and political
independence of Lebanon.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to follow closely the situation
in Lebanon and to report urgently on the
circumstances, causes and consequences of this
terrorist act."

This statement Will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/4.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.
