Mr. Bishnoi (India): Let me begin by thanking
you, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, as President of the
Security Council, for organizing today's debate on the
situation in Afghanistan. I also thank the Secretary-
General for the quarterly report (S/2014/876) on the
situation in Afghanistan and welcome the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom.

Afghanistan has just gone through a historic
political transition. We welcome the establishment
of the National Unity Government, led by President
Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah.
The people of Afghanistan have shown tremendous
patience and forbearance, which made the National
Ynity Government agreement possible. I have no
doubt that the Afghan political leadership will keep
the expectations of the Afghan people in mind as they
undertake the difficult tasks that lie ahead, including
the early formation of the Government, consistent with
the National Unity Government agreement and the task
of electoral reforms and organizing the constitutional
loya jirga. I wish to place on record my Government's
appreciation for the special role played by the Special
Representative in Afghanistan during this process.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) must continue to play a leading role in
shaping and coordinating the international community's
efforts to assist Afghanistan's political and economic
reconstruction process.

The scourge of terrorism and extremism continues
to threaten Afghanistan's peace and stability. That
terrorists and extremist groups have continued to
survive despite the immense military pressure that
is being brought on them by the Afghan National
Security Forces only underscores the fact that these
groups continue to benefit from support from beyond
Afghanistan's borders and continue to access resources
from transnational terrorists and criminal networks. The
latest Secretary-General's report mentions that, of late,
the Afghan Government has been facing a sustained and
determined challenge in securing key districts across
many provinces that remain under insurgent pressure.
It is alarming to see statistics like the overall number
of security incidents this year increase by 10.3 per cent,
as compared to a similar period in 2013. The Special
Representative must therefore continue to focus his
attention on this serious issue. We cannot afford to
lose sight of the fact that the main threat to peace and
stability in Afghanistan is terrorism. The attacks in
Kabul, Sydney and Peshawar only serve to underline
the fact that terrorists do not respect borders and make
no differentiation between States. They pose a common
threat to humankind.

In the recently concluded London Conference
on Afghanistan, we all agreed that Afghanistan is
entering a new phase in its economic transition. In
today's global economic situation, when Government
budgets are strained and when the sentiment of aid
fatigue exists in most traditional donor countries,
Afghanistan's economic transition will have to be
primarily private-sector led. As a lead country of the
trade, commerce and investment confidence-building
measure under the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process,
India has gained some experience on the issue. One
of the consistent messages we are receiving from
the private-sector businesses that are serious about
entering the Afghan market is that while security is an
issue that can at times be managed, Afghanistan's lack
of connectivity to seaports and to the faster growing
economic regions of Asia is an insurmountable
constraint. India feels that ecuring Afghanistan's access
to all existing regional maritime ports and developing
more effective transit agreements between Afghanistan
and its immediate neighbours, and faithfully
implementing the existing ones, are vital priorities.
India is at present in discussion with the Governments of
Afghanistan and Iran to examine how the existing Port
of Chabahar in Iran can be developed to support such a
strategy. We feel that when this project takes off, there
will be significant immediate gains for reconstruction
activities in the western regions of Afghanistan.

UNAMA has an important role to play in
supporting the activities of new political institutions of
the Afghan State. No other organization can represent
in full measure the international community's concern
for Afghanistan and its vision for a peaceful, sovereign,
independent and prosperous Afghanistan. But
UNAMA must also focus on the important role it plays
in ensuring the delivery of valuable humanitarian and
development assistance to Afghanistan. The Mission is
uniquely placed to deploy the required professional and
physical resources to reach much-needed humanitarian
and development assistance to the remotest corners of
Afghanistan.

This is a critical decade of transformation
for Afghanistan. A united, stable, prosperous and
independent Afghanistan is in the interests ofthe region
and the international community. India is committed to
helping Afghanistan achieve that objective.

