Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, let me
congratulate Mr. Lowcock on his first briefing to the
Security Council on Syria. He brings more than 30
years of experience to the position, having led and
managed responses to humanitarian crises across the
globe, and wise strategic leadership in the area of
international development.

We are also grateful to the Special Envoy for Syria,
Mr. De Mistura, for his insightful update. We commend
him for his exceptional commitment and determination
to pursue peace in Syria, and welcome his multifaceted
diplomacy to resolve the crisis.

Kazakhstan remains committed to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria
and to the continuity of State institutions. We note
gradual progress on the political front during the
Geneva and Astana meetings, and draw attention to the
reduced military activity and the improvement of the
humanitarian situation in the four de-escalation zones.
Astana reaffirms its readiness to further the political
process to achieve peace and stability in Syria. I want
to underline that the Astana platform complements the
Geneva platform and is not intended to replace it.

In searching for an exit strategy, an original approach
should be considered as a very effective method to
mitigate the situation and prevent further deterioration.
Therefore, Kazakhstan calls on all Middle Eastern and
Gulf States to join the guarantor countries in ensuring
that the ceasefire regime is respected and observed
by all parties. If we hope to see further progress, it is
important to continue supporting the objectives and
gains of the Astana and Geneva negotiations and of the
three guarantors.

The humanitarian situation is grave and deserves
our attention. Kazakhstan highly appreciates the
activities of the humanitarian personnel of the United
Nations stationed in Syria, namely, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the
World Health Organization and the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent Society (SARC) . We call on the Syrian
Government and neighbouring countries not to impede
the access of humanitarian assistance to refugee camps,
and we urge Syria to open humanitarian corridors to
the besieged areas.

Following a comprehensive review by the United
Nations, we were pleased to learn that Deir ez-Zor and

93,500 people in city are being removed from the list
of those besieged. However, 419,920 people remain
besieged in 10 locations across Syria. We are encouraged
by the fact that United Nations humanitarian personnel,
OCHA, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the World
Food Programme will deliver humanitarian aid to Deir
ez-Zor for the first time since earlier this month.

The safe withdrawal of civilians from war zones
and their protection should be the priority of all
operations. We support the visit by Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock to Syria in the near future to see
the situation on the ground for himself. The parties to
the conflict and the countries supporting them should
agree on the release of hostages, the transfer ofthe dead
and the exchange of information on missing persons.

Finally, the Security Council must fulfil its statutory
duties by taking more effective and collaborative
measures to resolve the Syrian crisis as soon as possible.

