Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Let me begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General
Oshima for his briefing.

In armed conflicts throughout the world, innocent
civilians represent a growing percentage of victims,
generating widespread concern in the international
community. In recent years, the Security Council has
held many debates and adopted a number of resolutions
and presidential statements on this issue. It is our hope
that today's discussions and the aide-memoire to be
adopted will facilitate the efforts of the international
community to protect civilians in armed conflict.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
multifaceted mission in which the international
community, including the humanitarian relief agencies,
has done a great deal. All the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations have, to varying
degrees, incorporated the protection of civilians. The
main responsibility for protection, however, rests
fundamentally with the Governments and parties to the
conflict concerned. The Council must urge all parties
concerned to seek a solution through dialogue and
peaceful means and strictly to abide by international
humanitarian law so as to avoid making innocent
civilians suffer.

For the United Nations, the Security Council in
particular, the prevention and early cessation of armed
conflicts are the most effective ways to protect
civilians. Two days ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1397 (2002) on the issue of the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question, in
which it demanded immediate cessation of all acts of
violence and a political settlement through negotiation.
We believe that this is an important step by the Council
and one that is long overdue.

Apart from the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, many
armed conflicts around the world continue to endanger
the safety and security of innocent civilians and thus
threaten regional and international peace and security.
The Council should make further efforts to mitigate
and seek solutions to these conflicts so as to establish
conditions conducive to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

