Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I thank Prime Minister Rutte
and the Netherlands for convening today's timely
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and the other
briefers whom we heard this morning.

Ireland aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

This year Ireland marks the sixtieth anniversary
of its contribution to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Not one year or one month has passed since
that date without Irish troops wearing the blue helmet
abroad. It is part of who we are at the United Nations.
With 86 Irish soldiers having lost their lives in the
service of such missions, Ireland is in no doubt as to the
significance of this debate. Unfortunately, such losses
are becoming all too frequent. It is our responsibility to
determine how to prevent such sacrifices.

This is not the first time that we have considered
the issue. Previous discussions have demonstrated that,
although we are often frank about our shortcomings, we
are less adept at addressing them. Repeatedly, we have
acknowledged the disconnect between mandates and
strategic direction and between mandates and adequate
resources. For peacekeeping missions to be successful
and for peacekeepers to be safe, missions must be more
than a means for demonstrating political resolve. They
must be a meaningful tool for the attainment of peace.

Mandates must match the needs presented by the
conflict, resources must match the mandate, and they
must be reinforced by political support. Strategic
reviews of peace operations are a welcome additional
tool for ensuring that operations remain fit-for-
purpose. However, we must ensure that proper analysis
is conducted at the very outset so that, from conception
to implementation, we are assured that mandates are
designed and operations resourced to meet the real
security challenges that such missions face on the
ground. Equally, we must be transparent and open
when we identify failures. Only by learning from our
mistakes and holding ourselves accountable can we
ensure that our words of support in this Chamber are
not hollow and that mistakes are not repeated. That goes
to the heart of the credibility of the Security Council.

The report authored by former United Nations
Force Commander, Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto
dos Santos Cruz, entitled Improving security of United
Nations peacekeepers, highlights the incoherence that
often exists between mandates and capabilities. That is
not a bureaucratic or theoretical concern. If we continue
to fail to act on that call, we will, as the Cruz report states,
be responsible for consciously putting our personnel
in harm's way. Effective, focused and appropriately
resourced operations drive efficient operations. We
must ensure that our drive for efficiencies does not
blind us to that fact. Key regional partner organizations,
such as the European Union, are developing capability
platforms that could help address some of the resource
challenges that United Nations peacekeeping missions
face. Ireland is ready to work with the United Nations
in the framework of permanent, structured cooperation
to develop and utilize those tools for the benefit of all.

Effectiveness is also strengthened through the
increased participation of women as peacekeepers - an
aim to which Ireland is committed- along with doubling
female participation in our defence forces. Ireland
recently co-hosted an event in the Netherlands with
the Dutch Foreign Ministry, which focused on the
challenges that remain in addressing structural and
societal barriers to such participation. We need to listen
more to those women peacekeepers in the field to allow
us to strategically effect change. Similarly we need to
be more strategic on the issue of capacity. We all know
that training is a key issue, and many Members have
provided offers in that area. We now need to identify
where gaps continue to exist and consider how best to
address them. Now more than ever, the United Nations
needs to demonstrate that it is capable of fulfilling its
obligations. That requires developing the capacities of
those on whom we call to carry out that role.

Responding to and addressing conflict demands the
use of the widest possible range of tools and instruments
Security is just one step on the path to peace. To that
end, Ireland fully supports the Secretary-General's
reform efforts, in particular to increase emphasis on
prevention and political strategies. The most effective
means at our disposal for the protection of our citizens
and the protection of our peacekeepers is taking action
that means they never need to be deployed.

