Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): My delegation agrees with the statement made by
the Chairman of the African Group, of which Rwanda is a
member.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
situation in Somalia. Although the report seems routine, at
least it reminds us that Somalia exists and that its problems
are still with us.

We congratulate the Somali people, and the various
Somali leaders, on the efforts they have made to try to find
common ground for the establishment of a national
government. We also pay tribute to the diplomatic efforts
made by leaders in Africa.

We also congratulate the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, which took the initiative in convening a
meeting of the various leaders in September 1995 to
encourage implementation of the Nairobi agreements.

I congratulate the OAU on its efforts and initiatives
to facilitate agreement between the Somali factions. We
also congratulate the League of Arab States. We convey
our encouragement to the humanitarian organizations of
United Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations
and others for the sacrifices they have made for the
Somali people.

Just a few hours before this discussion on Somalia
began we were making solemn declarations, with satellite
coverage, about development programmes in Africa. That
made us forget for a moment the reality of Africa and its
problems. We cannot delude ourselves about those
problems, because they are the daily lot of thousands of
people.

We must not forget that Somalia is not an isolated
case in Africa; there are also Rwanda, Burundi, Liberia,
Sierra Leone and others. The misfortune gnawing away at
those countries is not very different; it has become a
common denominator for most African countries. That is
why my delegation hopes that this public debate on
Somalia will not give its participants a sense of self-
satisfaction. We hope that it will lead to thought in the
Security Council and the Secretariat of this Organization,
and among Somalis and all Africans who are victims of
situations which are often beyond their control.

My delegation would also like to denounce the
minimalist practice, increasingly adopted by this
Organization, of abandoning member countries in
difficulty. We have seen it take place in Somalia, Rwanda
and, to some extent, Liberia. It is well-known that the
withdrawal of the United Nations force from Somalia
helped to increase chaos there. Genocide in Rwanda was
made possible by the withdrawal of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda. Yet the same
Organization is prepared to intervene elsewhere, in
countries where the problems are similar but less severe.

Experience has shown that countries which have
been abandoned ultimately experience disasters from
which they have difficulty recovering. In the long term,
failing to take a political stance, or taking inadequate
positions, together with the weakness of the preventive
diplomacy of which this Organization is such a strong
advocate, means that the Organization and the

 

international community pay a heavy price, dealing with the
damage caused by bad policy. The Organization will bear
responsibility before history in particular for its handling of
the situation in African countries, which, despite official
statements, have been neglected.

As for Somalia, it is for the Somalis to find a solution
to their problems. The Secretary-General's report records
the efforts made to form a Government. However, the
parties have said that, in order for them to come together,
they need a facilitator, the necessary resources and a forum.
The Somali leaders are ready for dialogue and have
expressed a wish for it. The same leaders have also
appealed to the United Nations to continue to play the role
of facilitator and mediator.

What is the point of having several United Nations
offices for Somalia in Kenya? Their effectiveness is
difficult to gauge. All the United Nations offices, such as
those of the United Nations Development Programme and
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia, have
preferred to base themselves in Nairobi. My delegation
is convinced that the establishment of the so-called
Political Office for Somalia in Nairobi is useful neither
for the Somalis nor for United Nations agencies operating
in Somalia. The latest report of the Secretary-General on
Somalia mentions no important initiative taken by that
office throughout 1995.

Depriving Somalia of the presence of the
international community and the United Nations in
Mogadishu has given a green light to the various factions.
The Somalis and their leaders need time to rise above
conflict, heal their wounds and find common ground. We
recognize the importance of security for United Nations
personnel, but we also attach great importance to the
participation of the interested parties - in this case the
Somali people themselves - in decisions about their
future. However, the Somali leaders have requested
reinstatement of the United Nations Political Office for
Somali in Mogadishu. My delegation sincerely hopes that
this legitimate appeal will be heeded and answered. Great
attention must be paid to the situation of Somalia, which
is a Member State of this Organization. This is all the
more important because of the problems which Somalia
faces.

In conclusion, my delegation appeals to the Security
Council and the Secretariat to provide an opportunity for
the Somali people themselves to find a solution to their
problem. The Council should resume contact with the
various Somali leaders and listen to them impartially. The
Council should help them to create a forum to facilitate
dialogue between those leaders, which they say they want.
Humanitarian aid should be continued, but it should be
borne in mind that the most pressing need is to find a
political solution.

