Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the presidency for convening today's meeting, and
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham
for their comprehensive briefings, in which they have
described for us a scenario that requires the urgent
attention of the Security Council. Peru recognizes
the valuable efforts that both briefers are making in
their respective remits to put an end to the devastating
conflict in Syria and to alleviate human suffering.

The armed conflict in Syria has entered its ninth
year, and Peru can only strongly condemn the serious
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the
country and the deliberate attacks on civilians, which
have caused more than 400,000 fatalities and the
displacement of 11 million people inside and outside
Syria. We note with concern that the change in the
balance of forces we have observed in recent months
has not yet been reflected in a sustained cessation
of hostilities, while the much-needed humanitarian
assistance on which 13 million Syrians depend continues
to be provided in a restricted manner. We note with
alarm the prospect of a further escalation of violence in
north-west Syria, particularly in Idlib, as a result of the
actions of terrorist organizations present there and the
intensification of air strikes, which do not discriminate
between combatants and the civilian population.

In those circumstances, we call on the Syrian
Government and all those involved in the conflict to
prevent further deterioration, which basically means
preserving the ceasefire agreed by Turkey and Russia
last September. We also want to focus attention on the
east of the country, where tens of thousands of civilians
have had to flee the heat of the clashes against the
remnants of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

At this time, we emphasize the urgency of meeting
the humanitarian needs of the more than 70,000
internally displaced persons who have been living at the
Al-Hol camp and of providing them with the financial
means required to adapt their needs. Similarly, we
encourage new and sustained deployments by the
United Nations and other humanitarian actors in Rukban
to provide assistance and conduct comprehensive
humanitarian-needs assessments. We urge that, in
parallel and with the utmost urgency, comprehensive
solutions be promoted that address the willingness of
95 per cent of its people to return home in a safe and
dignified manner. We would also like to welcome the
generous contributions from donor countries at the
recent Brussels Conference, which should substantially
help to alleviate the shortages that have caused much
suffering to the Syrian population and contribute to the
urgently needed reconstruction of the country.

However, we must bear in mind that only the
achievement of a political solution that lays the
foundations for sustainable peace in Syria will make
it possible to overcome the humanitarian disaster that
continues to affect its population. Such a solution
must respect Syria's sovereignty, territorial integrity
and unity. We therefore note with satisfaction the
constructive tenor of the meetings held in recent weeks
between the Special Envoy and relevant stakeholders,
which we hope will be reflected in substantive progress
in the political process based on resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

Finally, we consider it essential to achieve concrete
results soon with regard to the establishment of an
inclusive and representative constitutional committee,
as well as with regard to the release of prisoners and
the identification of missing persons and the return
of corpses, as important confidence-building and
reconciliation measures for achieving peace in Syria.

