Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I thank the United
Kingdom presidency for convening this timely open
debate.

Indonesia associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

It is deeply shocking to learn that the international
community was confronted with yet another act of
shameful terror in Paris last Friday, which claimed
innocent lives and inflicted massive pain and sorrow on
French society. Indonesia joins the chorus of Member
States in condemning such a cowardly act and expresses
its sympathy to the Government and people of France.

More than ever, the United Nations system and the
international community must place greater emphasis
on the peaceful resolution of disputes and conflict
prevention. That must be reinforced by a much-needed
comprehensive approach and partnership effort on the
part of all Member States. In that context, Indonesia
welcomes the clear emphasis on political solutions to
conflict, mediation and conflict prevention in the recent
report of the High-level Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446), the report of the Secretary-General
entitled "The future of United Nations peace operations:
implementation of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations" (S/2015/682), the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations and conflict
prevention (S/2015/730) and the report of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture (see S/2015/490). We also concur with
the emphasis therein, and in today's concept note
(S/2015/845, annex), on an integrated approach in
which there must no unbridgeable silos separating
development from peace and security and human rights.

Indeed, Indonesia is supportive of a holistic
approach, which it has long advocated at both the
regional and the multilateral levels. We are passionately
convinced of the primacy of dialogue, peaceful
political processes and equitable development since
we ourselves have directly reaped their fruit. Our
once restive province of Aceh would not have become
stable and peaceful, if such a combination had not been
implemented and owned by the people.

While my delegation shares the enthusiasm of many
others here today and in the recent Fourth Committee
debates, where prevention and comprehensiveness with
more responsive United Nations mechanisms have been
stressed, we also underscore the need for the Security
Council to function effectively. The Council must
fully uphold the principles of justice, international law,
human rights law and humanitarian law.

On the question of what more the Security Council
can do to break down silos so as to foster a more
comprehensive undertaking, my delegation would like
to offer following additional points.

First, we have noted that no one has disagreed with
the need to advance a holistic approach to promoting
peace and security. It is very encouraging that the
Council also stresses such an approach. All principal
organs of the United Nations and their subsidiary
entities have their respective mandates. They work best
when they stay within their respective domains, while
collaborating and cooperating with each other and
with external stakeholders, including relevant regional
organizations. Any undertaking to promote sustainable
peace and prevent armed conflict should make the best
use of drawing on the strengths of the entire United
Nations system.

In that context, Indonesia welcomes the two
recommendations by the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture.
The General Assembly, in its future quadrennial
comprehensive policy reviews, should include a
specific focus on sustaining peace and on examining
the success of the United Nations system in bringing
together development, humanitarian and peace and
security actions. The Secretary-General should
consider having objectives that incorporate peace
into performance compacts with the heads of all of
the relevant departments in the Secretariat and other
United Nations entities.

Secondly, the future intergovernmental consideration
of the aforementioned reports in the various United
Nations platforms will be a valuable opportunity for
the entire spectrum of Member States to re-evaluate the
working of the United Nations system in peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and to see how best
to harness their respective wisdom and experiences so
as to help advance international peace and well-being.

Thirdly, in the adoption of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), world leaders have clearly underscored
poverty eradication as the overarching goal of the
new Agenda, with the imperative of integrating the
economic, social and environmental dimensions
of sustainable development at all levels. In that
regard, Sustainable Development Goal 16 addresses
the promotion of peaceful and inclusive societies.
Correspondingly, achieving other Goals, along with
Goal 17 on strengthening the means of implementation
and revitalizing the global partnership, coupled with
the role played by the High-level Political Forum in
the Goals review framework, will also be critical in
buttressing a comprehensive and well-supported effort.

Finally, Indonesia reiterates the fundamental
importance of embracing and practicing a sound
principles-based paradigm to address and resolve
conflicts in a peaceful manner, including by addressing
the root causes of conflicts. We are ready to extend
our support to the United Nations system and the
relevant stakeholders in order to help promote effective
approaches to sustainable peace and development.

