The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Libyan Arab J amahiriya.

At the outset, I wish to express our appreciation
to Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
for his valuable briefing. I also wish to thank our
brother Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Somalia, for his presence and for the
information he provided to us today on the situation in
Somalia. I also express our thanks to Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for his valuable briefing.

In the past few months, the leaders of the Somali
people have affirmed their determination to emerge
from the quagmire of the civil war in which that
country has been embroiled for the past 18 years. The
parliament was expanded, followed by the election of
Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed as the new President of
the country. A Prime Minister was appointed and a
Government was then formed and endorsed by
parliament. Those are all positive indicators of the
parties' commitment to the national reconciliation
process under the Djibouti agreement. Dialogue among
all parties to the conflict in Somalia and the
abandonment of policies of exclusion are the only path
to a permanent political settlement.

We believe that the desire of President Sharif to
communicate with all parties that oppose the Djibouti
process, with whatever their various political Views, is
a first step in the right direction. For our part, we urge
all factions of the Somali population to respond to the
call of President Sharif and to adopt a spirit of
tolerance and overcome the past in order to spread
peace and reconciliation throughout the country.

My delegation welcomes the completion of
Ethiopia's full withdrawal from Somalia. We are
grateful for the commitment of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to continue working
under difficult conditions. We urge African Union
(AU) member States that have pledged to contribute

troops to make the necessary arrangements to deploy
them without delay. We also call upon the international
community to provide the resources to enable those
States to contribute troops to AMISOM. We hope that
the United Nations logistical support package for
AMISOM. will help to apply United Nations criteria
with regard to the participating troops.

The security situation in Somalia is of great
concern despite the fact that no major combat
operations have taken place since the withdrawal of the
Ethiopian forces. The AU Mission has been targeted by
repeated attacks, and armed groups still control several
areas of the country. That has had a negative impact on
the human rights situation and humanitarian
conditions.

On the humanitarian front, the continued
deterioration of humanitarian conditions in Somalia
continues to be of concern. Over 3 million people
require humanitarian aid, and the number of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) continues to increase. The
IDPs are not expected to return home anytime soon,
while armed groups continue to target humanitarian
organizations, whether to loot equipment or to abduct
or kill workers. On this occasion, I wish to commend
the World Food Programme and its personnel for their
courage and for their decision to continue providing
humanitarian aid in the southern and central areas of
Somalia despite the difficult conditions.

On another front, with regard to the encouraging
response of the international community in combating
piracy off the Somalian coast, we think that piracy is a
natural response to the unstable situation in Somalia
and cannot be addressed in isolation from the political
situation in the country. Combating piracy therefore
requires a multidimensional approach based on a
political dialogue among all parties, stemming from the
Djibouti process and backed by a peacekeeping
mission and efforts to revive State institutions and
build capacity, in particular relating to law
enforcement.

In that regard, we encourage cooperation among
States, international organizations and United Nations
bodies within the context of international law to
combat piracy and we support considering the
formulation of a national and regional legal framework
to facilitate the arrest and trial of those suspected of
committing acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea.
We affirm the pivotal role of the United Nations in
coordinating the fight against piracy and in providing
information, and we urge all Member States to offer
information on their efforts to combat piracy.

My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General's
decision to hold a donors conference in the coming
days to collect contributions for the AMISOM. trust
fund and for building the capacity of Somali
institutions. We urge all countries that can to contribute
generously. We look forward to the report that the
Secretary-General will submit by 15 April on the
current situation in Somalia and on the progress made
in fully deploying the African Union Mission and in
expanding it to become a United Nations peacekeeping
mission.

The report will discuss political progress and the
security situation on the ground so that the Council can
use it in its decision on deploying United Nations
peacekeeping forces in Somalia. We also believe that
the lack of stability and the security situation must not
be used as an excuse to oppose the deployment of a
United Nations force in Somalia: United Nations
experience shows that deploying United Nations forces
to unstable areas has proved to be effective in the past.

Once again, my country's delegation reaffirms its
commitment to work towards national reconciliation in
Somalia and we assure His Excellency the Foreign
Minister - who has informed me that President Sharif
may arrive in Libya tomorrow or the day after - that
we are in contact with all parties and factions. Libya is
the only State that for years has had an embassy in
Somalia. We have set up a hospital in Djibouti to treat
wounded Somalis and we continue to offer food and
medical aid. We have provided hundreds of
scholarships to Somali students, the Tripoli University
has produced many Somali graduates, including
President Sharif. We will continue to offer aid to the
Government, including vehicles, administrative tools
and equipment, and we will work with the AU and the
League of Arab States in that area.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Czech
Republic.

