The Secretary-General: World Humanitarian
Day is our annual opportunity to salute the brave and
committed women and men who endure danger and
adversity so others may survive and thrive, to thank
those who open homes and borders to people fleeing
war and persecution, and to remember those who have
lost their lives helping others who are suffering.

Ten years ago today, explosions ripped through
the Canal Hotel in Baghdad. Twenty-two United
Nations colleagues lost their lives, among them Sergio
Vieira de Mello. His passion for the mission of the
United Nations and his compassion for those we serve
remain inspirational. Every day, humanitarian workers
protect, feed, shelter, educate, heal and assist millions
of people, regardless of who or where they are. It is
an outrage that our colleagues and partners should
be attacked for providing those essential services. On
this tragic anniversary, I call again for greater respect
and protection for humanitarian workers and assets
everywhere. Attacks against humanitarians are a
violation of international law, they are war crimes and
they are direct assaults on those who we serve, those
who need us most.

Every day, we are reminded of the horrific
consequences of conflict, violence and terrorism.
We cannot become numb to that brutalization. I am
particularly concerned about the use of explosive
weapons with wide-area effect in populated areas.
Roadside bombs, heavy weapons and artillery and
air strikes can indiscriminately kill and maim, with
profound humanitarian consequences.

I repeat my call to the Security Council and to
Member States to also work through the General
Assembly to recognize and act on this critical issue.
We need to better understand the types of explosive
weapons that are most problematic. We need to examine
how existing international law can help regulate use.
And we need to consider the concrete steps that can be
taken to reduce the humanitarian impact of explosive
weapons in populated areas.

In Syria, villages and towns are repeatedly subject
to indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks. All
parties to the conflict are systematically failing in
their obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law to protect civilians. That must end
immediately.

The Violence has created overwhelming
humanitarian needs and widespread suffering.
The number of persons displaced by the fighting
continues to grow. Yet, all parties continue to hinder
direct and efficient access for impartial assistance.
The humanitarian space in opposition-held areas
is shrinking. And the Government continues to
impose numerous and unacceptable bureaucratic and
administrative constraints. I urge the international
community to increase its support for relief efforts.
That includes assisting affected countries in the region.
Their borders need to remain open to people fleeing the
Violence.

I am also seriously concerned about the situation in
the Central African Republic. The Council was briefed
on Wednesday about the deteriorating humanitarian
and human rights situation there. Armed attacks against
civilians, illegal detention, torture, widespread sexual
violence, child recruitment and abductions are rife. I
urge the Council and the international community to
give that tragedy the highest priority.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, civilians,
including children, are also caught in the fighting,
subjected to sexual and gender-based Violence, killed,
forcibly recruited and arbitrarily detained. Those
Violations have continued for far too long.

I call on all parties to respect their obligations
under international law and to work towards the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. Protecting civilians demands timely
political action and prevention. It means helping
Governments - which have primary responsibility for
protection - to build the necessary capacity. That may
include a presence or preemptive action by uniformed
peacekeepers.

Where the United Nations acts to support the
strengthening of national security institutions, we
are guided by our human-rights due-diligence policy,
which is firmly rooted in the fundamental principles of
international law.

United Nations peacekeeping operations take
an integrated approach to protecting civilians that
addresses a wide spectrum of possible measures. The
protection of civilians remains at the core of nine
current United Nations peacekeeping operations.

The establishment of the new mandate for the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and the strengthening of the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have offered
opportunities to enhance our ability to protect civilians.
At the same time, the evolving nature of our protection
role also poses significant challenges for the Council to
consider. In particular, we must beware of the risk of
being seen as a party to conflict and diminishing our
ability to provide impartial and timely humanitarian
assistance.

Let me turn to the question of compliance. It is
essential to act on and punish Violations ofinternational
humanitarian and human rights law, including the
deliberate obstruction of humanitarian assistance.
Commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions
with clear mandates have proven crucial in supporting
investigations and informing possible referrals to the
International Criminal Court.

The Security Council has a particularly important
role in such efforts: first, in promoting the cooperation
of Member States with the International Criminal
Court and, secondly, in encouraging and assisting
States to ensure accountability at the national level.
Those responsible for attacks against aid workers must
be arrested and prosecuted. We must never tolerate
impunity.

Addressing the issues I have outlined demands
unity and resolve. It has been 14 years since the
Council acknowledged the protection of civilians as
a fundamental component of its responsibility. In
that time, divisions have too often stood in the way of
action to meet urgent needs. The tragedy in Syria is a
particularly stark example.

Let us be inspired by the unselfish commitment
and sacrifice of humanitarian workers everywhere.
Let us commit to work in common cause to meet
our responsibility to the peoples of the United
Nations - wherever and whenever they need us.

