Mr. Spiric' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in Bosnian; interpretation provided by the delegation): It
is a great honour and privilege to share with the
Security Council my views regarding the results
achieved in Bosnia and Herzegovina to date, as well as
the challenges ahead of us.

In spite of different international and domestic
assessments that may be heard regarding progress in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, it is my opinion that 2008 has
been a successful year. During 2008, we signed the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the
European Union, started negotiations on a
liberalization of the visa regime and deepened dialogue
with NATO. We are close to completing our
negotiations for membership with World Trade
Organization.

We have also been successful in maintaining
macroeconomic stability. The average growth rate of
the gross national product in the past three years has
been about 6 per cent. Wages have increased, as have
pensions, employment and foreign exchange reserves.

The real challenge we continue to face is the high
foreign trade deficit. However, it should be recognized
that this is a problem all countries in transition have to
face until their economies become competitive in the
European Union (EU) market. When it comes to
achieving competitiveness, we are on the right track.

Apart from reforms, the challenges we will have
to face during 2009 and afterwards are the
consequences of the global financial and economic
crisis. Even though the depth of the crisis is as yet
unknown, and although the assessments are that Bosnia
and Herzegovina will not feel direct consequences of
the crisis, it is certain that indirect consequences will
not bypass my country. In that respect all levels of
Government, including State, entities and cantons,
found a unified answer and spoke in one voice on the
issue of successfully - at least for now - preserving
citizens' hard-won trust in commercial banks. Due to
internal differences and differing visions within Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the global financial and economic
crisis may result in a serious decrease in economic
growth. That is why we are working hard on possible
scenarios to best respond to the challenges of this
cr1s1s.

I am glad that the most developed world
economies and the EU member countries are looking
for a common answer to these challenges. I think it
would not be good to leave the fragile economies of
the western Balkans, including Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to search alone for individual solutions. I
think that solving the challenges of the global financial
and economic crisis for the western Balkan countries
would require a well-organized, combined approach.

Since the last meeting of the Security Council,
the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina
has held 18 regular and 6 thematic sessions, adopting a
number of important bills, strategies and decisions.
Here, I would particularly like to note the police
reform legislation, the Public Roads Bill, the Aviation
Bill, the Agency for Air Navigation Services Bill, the
Information Society Development Agency Bill and
many others.

We passed a number of strategies and action
plans, such as the Integrated Border Management
Strategy, the Immigration and Asylum Strategy and the
related 2008-2011 action plan, the action plan for
implementation of the Interim Agreement, the action
plan for implementation of obligations deriving from
the Stabilization and Association Agreement, the action
plan for implementation of obligations deriving from
the European Partnership, and the initial document for
the intensified dialogue with NATO.

Regarding negotiations on liberalization of the
visa regime, I would like to inform the Security
Council that immediately after the negotiations were
opened, the Council of Ministers established a working
group for negotiations. After the road map had been
delivered, we tasked the working group with drafting
the implementation action plan as quickly as possible,
and the plan was adopted at the fifty-seventh session,
held on 29 July 2008.

The working group fulfilled its first obligation
regarding the readiness report within the prescribed
deadline. We have recently received the European
Commission report, which is being analysed by
responsible institutions. We are of the opinion that the
end of 2009 and the beginning of 2010 will be the time
when citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina will be able
to enjoy the benefits of the white Schengen.

The Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina has started holding thematic sessions
devoted to European integration, and they have proved
to be very useful. We used those sessions to adopt a
number of important decisions and action plans, and
we regularly analyse our obligations in that respect and
monitor their implementation. The latest thematic
session was attended by the Entity Prime Ministers,
and we concluded that the Council of Ministers would
hold thematic sessions on European integration at least
once a month and that at least once every three months
Entity Prime Ministers would attend those sessions.

The Fiscal Council of Bosnia and Herzegovina
became operational and has held three sessions to date.
That body made it possible to establish the draft budget
of the country's institutions in a timely fashion and to
forward it for adoption to the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which is the official proponent of the
budget according to the Constitution.

I would like to note here that this is the first time
since Dayton that the conditions have been met for
adoption of the next year's budget before 31 December
of the current year by the Parliamentary Assembly of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Efficient functioning of the
Fiscal Council made it possible for us to lead a
responsible budgetary policy with the view to reducing
public spending. Bearing in mind all of the above, I
have a hard time accepting the assessments that this
has been an unsuccessful year for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We did have problems and challenges
that we were unable to solve.

At the meeting of the Peace Implementation
Council (PIC) Steering Board on 27 February 2008,
member countries set five objectives that the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina must fulfil in
order for the Office of the High Representative to be
transformed. These are the acceptable and sustainable
resolution of State-owned property, acceptable and
sustainable resolution of defence property, completion
of the Brcko Final Award, fiscal sustainability and
entrenchment of the rule of law, as well as two
conditions: signing of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement and a positive assessment of the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina by the PIC Steering Board.

So far, as already mentioned, we have signed the
Stabilization and Association Agreement and ensured
fiscal sustainability. The objectives regarding the
defence property and the rule of law have been partly
achieved. The latest agreement achieved by leaders of
three political parties - the Alliance of Independent
Social Democrats (SNSD), the Party of Democratic
Action (SDA) and the Croat Democratic Union of
Bosnia and Herzegovina (HDZ) - in Bosanski Samac
on 8 November 2008 was welcomed by Brussels. It
represents a solid basis for the fulfilment of the
remaining conditions and objectives, which would
create conditions for the final decision on closing of
the Office of the High Representative.

I think that would be a good development for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and I would like to ask for
the Council's support in that. Continuous delaying of
the transition of the Office of the High Representative
into a European Union special representative would, in
my opinion, damage the credibility of international
institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina and hurt the
trust in the reforms conducted so far, and I fear it
would fully erase the effects of the already shaken
justice system reform. It is hard to accept the claim that
the justice system reform is made credible by the
presence of international judges, particularly
concerning prosecution of organized crime, if we see
that almost no indictment has ended with a legally
binding verdict, as was the case with Sarovie, Covie,
Fazlie and others.

I am grateful for everything that the international
community has done for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
it is my personal opinion that we will continue to need
not just attention but also assistance. That assistance
must be provided in the form of services and advice,
but not in the form of international representatives
having decision-making power in our institutions -
primarily judiciary - with diplomatic immunity and
without accountability for bad decisions. I think that it
is very important to stress at this moment that there is
no other country with a larger presence of international
institutions than Bosnia and Herzegovina, with a
general assessment by those institutions that Bosnia
and Herzegovina is making less and less progress.

Looking from the outside, the impression is that
13 years after Dayton, Bosnia and Herzegovina
represents an international observation post for
monitoring global projects in the region, and,
according to evaluations of high international officials,
it looks more and more like a controlled cul-de-sac.
These are hard but serious warnings.

Lately we have heard assessments that aim at
creating tensions between the Republika Srpska and a
part of the state-level Government, all the while
forgetting that Bosnia and Herzegovina is also made up
of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina with the
same constitutional powers, which, due to the
complexity of its organization and accumulated
internal problems, requires emergency action.

According to all parameters and assessments by
international financial institutions, Republika Srpska
represents a more stable entity, and it could be an
engine for development of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and not a threat, as some would maliciously say. The
stability of Republika Srpska should not be interpreted
as a cause of instability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I
do not think that the situation in the Federation is
improved by throwing accusations at the Republika
Srpska. Rather, all of us should help to make the
Federation an example of a well-organized and
efficient entity.

It is hard not to agree with assessments of a high
United States official who said that Republika Srpska
must be respected because it is part of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That is why I would like to stress that it
is extremely important that both Republika Srpska and
the Federation be equally respected as constituent parts
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

It goes without saying that Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs to enter a new era. I want to believe
that such an era would be characterized by a spirit of
agreement and compromise. We know that next year
will bring greater involvement by Brussels and the
European Union in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which I
strongly support. In addition, however, those of us
within Bosnia and Herzegovina must pay much greater
attention to realizing a common vision within our
country, which would mean its acceleration towards
integration with the EU.

The only way to do so is to have an open
dialogue and discuss all challenges, because every
agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina is an invitation
to reach broader agreement and to fulfil obligations so
that the country can succeed, which is in everyone's
interests. Political elites must make decisions that will
ensure the development of the system, rather than
waiting for sweeping change to come to Bosnia and
Herzegovina from abroad. I hope that the messages and
lessons resulting from today's meeting will be aimed in
that direction.

Finally, I would like to thank High Representative
Miroslav Lajcak on behalf on behalf of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, even though I wish his report were more
optimistic and not as selective.

