Mr. Holmes: I am grateful for this opportunity to
brief the Council on my visit to Kenya from 8 to 10
February. I apologize if I have kept the Council
waiting; I think there was a misunderstanding about the
timing.

I went to Kenya in response to the post-electoral
wave of violence and its devastating impact on so
many ordinary Kenyans, and at the specific request of
the Secretary-General. My first objective was to
reaffirm the practical support of the United Nations for
the people of Kenya at this extremely difficult time. As
part of that, I made clear again that the full weight of
the United Nations was behind the mediation process
led by former Secretary-General Kofi Annan. My other
aims were to assess the humanitarian situation on the
ground, in particular by visiting some of those most
affected by the violence; to make clear to all concerned
our commitment to completely impartial help for all
those in need; and to make sure that the humanitarian
2
community is fully prepared for the challenges in the
coming months.

As a result of the violence, which left around
1,000 people dead, at least 300,000 people were driven
from their homes - and probably many more. Over
270,000 people from six of Kenya's eight provinces
remain in approximately 200 camps and sites in the
Rift Valley, Nyanza, Western, Coastal and Central
Provinces. An estimated 500,000 people altogether
continue to require emergency assistance, with shelter,
water, food and medical care. Some 12,000 Kenyan
refugees in Uganda are also being looked after.

Most of the basic humanitarian needs in the
camps and sites have, I believe, been reasonably met so
far. The Kenya Red Cross Society has led the response,
together with the relevant government services, and
has played a key role in that success. The initial
strategy of the United Nations humanitarian agencies
and non-governmental organization (NGO) partners,
which responded quickly and effectively to the new
and unexpected crisis, was to support and complement
the national response capacity, in a country that does
not lack resources or a strong civil society.

There have been many challenges to overcome.
In the first chaotic weeks, displaced Kenyans moved
around the country rapidly and unpredictably, driven
by violence and threats of violence, but also by fear
and rumours. When I was visiting camps in the Nairobi
area, one site had had approximately 5,000 people just
a few days earlier, but was virtually empty by the time
I went to see for myself. Those concerned were moving
to their tribal homelands, areas that they considered to
be safer. That is a pattern for certain groups among
those affected. It greatly complicates identifying and
assisting all those in need, including host communities,
which will be a considerable challenge for the
humanitarian community in the weeks to come.

In practice, we have mapped three main types of
displaced persons. The first are farmers or smallholders
living in the Rift Valley, who have been driven from
their land and remain in camps, churches and police
stations. Second are migrant workers from western
Kenya, who have been chased out of their homes by
reprisal attacks. Many of them have returned, at least
temporarily, to their ancestral homelands in the western
provinces. Third are those living in the slums of the
greater Nairobi area, who were forced out of their
homes and shops during the violence and are now in
08-25105
camps around Nairobi, unsure of where and how to
restart their lives.

In the first category, Rift Valley Province has
over three quarters of the total displaced in Kenya and
was one of the worst affected by the violence. I visited
five sites in Nakuru and M010 and was impressed by
the cooperative efforts of the communities themselves,
the Government, the Kenya Red Cross, United Nations
agencies and NGOs to meet people's immediate needs.

However, it was also clear that a good deal more
needs to be done to consolidate sites, build new camps,
increase security and privacy, particularly for women,
children and other vulnerable groups, and upgrade the
quality of our assistance. It was evident from my
discussions in the camps that the vast majority of these
people left in panic, taking nothing with them, and are
reluctant to return to their homes in the near future
because of the violence they have experienced and
their continuing fear. In many cases, their homes and
crops had been destroyed. These people did not take
the view that they had tribal homelands to return to.
Many said that they wanted to be resettled elsewhere,
though this poses considerable problems of both
principle and practicality.

Common threads among all the displaced groups
were their urgent need for safety and security,
particularly for women and children, with some
disturbing accounts of continuing abuses in and around
camps, and the deep psychological consequences of the
trauma they had been through. I heard dreadful stories
of murder, of rape and of burning. The ethnic basis of
much of what happened was tragically clear.
Heightened ethnic awareness and fears have quickly
spread through much of Kenyan society, fuelling
polarization. The effects of ethnic divisions on basic
government services, for example, have been dramatic
in some areas because staff have quietly left or fear to
go to work. Overall, it is clear that this displacement
crisis will not disappear quickly even if there is a
political agreement in the coming days.

All of this poses a huge challenge for the
politicians, for Kenyan society and for the
humanitarian community. Questions about the possible
return and resettlement of internally displaced persons
are particularly sensitive. There are pressures of
conflicting kinds on them and on the humanitarian
community. It is natural to want to see as many people
as possible return home as soon as possible, but there
08-25105

is a lot to be done in terms of rebuilding confidence
and providing reliable security before that can happen
in many cases. It is vital in these circumstances to
adhere strictly to the principles of impartiality,
voluntariness and the need for full consultation with
the internally displaced persons themselves about their
future. We are reinforcing our guidelines on those
points and working with the Government and the
opposition on the way forward.

I emphasized those points in meetings with the
Government and the opposition. Both the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and the Minister of State for Special
Programmes acknowledged them and expressed their
gratitude for the support of the United Nations and the
international humanitarian community. The Secretary-
General of the Orange Democratic Movement and his
humanitarian team did likewise, while emphasizing
that we needed to pay as much attention to those who
were not landowners and who were therefore fleeing to
their homelands as to those who were likely to stay in
the camps for some time.

Meanwhile, the depth and complexity of the
underlying causes of the violence should not be
understated; nor should the difficulty of tackling those
long-standing issues. Time and political will from all
sides will be needed if there is to be any hope of real
success and a decent chance of averting further violent
explosions in future.

Decades-long grievances over land, poverty and
wide economic inequalities must be addressed in a
context of strong population growth and limited
availability of fertile land. Political manipulation of
land and tribal issues will have to be prevented in
future, including, no doubt, through constitutional and
electoral reform to encourage more equitable
representation of different interests in Government.
There must also be accountability for those responsible
for the violence, the widespread abuses of human
rights and the multiple failures to protect civilians. I
believe that the United Nations can and should play a
vital helping role in many of those areas, including
programmes to tackle provision of livelihood support,
youth unemployment and reconciliation between
communities, building on local initiatives.

While in Nairobi, I spoke to the donor
community to remind it that the response to the
international Emergency Humanitarian Response Plan,
which had appealed for $42 million, was so far only
3
around 60 per cent, including a contribution of
$7 million from the United Nations Central Emergency
Response Fund. That level of funding response is a
concern for most agencies in light of the potential for a
protracted crisis. We will be revising the Response
Plan in the coming weeks and I hope that donors will
respond generously as the strategy behind it develops.

The regional implications of this crisis are
considerable because of Kenya's long-standing role as
East Africa's main transport hub. More than 80 per cent
of Uganda's total imports for 2007 passed through
Mombasa, as did almost all of Rwanda's exports.
Burundi, the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, parts of northern Tanzania and the southern
Sudan also rely on the port's facilities to a significant
degree. That means that many aid and humanitarian
operations in the region also rely on Mombasa and are
at risk of being significantly affected by violence and
disruptions.

There are secondary effects, too. For example,
fuel prices in Uganda, the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Burundi have increased by almost 50
per cent in the past six weeks. Aid agencies are having
to look into alternative routes - for example, through
Dar Es Salaam - as a matter of sensible contingency
planning in present circumstances. But a peaceful
Kenya remains by far the preferred option. There is a
huge amount, therefore, at stake.

In summary, my assessment is that major
humanitarian needs will have to be addressed for many
months to come. We are currently looking at least a
year ahead, even on the basis of a quick and effective
political settlement of the immediate issues. We will
strengthen our own presence further and reinforce our
work alongside the Kenyan Red Cross on the basis of a
strategic analysis of the needs, a clear action plan and
contingency planning in case things deteriorate. As I
have suggested, the United Nations will also need to
look hard at how to reorient its development
programmes for Kenya to reflect the need to deal with
the deep underlying problems which have come to the
surface.

On the other hand, if there is no quick resolution
to the political crisis, the risk of a fresh surge in
violence, more displacement and further polarization of
society is very high. The humanitarian consequences of
that could dwarf anything we have seen so far, so the
responsibility of the politicians on all sides is very
great, as is the need for continuing strong support from
the international community, including this Council,
for solutions to both the short-term political problems
and the long-term questions.

