Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April. I also take this
opportunity to thank Ambassador Shalgham and the
Libyan delegation on their excellent work during the
month of March.

I should like to begin by warmly thanking
Mr. He'di Annabi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his very comprehensive briefing
this morning. I would like to express my deep
appreciation to Mr. Annabi, to his colleagues in the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and also to the Government and the
people of Haiti for their exceptional support and
assistance during the successful Security Council
mission only a few weeks ago. I think it was an eye-
opening experience for many of us - including me -
to have first-hand experience with the activities and to
see the people of the Mission, as well as the
Government and local leaders. I also believe that it
demonstrated the value of Security Council missions to
various places.

We welcome the fact that the security situation in
Haiti has improved greatly thanks to the support of the
international community and the efforts made, in
particular by the military and police components of
MINUSTAH. We witnessed on the ground that
MINUSTAH's presence is clearly making a difference
in Haiti.

At the same time, however, we need to be
mindful that security in Haiti remains in a fragile state.
The next presidential election, to be held in November
next year, and the revision of the Constitution will be
milestones in the political process on which Haiti has
embarked. But they could be accompanied by political
tensions or even disturbances, which we should try to
contain and deal with.

Thus, the presence of MINUSTAH troops and
police will continue to be as important as it has been
thus far, as the Haitian National Police is not yet able
to respond effectively on its own to unrest. We
welcome the steady progress in the capacity-building
of the National Police, which has been greatly assisted
by the strong support and guidance that the Mission
has been providing. However, continued technical
support from MINUSTAH is clearly indispensable to
achieving the target of building a strong police force of
14,000 members by 2011. Similarly, bilateral
assistance and support is required in order to meet the
need for equipment and facilities.

Lasting security and political stability will not be
achieved solely through a military and police presence
or even through the political process alone. Progress
must be made on the social and economic fronts. The
year 2008 was a difficult one for Haiti. Early in the
year, high food prices greatly affected the country, and
in August and September major hurricanes hit,
devastating many parts of the country. And this
occurred against the backdrop of the global financial
crrsrs.

In order to achieve sustainable development, the
Government of Haiti needs to demonstrate to its people
and to the international community a clear vision of
what self-development entails, as well as the will to
assume ownership of such a major task. To that end, it
will be necessary for the Government to attach priority
to the development strategy in its overall national
policy, to create that policy in consultation with
international supporters and to make it an
implementable strategy.

The international community, for its part, should
match Haiti's efforts by extending support that enables
the Haitian people to receive a peace dividend and the
stability that will make it possible for them to move
forward with the work of construction. The upcoming
Haiti donor conference in Washington, D.C., will
provide an important opportunity to reaffirm the
support for economic development. I hope that
conference participants will demonstrate the depth of
that support, not only by expressing political
commitment, but also by pledging, quite specifically,
the financial assistance that they will provide.

Food security and job creation are two of the
urgent issues that we need to address. The fact that, at
present, the rate of self-sufficiency in food production
in Haiti is only 48 per cent, even though more than half
of the working population is engaged in the
agricultural sector, underscores the importance of
securing sufficient food security by formulating
coherent policy measures that will make it possible for
the country to increase food productivity. That would
also help to improve the unemployment issue and
contribute to long-term development.

In that context, we are very grateful to the
Secretary-General for commissioning Professor Collier
to prepare his valuable recommendations. They must
be translated into concrete policy measures for
implementation. It is the sincere hope of my
Government that coherent policy measures along the
lines of those recommendations will be established by
the Government of Haiti in order to achieve human
security for every Haitian person.

When we consider benchmarks for MINUSTAH's
presence, we will have to focus more on socio-
economic development and reconstruction in order to
achieve lasting stability. We should initiate a
consideration process that involves all the actors and
partners concerned, focusing on the factors essential to
making a smooth transition from peacekeeping to the
peacebuilding stage. As we enter into such a
discussion, it is crucially important to bear in mind that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts are not
sequential, but overlapping. Serious peacebuilding
efforts must begin while peacekeepers are present and
doing appropriate work.

For that reason, steps must be taken to ensure that
the eventual process of reconfiguring MINUSTAH
does not, first, create a security vacuum or, secondly,
lead to a reduction in the commitment and support of
the international community. That can be done by
assuring the people and the Government of Haiti that
the international community will remain engaged in
working for the country's long-term stability.
In conclusion, I would like to pay particular
tribute to Mr. Annabi and his colleagues in

MINUSTAH. We are very much impressed by their
dedication to the cause. I would also like to thank those
countries that have contributed troops, police or
logistical support. They have significantly improved
the security situation under very difficult
circumstances.

