Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): On behalf of my Government, I offer our
condolences to the Governments and peoples of friendly
India and Pakistan for the tragedy that has struck them.

At the outset, I wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello; the President of the General
Assembly, Mr. Harri Holkeri, the member of the
transitional Cabinet of East Timor, Mr. Jose Ramos-
Horta; and the others who have been invited to
participate in our meeting for their excellent statements
containing deep analyses of the positive development
ofthe situation in East Timor.

We believe that we have every reason to describe
the results of the work of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
in various areas as impressive. Some ofthe most varied
issues fall within UNTAET's purview, ranging from the
state of the infrastructure to the development of
political processes. In this respect, we feel that it is
pointless to attempt to determine which is the most
important. At the same time, we are convinced that
unquestioned priority should be accorded to UNTAET's
efforts to Timorize authority and to promote national
reconciliation among the inhabitants of that part of the
island. Both these elements are of key importance to
the future of the territory because they will prepare
East Timor for self-government and help to create the
atmosphere in which East Timorese society will have
to live.

In the Secretary-General's report, it is rightly
pointed out that UNTAET is taking innovative
approaches in solving the problems facing East Timor.
We feel that we must pay due tribute to the staff of the
Transitional Administration, and first and foremost to
its head, Special Representative Sergio Vieira de
Mello, for his efforts in the search for creative
solutions and for his ability to take an innovative
approach.

Naturally, the problem of refugees and their
camps in West Timor remains rather acute and we hope
that the Indonesian authorities will do everything
necessary to halt as soon as possible the activities of
units ofthe integrationist militias. At the same time, we
consider it necessary to note with satisfaction the good
level of cooperation between the Government of
Indonesia and UNTAET.

It may be concluded from the Secretary-General's
report that East Timor is moving steadily forward
towards independence. This is in accordance with the
aspirations of the people of East Timor. We therefore
support the Secretary-General's recommendation that
the mandate of UNTAET to 31 December 2001 so that
the Transitional Administration can successfully
promote the achievement ofthat worthy aim.

