Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Lacroix,
Ambassador Blanchard and Ambassador Bin Momen
for their briefings.

I would like to begin by paying tribute to the
bravery and sacrifice of the men and women of United
Nations peacekeeping. They represent the very best
of the Organization. We owe it to them and to those
they protect to ensure that peacekeeping operations
have the right capabilities for the mission at hand. That
means the right people, with the right equipment and
skills, carrying out the right mandate. How often do
we actually meet that standard? How often, instead, do
we hear of peacekeeping operations having to rely on
whichever forces are available, rather than on the forces
best suited to the mission?

Our ultimate goal must be to give the United Nations
the freedom to tailor the forces it deploys according to
the unique circumstances of each mission's mandate.
We made a good start towards that goal, including at
the United Nations Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
Meeting in London last year. But as our Canadian
colleagues pick up the battle, it is clear that there is
more to do. Let me outline three steps that we need
to take.

First, we should not be afraid to innovate. We know
that there are persistent gaps in niche capabilities, such
as attack helicopters, specialist engineering skills and
medical skills. We should not accept those gaps as an
unavoidable reality, but instead look to countries to work
together to rotate the provision of that scarce capability.
That could mean one country providing those skills
while another supplies the supporting logistics, sharing
the burden and increasing the availability of that niche
asset. Such innovative smart pledges will be one of
the issues that the British Defence Secretary will raise
in Vancouver.

Innovation also means incorporating modern
technology to make peacekeeping more responsive and
more effective. We have already made some progress
on using unmanned aerial vehicles, but there are more
technologies that we could be harnessing. To do so
effectively, we need to be able to anticipate the future
requirements of missions, which brings me to my
second point.

Put simply, United Nations peacekeeping missions
are not meant to stay the same. They are meant to evolve
as the conditions on the ground evolve. As the mission's
objectives are achieved and as political processes
progress, force requirements will also change. We
should be able to anticipate those changes and be agile
enough to provide the capabilities required. That means
moving away from setting arbitrary troop ceilings
and instead moving towards a tailored approach that
relies on better information on what capabilities are
actually needed and when, so that we are more focused
on the effects that we want the peacekeeping mission
to deliver.

For example, next month we will be discussing
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. Many here will no doubt advocate for an
increase in the troop ceiling. But the United Kingdom
is more concerned that the Mission has the right troops.
For us, that means troops who are agile and mobile,
willing and capable of moving to where they are needed
at short notice. We know that this approach works; we
have seen it in action elsewhere. I would like to praise
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Pakistani contingent there for their agility in relocating
troops to hotspots where they are really needed for the
protection of civilians.

To help us anticipate future force requirements, we
need rich, real-time data from the United Nations to
inform Council decision-making. That analysis needs
to be used also to inform force-generation decisions.
We therefore welcome the call in resolution 2378 (2017)
for the collection and analysis of data on peacekeeping
performance. It is a really important step forward. Let
us all work with the United Nations to make it a reality.

My final point is that we cannot lose sight of long-
term planning and strategic force generation. That
includes more partnerships, more training and more
capacity-building, so that we are moving beyond the
immediate force generation to future strategic force
generation, and so that we are preparing for future
needs, not just filling the current capability gaps.

As we do so, let us not forget that the military force
is just one of the three pillars ofa mission. As missions
become more involved in political work, we will all need
to think about how we generate the civilian component
and the policing component so that missions can play a
role that has a significant impact, notjust in keeping the
peace but in building and sustaining it too.

