Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Pierre Lacroix for his briefing on the state of affairs
in Darfur and on the main conclusions of the strategic
assessment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We also
listened carefully to Assistant Secretary-General
Andrew Gilmour's report on the human rights situation
in the region.

We share the conclusions in the joint strategic
assessment of the Secretariat and the African Union
Commission regarding the fact that there is a noticeable
improvement in the security situation in Darfur. The
various clashes with the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid in Jebel Marra do not change that. We are also
seeing a degree of normalization on the humanitarian
front. The overall trend in the situation in the regions
that the Blue Helmets have already left has not changed.

We believe that all of those arguments confirm that
the Security Council was right in its decision to reduce
the military component of UNAMID with the aim of
fully drawing down the mission by the end of 2020.
In proposing a technical rollover for UNAMID, the
representatives of the United Kingdom and Germany
even referred to the African Union Peace and Security
Council's communique, but for some reason quoted it
selectively. I would like to point out that in paragraph
10 of the communique, the Peace and Security Council
approves the strategic assessment and the mission's
future drawdown. I see no reason why we should call
for any other course of action. I ask our colleagues
to follow the spirit and letter of Security Council
resolution 2429 (2018) and discuss the parameters for
the peacekeepers' withdrawal. Nor can I ignore the
fact that the discussion of their proposal for a technical
rollover has only just begun at the expert level. We have
not yet been able to engage in support of their text. Why
should they fly in the face of Security Council practice
by announcing this in an open meeting and anticipating
the experts' work? It does them no credit and makes our
work considerably harder. Moves like these display all
the signs of megaphone diplomacy, which we thought
we had all decided to do away with.

I would also like to focus on another aspect. The
ongoing discussions in the United Nations about
the Organization's difficult financial situation are
constant. The Secretary-General is openly sounding
the alarm, calling for us to work together to deal with
it. The budget deficits for peacekeeping operations are
growing steadily. And what do we see? Despite all of
that, some of our colleagues are calling insistently for
putting the drawdown of an operation that costs more
than half a billion dollars on hold. As a comparison,
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo, whose closure our Western colleagues
have been calling so loudly for despite the continuing
tensions there, costs less than $40 million. What kind
of savings is that?

We are realists, of course. We understand that Darfur
is facing many complex challenges. There are questions
and problems that must be resolved. However, that is a
job for peacebuilding, not peacekeeping. UNAMID was
first deployed 12 years ago and has helped to deal with
the acute phase of the crisis. An analysis of its activities
will be extremely important for future peacekeeping
operations. But the time has come to concentrate
on the restoration and economic development of the
region. That should be the international community's
priority now.

We are once again astonished to see a number
of our colleagues around this table using this agenda
item not to discuss the parameters for withdrawing a
peacekeeping operation but to voice their opinions of
the domestic political situation in the Sudan, despite the
fact that only a few days ago there was a clear appeal
for refraining from any external interference in the
agreed Security Council press statement (SC/13836) as
well as the African Union communique. It seems it is
just those sections of the communique that our Western
colleagues have decided to ignore.

I would like to emphasize that we believe that
the resolution of the internal crisis in their country
is a matter for the Sudanese people themselves.
Outside pressure, ultimatums and open support for
one of the parties in the negotiations, let alone blatant
interference in a sovereign State's internal affairs, are
absolutely unacceptable and will only exacerbate the
disagreements. However, we were pleased to see a
positive trend on the ground in the context of Ethiopia's
mediation initiative. We should support African efforts
rather than telling the Sudanese people what to do
and how to do it when they are in a difficult situation.
Believe me, they will reach an agreement much more
quickly without lectures from outside.

In conclusion, I would like to ask Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix two questions. Besides decree 102 of
the Transitional Military Council, which he mentioned,
are there any other technical obstacles to UNAMID's
drawdown? Also, in the Secretariat's view, what is the
time frame needed for UNAMID's withdrawal and
complete closure? I would be grateful for his answers.

