While the absolute number of war-related deaths has been declining globally since 1946, incidents of conflict and violence are still on the rise, with many conflicts today becoming far more fragmented and waged between such non-State actors as political militias, criminal entities and international terrorist groups. While varying widely across regions, organized crime and gang violence have killed far more people than armed conflicts have. Technological advances are also contributing to the changing nature of conflict. There are concerns about the potential for artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning to worsen cyber, physical and biological attacks, for example, by making them more precisely targeted, harder to attribute and easier for small groups- perhaps even "lone wolves" - to carry out. Terrorist and radical extremist groups today have unprecedented access to the general public through the Internet, which allows for more efficient and effective recruitment, incitement, and propaganda, as well as for easier purchase of weapons and illegal money transfers. Both State and non-State actors can use Al-enabled deep learning to create "deep fakes" that have the potential to fuel misinformation, division and political instability. Emerging technologies are also lowering the barriers to the acquisition of biological weapons - toxic substances or diseases used to harm or kill humans, livestock and crops. There are concerns that advances in AI and 3-D printing could facilitate attacks by automating the development and deployment of weapons and weapon systems, thereby transferring responsibility over life and death from human moral systems to complex data systems, devoid of any ethical compass. In addition to the foregoing, breakdowns in the rule of law, the absence of State institutions, illicit economic gain and the scarcity of resources have also become drivers of conflict. Moreover, in recent times, conflicts have become longer, more protracted and less responsive to traditional forms of resolution. Finally, terrorist forces continue to be relentless in their pursuit of fomenting terror and insecurity. While the United Nations was designed 75 years ago as an institution to manage relations among States as the world reeled from the horrors of two world wars, today's new, complex and more sophisticated drivers of conflict require a holistic, innovative, inclusive and multi-stakeholder response. It is in this context that India views peacebuilding as a powerful deterrent to violent conflict. India recognizes the primacy of national Governments and authorities in identifying and driving priorities, strategies and activities for sustaining peace at all stages of conflict and emphasizes that inclusiveness is the key to advancing national peacebuilding objectives. As one of the largest troop-contributing countries in the history of United Nations peacekeeping operations, India is proud of the accomplishments that the United Nations has made in peacekeeping. We are also proud to have contributed to that success. Nevertheless, peacekeeping alone is not sufficient to sustain peace and security. Peacekeeping ably aided and supplemented by peacebuilding will help transition to sustainable peace and development. Inadequate financing for peacebuilding activities has so far remained a stumbling block. For peacebuilding efforts to be more effective, there is an urgent need for predictable and sustainable financing. Bringing about social cohesion in divided societies and building trust in Government is easier said than done. Ensuring that conflict-ridden countries do not slip back into chaos will require the creation of strong governance structures that enhance trust between citizens and Governments, guarantee delivery of essential services and increase avenues for citizen participation in governance. As the world's largest democracy, we are convinced that effective and strong governance structures will help stabilize peace, safeguard fundamental rights, protect the rule of law and make governance representative, transparent, responsive and people-centric. India's contributions in the area of people-centric peacebuilding in the post-conflict reconstruction work of Afghanistan is well known. Even in the face of repeated terrorist attacks, India has persisted and invested in grass-roots and impactful development partnership projects worth over $3 billion, covering all provinces of Afghanistan. For instance, in the sphere of education, training and capacity-building, India has assisted the Government of Afghanistan in setting up the Afghanistan National Agricultural Sciences and Technology University in Kandahar. It is the first of its kind in Afghanistan. India's fundamental approach to peacebuilding efforts is to respect national ownership and to be guided by Member States' development priorities. For example, last year, 25 senior civil servants, including the Solicitor General and Legal Secretary, Permanent Secretaries and Deputy Permanent Secretaries from key governmental ministries of the Gambia, trained at India's National Centre for Good Governance to understand best practices in field administration and good governance. The programme was conducted under our flagship Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation programme, which annually assists more than 160 countries through scholarships in the area of capacity-building. Going forward, India will continue to be a force multiplier for peacebuilding with an emphasis on the people-centric approach, not just in its neighbourhood, but also in Africa, the Pacific, the Caribbean Islands and beyond. The twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) is taking place in a world where 2 billion people live in countries affected by conflict. In those conflict- ridden countries, women are working against tremendous odds to build and sustain peace. Ensuring a gender perspective and women's participation in peacebuilding is critical, including in prevention, disarmament, protection in displacement settings, peacekeeping, policymaking and reconstruction. The Council will recall that the United Nations first-ever all women formed police unit (FPU) was from India and stationed in Liberia. Due to their dedication, professionalism and motivation, the all-female members of the FPU proved to be strong, visible role models, gaining world-wide attention and illustrating the significant contribution that women can make towards the provision of security. Today, India's female engagement team members are also playing an important role in the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Lastly, the enablement of youth as an active agent in peacebuilding cannot be considered without considering such challenges that they tend to face, owing to conflict situations resulting in loss of education opportunities, a lack of employable skills and the destruction of a stable family environment. The wider socioeconomic needs of young people are often ignored in post-conflict contexts, as they are not seen as a vulnerable group. With their youthful energy, capabilities and ability to adapt to new technological trends, it is important to provide youth with training opportunities, especially in the digital space, so that they can take an active part in peacebuilding. We are convinced that people-centric, gender-sensitive and technologically primed solutions and democratic institutions of governance that give all stakeholders a say in creating a better future is the biggest guarantee for success of peacebuilding and for sustaining peace.
