Mr. Grigore (Republic of Moldova): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the current month and to express our appreciation
for your skilful guidance of the Council's work. Like
previous delegations, we commend the efforts of the
Pakistani presidency in convening this open debate on
peacekeeping operations, and we share its position on
the need to evaluate the strategic direction of
peacekeeping operations and future trends.

The landmark documents in the area of
peacekeeping - such as the 1992 Agenda for Peace
and the 2000 Brahimi report - highlighted the
significant importance of peacekeeping and assessed
the existing system, providing specific
recommendations on the political, strategic and
operational levels of peacekeeping operations. At the
same time, with the recent surge in demand for
peacekeeping operations, we foresee the need to review
the effectiveness and efficiency of the entire United
Nations peacekeeping system.

The Republic of Moldova fully shares the
assessment of the challenges identified by the
Secretary-General in his remarks today and in his
recent report to the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. We find the questions
formulated in the President's non-paper for this open
debate to be of the utmost importance, and we look
forward to cooperating in identifying adequate
solutions to those challenges.

Peacekeeping operations have now become more
complex and multidimensional. Meeting these multiple
challenges requires not only greater resources in
personnel, logistics or finances, but also enhanced
operational effectiveness and efficiency through
constant improvement of the planning, the organization
and the management of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, we appreciate the actions
undertaken by the Secretariat in order to improve its
capabilities in the field of peacekeeping and to enhance
the effectiveness and the timeliness of its peacekeeping
operations.

With the increasing demand for peacekeeping
operations, we need to ensure that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) carries out its heavy
responsibilities efficiently and that available
peacekeeping resources are used in the most beneficial
manner possible. In that regard, we commend the
efforts of DPKO to strengthen United Nations
operational peacekeeping capacities in the fields of
integrated planning, rapid deployment, coherent
command and control, as well as the considerable
advancement made in strengthening the United Nations
Standby Arrangements System (UNSAS).

The expected increase in the number of deployed
peacekeepers will require from troop-contributing
countries well equipped and properly trained units. In
that respect, we note the significant achievements of
DPKO in the area of training and would encourage it to
continue the practice of providing timely information
to potential troop-contributing countries on future
training sessions and wide dissemination of materials
on lessons learned and best practices. We support
further development of standardized training modules,
and we welcome the Department's steady efforts to
develop a new process for recognition of United
Nations training courses delivered by representatives
of experienced troop-contributing countries, as well as
the measures to establish new peacekeeping training
centres.

I would like to emphasize the continuing
commitment of the Republic of Moldova to United
Nations peacekeeping as an important instrument for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Despite the fact that my country's ability to contribute
effectively to peacekeeping operations is often
impeded by financial constraints and shortfalls in
training capabilities and equipment, the Government of
the Republic of Moldova is willing to provide its full
support, in political, human and logistical terms, to
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Here, I wish to inform the members of the
Security Council that Moldova, as an emerging troop-
contributing country, is currently a participant in
United Nations peacekeeping efforts, with military
observers and staff officers in the United Nations
missions in Liberia and C6te d'Ivoire. Military officers
are also taking part in various peacekeeping missions
within regional arrangements. The national authorities
are undertaking the necessary steps, with a view to
proper training and providing logistics for the national
peacekeeping contingent. In the forthcoming period,
the Republic of Moldova will consider strengthening
its contribution to United Nations peacekeeping by
concluding a memorandum of understanding and
providing national troops in accordance with its
pledges to UNSAS.

In conclusion, I would like to touch upon the
question of safety and security of United Nations
personnel, which should be addressed as an absolute
priority. The United Nations has to enhance its efforts
to review its systems and procedures for safety and
security, both at Headquarters and in the field, and
must develop better capacities to prevent and manage
threats by improving mechanisms for gathering
information in the field.

As previous speakers have mentioned, in less
than two weeks we will observe the International Day
of United Nations Peacekeepers. Paying tribute to
those who served and continue to serve with dedication
and courage in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, we must do our utmost to ensure their safe
return to their families and home countries.

