Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Brazil is deeply concerned
about the deteriorating situation in Libya. We stand
behind the strong message of resolution 1970 (2011)
adopted by consensus by the Council. The Government
of Brazil has publicly condemned the use of violence
by the Libyan authorities against unarmed
demonstrators, and calls on them to uphold and protect
the right of free expression of the protesters and to
seek a solution to the crisis through meaningful
dialogue.

Our vote today should in no way be interpreted as
condoning the behaviour of the Libyan authorities or as
disregard for the need to protect civilians and respect
their rights. Brazil stands in solidarity with all
movements in the region expressing legitimate
demands for better governance, more political
participation, economic opportunities and social
justice.

We condemn the Libyan authorities' disrespect
for their obligations under international humanitarian
law and human rights law. We also took into account
the call of the League of Arab States for strong
measures to stop the violence through a no-fly zone.
We are sensitive to that call and understand and share
the League's concerns.

It is our view that the text of resolution 1973
(2011) contemplates measures that go far beyond that
call. We are not convinced that the use of force as
provided for in paragraph 4 of the resolution will lead
to the realization of our common objective - the
immediate end to violence and the protection of
civilians. We are also concerned that such measures
may have the unintended effect of exacerbating
tensions on the ground and causing more harm than
good to the very same civilians we are committed to
protecting.

Many thoughtful commentators have noted that
an important aspect of the popular movement in North
Africa and the Middle East is their spontaneous, home-
grown nature. We are also concerned about the
possibility that the use of military force, as called for
in paragraph 4 of today's resolution, could change that
narrative in ways that may have serious repercussions
for the situation in Libya and beyond.

Protecting civilians, ensuring a lasting settlement
and addressing the legitimate demands of the Libyan
people require diplomacy and dialogue. We support the
efforts being made in this regard by the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General and by the African Union. We
also welcome the inclusion in today's resolution of
operative paragraphs demanding an immediate
ceasefire and a complete end to violence and all attacks
against civilians, and stressing the need to intensify
efforts conducive to the political reforms necessary for
a peaceful and sustainable solution. We hope that these
efforts will proceed and succeed.
