Mr. Cohen (United States of America): The United
States joined the consensus in support of today's
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). We commend France for
the cooperative spirit in which it led this process. I also
want to express our deep appreciation to the troop-
contributing countries for their ongoing sacrifices in
support of UNIFIL's critical work.

We of course welcome the active approach that
UNIFIL's leadership has taken to de-escalate tensions
along the Blue Line and preserve the mission's vital
access to it. The United States remains steadfast in
its commitment to UNIFIL and to Lebanon's security,
stability and sovereignty. We have a common interest
in seeing UNIFIL succeed, but it continues to be
prevented from fully implementing its mandate. We
cannot continue to accept that status quo.

The implementation of the arms embargo under
resolution 1701 (2006) remains a top priority for the
United States. While some Council members did not
want to include language that was too prescriptive in
this mandate renewal, in the coming year the Secretariat
needs to take serious steps to build on the annex and
increase the United Nations reporting on and ability to
effectively monitor and verify the implementation of
the arms embargo. As we made clear to the Council just
a few weeks ago, we continue to see UNIFIL prevented
from accessing areas of concern. Eight months after
their discovery, UNIFIL still cannot access suspected
Hizbullah tunnel sites on the Lebanese side of the
Blue Line because Lebanese leaders have not directed
their armed forces to investigate suspected sites
with UNIFIL. In this renewal, we made serious efforts
to address access issues. There was some progress, but
we were unable to include a time frame for facilitating
access, which is necessary for accountability. We must
do more to ensure that UNIFIL has unimpeded, timely
access to the entire Blue Line and to urge the Lebanese
civilian leadership to address these concerns.

The fact that UNIFIL cannot access all of the areas
within its area of operations leads us to believe that it
is time to re-examine the troop strength and begin the
process of putting the mission on a trajectory toward
right-sizing. In the year ahead, we will be scrutinizing
the ability of the mission to implement its mandate, and
we hope that the United Nations will take the assessment
of the continued relevance of UNIFIL's resources and
options for mission efficiencies seriously.

We have all endorsed the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. One of those commitments is to pursue
clear, focused, sequenced, prioritized and achievable
mandates by the Security Council matched by
appropriate resources. If UNIFIL is prevented from
fully implementing its mission within the parameters
of its current mandate, it is the Council's responsibility
to adjust the mandate accordingly.

We look forward to working with the Council over
the course of the year, but I must reiterate that we need
to see serious progress and cannot, and will not, accept
the status quo, moving forward.

