Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia appreciates the
briefing provided by the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, and we wish to assure
him of our full support in the tasks entrusted to him.

Bolivia commends the joint declaration that was
issued after the latest session in Astana, held on 30 and
31 October, which underscored the progress made in
the implementation of the de-escalation areas, as well
as the significant reduction of violence on the ground
as a specific result of the measures taken to strengthen
and maintain the ceasefire. In that regard, we welcome
the efforts made by Russia, Iran and Turkey as
guarantors of the process, which is complementary to
the Geneva negotiations.

Nevertheless, we underscore that the establishment
of de-escalation areas and security must be a temporary
measure, based on consensus among the guarantors,
and that this should not undermine in any way the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic.

We also wish to highlight the important work that
the Russian Centre for the Reconciliation of Opposing
Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic is undertaking, both
as a guarantor of security in the supply of humanitarian
assistance and in the evacuation of people from the
towns where armed confrontations have taken place.
Proof ofthis is the fact that since 20 November it carried
out a total of 1,681 humanitarian operations.

My delegation wishes to highlight the significant
achievements made with regard to the progressive
liberation of the Syrian territory from Da'esh control.
We believe that the courageous efforts to eliminate
the presence of that terrorist group must undoubtedly
be accompanied by strategies to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure.

In that regard, we note - according to what was
reported in the report (S/2017/982) of the Secretary-
General - the existence of explosive remnants of war,
anti-personnel mines and improvised explosive devices
in the field. We believe that demining and the removal of
those explosive devices is an essential task in ensuring
the safe delivery of humanitarian assistance and the
return of more than 6 million internally displaced
persons who have been uprooted since the beginning
of the conflict.

Likewise, we view with concern the reports of
asymmetric attacks and possible violations of human
rights that have been committed by the parties to the
conflict during the period under review, which has led
to a total of 61 deaths and 238 wounded. That terrible
figure is in addition to the more than 7,000 deaths
recorded so far this year, and the more than 500,000
fatalities since the beginning of the conflict.

We recognize the cooperation and coordination
between the Syrian Government and the different
various humanitarian assistance agencies to improve
the delivery of assistance. We call for improvements
in order to avoid any administrative impediments
that would undermine or otherwise hamper such
aid delivery.

We believe it is urgent that the humanitarian aid
arrives swiftly to the population that most needs it.
We therefore reiterate that the parties to the conflict,
within the framework of international humanitarian
law, have an obligation to ensure unconditional and
unfettered access to humanitarian assistance. They
must safeguard its security and integrity, avoiding the
identification of convoys and humanitarian personnel
and ensuring that medical care centres do not become
military targets under any circumstances.

In that regard, based on the report of the Secretary-
General, we express our strong condemnation of the
destruction, by aerial bombardments, of vaccines
that were intended to combat the outbreak of measles
and polio. On the other hand, we reiterate once again
our highest appreciation for, and tribute to, the work
carried out by the staff of various agencies and
humanitarian organizations, who put their lives at risk
in the performance of their work.

Finally, it is important to note that the humanitarian
situation that currently affects more than 13 million
people in Syria should be resolved only through an
inclusive political process, negotiated and concluded
by and for the Syrian people. That is the only way to
achieve a peaceful solution to this prolonged conflict.

