Mr. Griitter (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this open debate. My thanks go also
to the three Chairmen, who gave us informative
briefings on the activities of their respective
committees.

My statement will focus on the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), since that body recently reviewed its guidelines
and introduced a number of important measures aimed
at improving its effectiveness. Switzerland particularly
welcomes the introduction of a standard cover sheet,
which obliges Member States requesting that an
individual or entity be included on the list to specify
suspected links with Al-Qaida or the Taliban. We
believe that that measure will help to enhance the
transparency and effectiveness of the listing procedure.

Switzerland also welcomes the establishment of a
focal point within the Secretariat, as well as the fact
that the 1267 Committee has incorporated the
corresponding procedure into its guidelines. We hope
that those sanctions committees that have not yet done
so will soon follow suit. Furthermore, we welcome the
various measures reaffirmed by the Security Council in
its resolution 1735 (2006), which are focused on
improving the criteria for inclusion on the list and
information about the persons and entities concerned.
Those developments represent important steps towards
improving the sanctions regimes, and they deserve our
full support.

However, more must be done. The focal point is
primarily a procedural measure that enables an
individual or entity to gain access to a sanctions
Committee at the beginning of the process.
Nevertheless, that does not change the
intergovernmental character of the procedure itself. In
order to make sanctions more effective, fair and clear
procedures for placing individuals and entities on
sanctions lists, and for removing them, should be
developed. The current procedures applied in the
different sanctions regimes may result in a conflict
between Security Council resolutions and international
human rights instruments. Such conflict potentially
harms the sanctions system as a whole and erodes the
legitimacy of the Security Council's efforts.
Switzerland believes that Member States and the
Security Council cannot afford to run that risk.
Sanctions are too important a tool in ensuring the
maintenance of international peace and security and in
countering terrorism worldwide, thereby contributing
to the implementation of Security Council decisions.

My country therefore continues to believe that the
efficient use of multilateral instruments in the fight
against terrorism requires the development of new
mechanisms, which should avoid incompatibility
between the obligations derived from sanctions
imposed by the Security Council and those arising
from international human rights instruments.

In that context, Switzerland believes that, in order
for the process to be equitable, the procedure should
include a way for a person or entity to be able to
launch a delisting procedure before an independent
panel. The recommendations developed by the Security
Council's Working Group on General Issues of
Sanctions are an excellent basis for further
strengthening existing sanctions regimes. Switzerland
believes it would be advisable for the Working Group
to be reconstituted to continue its important work.

Switzerland is resolved to contribute
constructively to the efforts of the Security Council
and its Committees to improve the effectiveness of the
system of targeted sanctions. Along with other
countries, Switzerland will continue to work for the
implementation of its initiative regarding harmonizing
targeted sanctions and the right to an equitable
procedure.

