Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Let me, at the outset,
commend Ambassadors Aboulatta, Llorentty Soliz
and Umarov for their insightful briefings and their
leadership of the Committees they chair.

Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction continue to pose a serious threat
to international peace and security. The threat is
constantly evolving and recent alarming developments,
including the use of chemical weapons in Syria by State
and non-State actors, have demonstrated the tangible,
concrete challenge facedby the international community.

The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its Group of
Experts are linked to the United Nations broad Counter-
Terrorism Committee and its work. Paragraph 27 of
resolution 2325 (2016) underscores that linkage and
complementarity, and reiterates the need to enhance
ongoing cooperation among the 1540 Committee, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism - through
information sharing, coordination of visits to States,
technical assistance and other issues of relevance to all
three Committees.

Terrorist individuals and entities are benefiting
from rapid developments in science, technology and
international commerce for proliferation purposes. That
phenomenon demonstrates how the abuse of emerging
scientific innovation can facilitate the spread of illicit
proliferation activities, particularly through the illegal
transfer of sensitive technology. This shortfall enables
terrorist entities and transnational criminal networks to
obtain access to weapons of mass destruction and make
it harder for States to put in place effective controls to
prevent proliferation activities.

Since no country is immune to the terrorist threat
today, it remains imperative for Member States to
take the necessary steps to effectively implement the
most relevant resolutions and to put in place long-term
prevention efforts, in compliance with their obligation
under international law, including human rights law. In
that regard, Italy recognizes the ongoing work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and, in particular, their efforts to assist Member States to
achieve the full implementation of Council resolutions
on terrorism and to identify important issues, trends
and developments.

Acknowledging the ability demonstrated by terrorist
individuals and entities to easily adapt to changing
circumstances, including the capability to misuse the
internet and social media to spread their hateful message,
recruit sympathizers, raise and move funds, CTED and
the Swiss non-governmental organization ICT4Peace
Foundation launched a joint project on private sector
engagement in order to respond to terrorists' use of
information and communications technology.

We encourage CTED to further pursue work on
private sector engagement, in response to terrorist
use of information and communications technology.
Furthermore, we welcome the CTC's recent adoption
of the proposal for a comprehensive international
framework aimed at countering the ways terrorists use
their narrative to encourage, motivate and recruit others
to commit terrorist attacks - submitted last month to
the Security Council for its consideration.

The 1267 Committee and its sanctions regime
remain crucial tools in the international community's
effort to detect and disrupt the activity put in place
by terrorist individuals, groups and undertakings. We
strongly support the work of the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions
1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh),
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities, particularly its regular report, focused
on the evolutionary threat posed by ISIL, Da'esh and
Al-Qaida and their affiliates, as well as its trip reports
aimed at curbing the current threat posed by those
entities in specific countries.

In that regard, we look forward to cooperating
with the Monitoring Team during its Visit to Italy in
the second half of the year. In acknowledgment of the
importance of the delisting mechanism, we also want
to pay tribute to the relevant role played by the Office
of the Ombudsperson and its effort to guarantee due
process and transparency in undertaking its function.

Resolution 1540 (2004) and the second comprehensive
review on the status of its implementation remain
central pillars of the international non-proliferation
architecture and have become even more important
in the current context, which is characterized by
acute and diffuse threats in which the distinction
between international and internal security is blurred.
The full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is
still a goal to be achieved and a long-term task that
requires continuous effort at the national, regional and
international levels, sustained and intensive support
from the Security Council and direct interaction with
States and the relevant organizations.

In this regard, and this is my final point, we
welcome all of the outreach activities conducted by the
1540 Committee and its strong engagement in providing
capacity-building assistance and encouragement to
those States that need to implement their obligations.
Considering the tools currently available in countering
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, we
believe that particular attention should be paid to
the field of biological weapons. Similarly, enhancing
protection of the critical infrastructure relevant to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction from
the increasing risk of cyberattack is a necessity today.

