Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): My
delegation welcomes Presidents Robinson and Byron
and Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow to the Council
today and thanks them for their continued work to fight
impunity. We congratulate Judge Robsinson on his
election as President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). We would
also like to commend the judges, prosecutors and staff
of the ICTY and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their diligence and dedication to
the work of the Tribunals.
The United States recognizes the many
accomplishments of the Tribunals and we acknowledge
in particular the recent arrests of Radovan Karadzic
and Stojan Zupljanin and the commencement of
proceedings in their cases. We urge the Tribunals to
continue to implement their completion strategies in
order to fulfil their ultimate mandate of bringing to
justice those responsible for crimes in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

We note the difficulties that the ICTR faces in
transferring the cases of indictees to national
jurisdictions and we urge the international community
to reaffirm its commitment to strengthening the
domestic judicial capacity of Rwanda. We commend
the domestic prosecutorial and judicial efforts to ensure
accountability for crimes committed in the Balkan
wars, which is critical to the long-term stability of the
region.

We want to stress once again that the fugitive
indictees must be brought to justice. We cannot allow
individuals who have been indicted by the ICTY and
ICTR to enjoy impunity simply because they outlast
the Tribunals. It must be clear to them and to those
who support them that such a strategy will not succeed.

Accordingly, the United States urges the
international community to work diligently towards
securing the arrest of the 15 individuals indicted by the
ICTY and ICTR who remain at large. We also call on
States to fulfil their legal obligations to cooperate fully
with the Tribunals. We are encouraged by recent
cooperation between the ICTR and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in tracking fugitives, but greater
cooperation is needed.

We are troubled, however, by the lack of urgency
of the Kenyan Government to act on reports that ICTR
fugitive and alleged genocide financier Felicien
Kabuga continues to have links to Kenya. We urge
Kenya to act immediately on the Tribunal's
recommendations and take additional steps to deny
Kabuga access to his networks of support.

Concerning the ICTY, we applaud Serbia for the
arrest and transfer of Radovan Karadzic. The
remaining fugitives, Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic,
must also be apprehended, and we call on Serbian
authorities to do everything in their power to locate
and arrest these individuals. A resolution of their cases
is critical for stability and reconciliation in the
Balkans. We also wish to stress the importance of all
countries fully cooperating with the ICTY, and we note
with concern Prosecutor Brammertz's report that the
prosecution has not yet received key documents for the
Gotovina trial, despite some encouraging steps taken
by the Croatian Government.

We urge the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia to continue to work
closely with the ICTY and their Governments to fulfil
all of their responsibilities relative to the Tribunal. In
addition, we urge the national authorities in the region
to work closely with each other so as to enhance
information-sharing, to facilitate the transfer of war
crimes proceedings between States, as appropriate, and

to consider revisions to laws so as to allow the
extradition of nationals charged with war crimes.

The United States thanks Ambassador Grauls and
the Belgian delegation for their work as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on criminal tribunals. We
look forward to working with Council members to
complete the task of establishing a residual mechanism
that ensures that no war criminal from these conflicts
enjoys impunity and that ensures the Tribunals' legacy
while allowing for their efficient and successful
closure.

Finally, we would like once again to thank the
Presidents, Prosecutors, judges, registrars and staff of
the Tribunals for their good work and for their efforts
to end impunity for these crimes.

