Mr. Li Kexin (China) (spoke in Chinese): First of
all, we would like to thank Ms. Kane for her briefing.

We are deeply disturbed by the recent escalation
of tension between Israel and Palestine. China has
consistently advocated the settlement of the
Palestinian-Israeli dispute through peaceful means. We
oppose any military action that would cause casualties
among innocent civilians. We hope that both Israel and
Palestine will be able to show the utmost restraint and
rationality and take immediate action to put an end to
the vicious circle of violence for violence, so as to
prevent a further destabilization of the situation in the
region.

Every Government has the right to protect the life
and security of its citizens. However, any action taken
should conform to international law. Israel has resorted
to unilateral force, and its action has been taken at the
expense of the lives of many innocent Palestinian
civilians. It has even detained democratically elected
Palestinian Government officials. The international
community cannot accept such actions. Israel must put
an end to its operations.

For its part, the Palestinian Authority should
endeavour to bring about the immediate release of the
kidnapped Israeli soldier, in accordance with the
interests of the Palestinian people.

China notes that the conflict tension between
Israel and Palestine has caused many civilian
casualties, thus aggravating the already fragile
humanitarian situation in Palestine. Again, we appeal
to Israel to respect international humanitarian law, to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance by the
international community to the Palestinian civilians
and to avoid taking any action that would worsen the
humanitarian situation in Palestine.

The recent rapid exacerbation of tension in Israel
and Palestine again reminds us that the Middle East
peace process should continue. Direct dialogue
between the two parties should be resumed at an early
date. Bloody lessons remind us that hatred and
violence will not bring about peace. We urge the
leadership of Palestine and Israel to proceed in the
interests of their peoples, guided by the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations and the principle of
land for peace, to restore political confidence as soon
as possible and to resolve all disputes through
dialogue.

It is our hope that the international community
can take practical action and, in a constructive manner,
help Palestine and Israel emerge from this difficult
situation. The Security Council bears special
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and should therefore play a more
active role in that regard.

