Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I should like to thank Sir Kieran
Prendergast, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his useful and comprehensive briefing on
the situation in Afghanistan and the developments
taking place there. Those developments coincide with
the approaching end of the term of the Afghanistan
Interim Authority, in accordance with the Bonn
Agreement.

Afghanistan is now preparing to elect a loya jirga,
which will establish the Afghan Transitional Authority.
That will be an important political achievement for the
country, which has suffered for more than 20 years as a
result of bloody conflicts and insurmountable
difficulties that require, first and foremost, focused
Afghan efforts as well as international efforts to solve
them.

Despite the importance of convening the loya
jirga, which lies at the very heart of the political
situation, security concerns remain in Afghanistan, as
was mentioned by Sir Kieran Prendergast in his
briefing. This indicates that there are pockets of Al
Qaeda and Taliban resistance, as well as confrontations
between political and military groups, including ethnic
confrontations. Serious human rights violations are
clearly taking place. We believe that this problem will
take a long time to solve because it is a chronic social
issue.

We all know that the political process and
economic and social development are important factors
in alleviating the security situation in Afghanistan,
particularly given that security goes hand in hand with
the political process. Thus, the international
community's efforts in this field are extremely
significant and decisive. We believe that we must focus
on the following issues.

First, assistance is needed in the building of the
national Afghan army and in the establishment of an
effective security force provided with the necessary
equipment, materiel and training. Only thus will
Afghanistan be able to address its own security issues
and to reintegrate ex-combatants into Afghan life.
Reintegration is one of the most important factors. In
this respect, we wish to pay tribute to the efforts of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan to
reintegrate some 200,000 ex-combatants.

Secondly, problems persist with respect to
refugees and the humanitarian situation. Since financial
assistance has been insufficient to address these
questions, we must take swift and effective measures to
prevent their resurgence. We believe that the financial
resources currently available are wholly inadequate to
the necessary solution.

Thirdly, we must strive to stimulate economic
development, particularly in areas where the
cultivation of opium poppies is widespread, as was
mentioned by Sir Kieran Prendergast. We must find
alternative sources of income for farmers so that we
can help them to eliminate opium. Such efforts need
the generous assistance of the international community
if they are to be implemented successfully. We
therefore call on the countries that made pledges at the
donor conferences in Japan and Geneva to honour
those pledges as soon as possible. In this way,
Afghanistan will be able to make progress in the
reconciliation process, provide security for Afghans
throughout their country and achieve development and
stability.

In conclusion, I thank the United Nations and all
parties that have helped Afghanistan and its people to
overcome their problems and find their own way in all
walks of life. Only thus will every group avoid being
marginalized. This can be done if there is a genuine
will to lead the country towards an overall peace.

