Mr. Fischer (Germany): I would like to thank my
colleague, Foreign Minister Svilanovic of Serbia and
Montenegro, for his statement, and the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive and informative
briefing. I would like to associate myself with the
statement to be made later by Ireland on behalf of the
European Union.

We were shocked and dismayed as we learned of
the events unfolding in Kosovo yesterday. We
profoundly appreciate the great efforts made by the
Special Representative to the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, Mr. Holkeri, the staff of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
KFOR and the police to bring the situation under
control in the face of the dangers confronting them.
The violence has claimed many lives and caused injury
to large numbers of people among the Kosovar
communities as well as UNMIK, the international
police and KFOR, and it must be condemned in the
strongest words. Our hearts and our deeply felt
sympathies are with the victims and their families. I
would like to extend my condolences to them.

The international community as well as political
leaders in Kosovo, both ethnic Albanian and ethnic
Serb, have great responsibilities over the next few
days. The most important immediate task is to restore
and maintain order. KFOR troops and the police will
have our full support as they take whatever steps are
necessary to stop the violence. We were deeply
disturbed by reports that KFOR troops were themselves
the object of attack yesterday. Germany supports the
decision made to bring in additional KFOR troops.

All leaders of Kosovo, especially those who have
been elected, must show the utmost political courage in
order to prevent the violence from undoing all the
painstaking efforts made over the past several years
toward building a tolerant and democratic Kosovo. The
joint statement made yesterday by politicians together
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General was a useful first step. It rightly emphasized
the need to support the police and KFOR and noted the
importance of responsible media behaviour. Political
violence is fed by misinformation, and the press should
not abet the plans of extremists by crediting unfounded
rumours.

But political leaders in Kosovo must go further.
Inter-ethnic violence is absolutely unacceptable and
must be condemned. We expect those leaders not only
to speak out against violence but also to actively
promote inter-ethnic understanding. They must also
explain to their constituents that no political grievance
justifies taking the law into their own hands. Political
leaders should visibly support all efforts by law
enforcement authorities to apprehend and punish
anybody who committed crimes or abetted violence
and should explain clearly why those people are
enemies not only of public order but also of the
legitimate democratic aspirations of the people of
Kosovo. There will be no impunity for the perpetrators.
Now is the time for responsible Kosovo Albanian and
Kosovo Serb leaders to appear together before the
people of Kosovo and to defend democratic values
against anarchy and mayhem.

Political leadership in Belgrade should also
exercise its responsibilities. It is especially important at
this time to prevent acts of retribution in Serbia. That
would only lead to an escalation of violence and feed
into the hands of extremists. We urge Belgrade to do all
it can to prevent further attacks on religious sites such
as took place yesterday in Belgrade and Nis. We also
urge Belgrade to continue the direct dialogue with
Pristina that was begun this month with the working
groups on energy and missing persons.

Yesterday's events highlight the stark choice
facing the people of Kosovo. Either they create a
society based on tolerance, multi-ethnicity and
democratic values, or they live in chaos and misery. It
is too early to say how the violence has set back the
process of implementing democratic standards. But
once calm has been restored, the only responsible
course is to proceed as quickly as possible with the
efforts to implement the "Standards for Kosovo" and to
finalize the implementation plan. Only by focusing on
achieving those standards can Kosovo put this ugly
series of incidents behind it and begin again to make
progress with regard to its European aspirations.

