Mr. Amorim (Brazil): I would first of all like to
recognize the presence among us of Vice-Minister of
Territorial Administration of Angola, General Higino
Carneiro.

The Security Council is called upon today to deal with
yet another critical juncture in the tortuous Angolan peace
process. To the profound disappointment of the
international community, the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol is once again being thwarted by the irresponsible
equivocation of the UNITA leadership. The facts were
described here by Vice-Minister Carneiro, and there is no
need to dwell on them at any length.

Successive attempts in recent weeks to put the process
back on track through dialogue and diplomacy have
unfortunately not been successful in dealing with UNITA's
persistent refusal to comply with its commitments. Such a
pattern of defiance is simply inadmissible. If the Security
Council today is given no choice but to impose additional
sanctions on UNITA, the responsibility for these measures
lies exclusively with UNITA's own short-sighted
leadership.

The Security Council owes it to the war-weary
Angolan people, whose plight is being unnecessarily
prolonged by systematic disrespect for commonly agreed
deadlines, to make its position clear. The draft resolution
we are about to adopt represents as fair an attempt as
possible to deal with this challenge. It condemns UNITA,
and particularly its leadership, for the failure to implement
fully its obligation under the Lusaka Protocol.

It demands that UNITA fully cooperate without
conditions in the immediate extension of State
administration throughout the national territory, in particular
in Andulo, Bailundo, Mungo and Nharea, and stop any
attempts to reverse this process. Complete demobilization
on the part of UNITA is treated as an imperative, and so is
its full cooperation in the verification of the
demilitarization.

Paragraph 5 of the draft resolution demands further
that UNITA stop any attacks by its members on the
personnel of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola, international personnel, the authorities of the
Government, including the police, and the civilian
population.

The draft resolution prevents all official contacts
with the UNITA leadership, in addition to establishing
targeted sanctions on UNITA's financial transactions as
well as on its lucrative diamond trade, if UNITA does not
fully cooperate in the transfer of administration of the
territories it occupies.

In our clear understanding, violation of the demands
set out in paragraphs 3 to 5, especially paragraph 5, as
cited above, would clearly indicate that UNITA is not
fully cooperating with the aims set out in paragraph 2.

The Angolan Government has displayed
commendable self-restraint and has done its part in regard
to the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. We applaud
the Angolan authorities for their efforts in absorbing
UNITA representatives into the executive and legislative
branches of the Government, as well as into the armed
forces, beyond their required obligations.

We wish to acknowledge the presence among us of
Vice-Minister Higino Carneiro once more and have taken
note of the assurances he has given the Council regarding
the Government's commitment to a political solution to
the present deadlock. General Carneiro's presence in the
United Nations has been much appreciated by my
delegation and, I am sure, by the entire Security Council
membership.

By adopting this draft resolution, we believe the
Security Council will be contributing to bringing to a
conclusion the drawn-out and painful process of
reconciliation in Angola. We can only hope that common
sense will prevail and that the UNITA leadership will
behave in such a way that will make further action
unnecessary.

