Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I should like to
begin by expressing, like previous speakers, a warm
welcome to Ambassador Jones Perry and to reiterate
that we are very pleased to see him here. We hope that
the good cooperation that already exists with his
Mission and with him personally will be characteristic
of his presence throughout his tenure in the Security
Council.

I should like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this meeting and to thank Ambassador
Munoz, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) (1267 Committee), for his very substantive briefing and the
concrete proposals it contains, which are aimed at
improving the work of the Committee in the fight
against terrorism. We commend the work that has been
done by the secretariat of the Monitoring Group, since
its assistance is indispensable for the activities of the
1267 Committee.

Resolution 1390 (2002), and particularly
resolution 1455 (2003), extended the sanctions
measures already in place against the Taliban and the
Al Qaeda network with a View to further improving
their implementation; therefore they are obligatory
references in the fight against the threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts. Despite the existence of the sanctions regime
created by those Security Council resolutions, the
strengthening of cooperation between Member States
and the Committee itself is urgently required for the
achievement of the objectives set out in those
resolutions.

Although there is a need for more effective
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions to allow a greater and more efficient
response to present and future threats to international
peace and security, my delegation is pleased to note the
considerable progress achieved during the past two
years, especially with regard to identifying and halting
the financing of terrorism. The listing process within
the framework of the 1267 Committee constitutes a
very important instrument for all Member States.
Significant progress has also been made in tracking
down and detaining the financing entities and
individuals belonging to the Al Qaeda network. Very
important steps forward should be noted in the travel
ban imposed by Security Council resolutions 1390
(2002) and 1455 (2003), as well as in the field of the
arms embargo.

However, despite the progress to which I just
referred, we must be aware that the efforts to curb the
financing of the Al Qaeda network and to control its
capacity to carry out terrorist activities are far from
complete. The specific references, contained in the
report of the Chairman of the Monitoring Group, to
training in the more specialized forms of terrorist
activities and to the fact that Al Qaeda has investigated
ways and means of developing weapons of mass
destruction are very serious indeed. As we have already
stated, we are convinced that further success in the
fight against terrorism - specifically with regard to Al
Qaeda - requires a sustainable international effort
along with increased cooperation, information sharing
and coordination between Member States and the
Committee. In accordance with operative paragraph 6
of resolution 1455 (2003), States are called upon to
submit updated reports to the Committee on all steps
taken to implement the measures imposed by operative
paragraph 4 of resolution 1267 (1999), by operative
paragraph 8 of resolution 1333 (2000) and by operative
paragraphs 1 and 2 of resolution 1390 (2002).

One of the important issues related to the work
done by the Committee since the Chairman's most
recent report, submitted in April, was the evaluation of
States' reports by the Monitoring Group covering the
implementation of resources and measures called for
under resolution 1455 (2003). In that connection, I am
pleased to say that my delegation has presented its
report within the required time frame.

As stated during the Chairman's most recent
briefing to the Security Council, in April, Angola has
developed various activities within the framework of
its relations with other countries in terms of
strengthening international cooperation in combating
terrorism. The 12 conventions for the suppression of
financing terrorism have been integrated into domestic
legislation. Ratification of that legislation is now under
way, which will complete our legal framework aimed at
dealing with terrorism.

Although the 1267 Committee and the CTC share

the same objective - of fighting the threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts - the activities of the two Committees are

different, albeit complementary. My delegation
commends the ongoing efforts and discussions in both
Committees on how they can better cooperate in
pursuing their complementarity, particularly with
regard to the implementation of operative paragraph 6
of resolution 1455 (2003) and of resolution 1373
(2001).

Finally, I cannot conclude my statement without
expressing our appreciation to the Monitoring Group
for the excellent work it has been doing. My delegation
shares the Views expressed in the Monitoring Group
report submitted in June, and underlines in the
meantime that technical assistance to be provided to
the countries lacking the resources to implement the
full scope of resolution 1455 (2003) should be one of
the top priorities of the work of the Committee and the
Monitoring Group as well.

