Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting and giving
me the opportunity to present the first report of the
Committee established recently pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1970 (2011), on the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya.

The text of this report, which will be posted in
full on the website of the Committee, which is already
available, gives us a picture of the activities undertaken
until today by the Committee. I will now read out the
main elements of the Committee's report.

The mandate of the Committee, first set out in
resolution 1970 (2011), was subsequently expanded by
resolution 1973 (2011) to also apply to the measures
decided in that resolution. Broadly speaking, the
Committee's tasks include overseeing the arms
embargo, travel ban, assets freeze and ban on flights of
Libyan aircraft. Currently, there are 18 individuals
designated as being subject to the travel ban, and
13 individuals and 5 entities designated as being
subject to the assets freeze.

Since the adoption of the two resolutions, the
Committee has met twice in informal consultations
followed by a formal meeting to conduct its work.
Moreover, prior to its first meeting, the Committee
considered and approved on an expedited basis an
2

urgent request for an exemption to the aforementioned
ban on flights, in accordance with paragraph 17 of
resolution 1973 (2011), to allow a Member State to
evacuate its nationals from Libyan territory using a
Libyan-company-owned aircraft.

After briefly discussing several proposals in
informal consultations on 25 March, the members of
the Committee agreed to adopt these proposals in a
formal meeting immediately afterwards. Thus, at its
first meeting, the Committee adopted provisional
guidelines for the conduct of its work. It approved a
note verbale that contained a reminder to all Member
States to report to the Committee on the
implementation of the relevant provisions of resolution
1970 (2011) regarding the arms embargo, the travel
ban and the assets freeze within 120 days of the
adoption of the resolution. The Committee also
approved an update to its lists of individuals and
entities. Finally, it agreed to the issuance of a press
release on its work. All of these documents will be
made available on the Committee's website.

In addition, in the prior consultations under other
matters, the members of the Committee were alerted to
forthcoming proposals on additional designations by
members of the Committee. They also heard a brief
update from the Secretariat on the status of recruitment
for the Panel of Experts, to be made up of up to eight
experts, as established by resolution 1973 (2011).
Following a preliminary discussion of a query received
from a Member State on the scope of the assets freeze,
the members of the Committee agreed to consider a
draft reply under the written non-objection procedure.
An urgent request for guidance from another Member
State, which involves providing clarification as to
whether the assets freeze applies to the subsidiary of a
designated entity, is also under consideration.

I have now concluded the outline of the most
important aspects of the report. For my part, I would
like to use this opportunity to highlight some elements
concerning the work of the Committee in overseeing
the sanctions regime imposed by resolutions 1970
(2011) and 1973 (2011).

As I mentioned earlier, the Committee has
already held two meetings. The Committee was able to
quickly adopt provisional guidelines and is now fully
operational to carry out its work. The Committee will
be working on further designations of individuals and
entities concerning the assets freeze, which, according
11-27938
to paragraph 19 of resolution 1973 (2011), have to be
made within the next three weeks. The Secretariat is
also working to recruit experts to establish the Panel of
Experts that will assist the Committee in carrying out
its mandate and report to the Council on its findings
and recommendations. We hope to have the Panel
established soon.

The prompt response of the Council, by adopting
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011), is a clear
signal of its determination to address the situation in
Libya and enable the Libyan population, through a
national dialogue, to fulfil its legitimate aspirations to
political reform in a peaceful and sustainable way
while preserving the independence, territorial integrity
and national unity of their country as stated in
resolution 1973 (2011).

The efficient implementation of the sanctions
regime is crucial in that regard * hence the
importance of Member States engaging actively in its
implementation. I wish here to remind Member States
of their reporting obligations resulting from resolution
1970 (2011) and to stress how important it is for the
Committee to promptly receive national implementation
11-27938
reports, which are due within 120 days, meaning by
26 June.

I should like to say one final word concerning the
transparency of the work of the Committee, to which
we are committed and which we will always try to
improve. Even if it is rather early in the Committee's
existence and there is only a short history on which to
report, I am very glad that the first briefing is taking
place here at an open meeting before the general
membership. The success of sanctions lies in the active
contribution of States to their implementation and their
commitment and understanding of the regimes, which
is only strengthened by transparency. We will try to
keep it that way, as we intend to organize, whenever
needed, informal briefings to the general membership
on the work of the Committee.

