Mrs. Mladineo (Croatia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this timely exchange
of views. We sincerely hope that today's deliberations
will help us to better understand, and take stock of, the
progress made thus far.

Although the Republic of Croatia has aligned
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Portugal on behalf of the European Union, I would like
to take this opportunity to share with the Council some
of our thoughts on today's topic.

Croatia recognizes the primary responsibility of
the Security Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security. In that context, we
regard conflict prevention as one of the core duties that
the Security Council is charged with carrying out on
behalf of all Member States of the United Nations.
Nevertheless, we firmly believe that conflict
prevention goes way beyond the membership of the
Security Council. In that sense, all Member States, to
the best of their knowledge and capacities, have the
responsibility to address the underlying causes of
conflict, in hopes of preventing them.

But what makes the task of conflict prevention so
difficult is the fact that we do not have a dedicated
system in place that would automatically, shall we say,
"take care of business". We have in place various
worthwhile initiatives, forums and bodies - all of
which are in need of a comprehensive approach to
streamline their activities.

Reading the list of the major causes of conflict in
Africa - starting with endemic poverty and
widespread underdevelopment, and in some cases
undemocratic, weak or nonexistent Government
institutions, and political and economic
discrimination- one realizes that a single United
Nations body cannot do the job alone. Most of the
issues that I have just referred to fall under the purview
of various bodies and organizations of the United
Nations system. Therefore, the internal logic of the
United Nations system holds that substantive
cooperation and effective coordination are the only
way to succeed in conflict prevention.

Since Croatia's presidency of the Economic and
Social Council, when Ad Hoc Advisory Groups for
African countries emerging from conflict were
established, Croatia has supported better coordination
among the main bodies of the United Nations - the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council - as well as with the
Peacebuilding Commission, as a new advisory body.
Likewise, we have supported including in that
coordination other important regional and subregional
organizations that have already successfully dealt with
local crises.

With respect to the regional and subregional
groups and their role in Africa, we have response
mechanisms for dealing with both old and new security
challenges. The problem lies within their ad hoc
nature. However, a clear trend is emerging toward their
formalization and institutionalization. The Economic
Community of West African States provides an
excellent example of this process, having intervened in
both Liberia and Sierra Leone in the 1990s. The
cooperation of the United Nations with such a regional
player and with broader organizations such as the
African Union can only benefit all parties involved.

Allow me to also point out that even a small
country with rich experience in conflict such as,

07-4920]
unfortunately, Croatia, can provide beneficial and
constructive input to United Nations conflict
prevention and conflict-resolving activities. So far, our
post-conflict knowledge has been put to use mostly
through our participation in 14 United Nations
peacekeeping missions all over the world and through
our work in the first session of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

There are two lessons learned that we always like
to repeat: first, there is no "one-size-fits-all" approach,
and any attempt to build upon such an approach leads
to failure; and second, gaining a deeper understanding
of the roots of any conflict is of utmost importance,
because it prevents us from following the easier path of
patching up a situation and not resolving the
fundamental antagonisms in a society, which can have
the effect of leaving a wound to fester. This is as
important before a conflict or crisis have arisen as it is
after: before, because it can help avoid a conflict; and
after, because it can help cure open wounds.

We can all agree that experience teaches us that
any crisis can be better handled in its early stages.
Therefore, an approach that would encompass a better
early warning system, so as to identify potential crises
before they emerge, is of utmost importance. We
believe it is also true that the early identification of and
reaction to problems that countries face have a positive
effect on their later development. Unfortunately, we all
know where ignoring the signs can lead in the long run.
In this sense, we understand too well the importance of
time and timeliness for the countries, in particularly
African, that were or are currently on the Security
Council's agenda, as Croatia was in the 1990s.

Finally, I would like to express our hope for an
opportunity, as well as for our determination to use it,
to share the lessons learned in order to act and not
merely to react.

