Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): South Africa regrets
that the sponsors of the draft resolution have persisted
with the same substantive text that they had tabled
before the latest report of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) was even
issued and hence, the draft resolution appears not to
adequately take into account the progress made on the
basis of the work plan agreed between the IAEA and
Iran.

Moreover, the adoption of the new draft
resolution, which imposes further punitive sanctions,
could apparently not even be postponed until the IAEA
Board of Governors had a full opportunity to consider
the matter and take account of the verbal update of the
Director General of the IAEA. That gives the
international community the impression that the
verification work and important progress made by the
Agency is virtually irrelevant to the sponsors of this
draft resolution.

The rationale for bringing the Iran issue to the
Security Council in the first place was, we were told, to
reinforce the decisions of the IAEA and to enhance its
authority, and yet the current draft resolution does not
accurately reflect what is happening at the IAEA. We
are seriously concerned about the implications of this
situation for the credibility of the Security Council, and
the only reason we will vote in favour of the resolution
is to preserve the previous decisions of the Council that
Iran has not fully implemented.

The IAEA is the only international authority that
can verify and provide the necessary assurances as to
the peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme. It is
therefore unfortunate that the Security Council gives
the impression that it is in such great haste to decide on
a series of further punitive sanctions that it does not
wish even to consider the significant progress being
made through the IAEA to provide the international
community with important factual information on the
implementation of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty (NPT) safeguards in Iran.

The report by the IAEA Director General issued
on 22 February 2008 clearly shows that all outstanding
safeguards issues, which are also included in the work
plan between the IAEA and Iran, have been clarified
due to the cooperation between Iran and the IAEA. The
IAEA has thus far not found any evidence of diversion,
and all material has been accounted for. Furthermore,
those issues that originally gave rise to serious concern

resulting in the demand for the confidence-building
measures, including suspending the uranium
enrichment programme, have now also been clarified.

On the basis of the factual situation available to
us we also have to recognize that since the adoption of
resolution 1747 (2007) in March of last year, which
South Africa supported, the situation has further
changed following the release of the United States
National Intelligence Estimate (NIE), which concluded
that Iran does not have a current nuclear weapons
programme. The NIE seems consistent with the IAEA's
findings to date.

To the extent that all the outstanding issues have
now been clarified, at least there ought to be increased
confidence in the peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme. It is important to allow the verification
process to proceed on its current course.

Also, given the context of the recent allegations
of weaponization activities, the need for continued
factual and reliable information about Iran's current
nuclear activities, based on increased access by and
cooperation with the IAEA, can be said to be all the
more important.

It is important not to jeopardize any of the gains
made. Rather, we should seek to build on the progress
made through systematic and continued verification
work by the IAEA. This approach will help to establish
the facts and encourage negotiations among concerned
parties with a view to reducing tension and further
escalation. Given the confidence deficit that existed
earlier, we need to move forward in a responsible and
balanced manner because we are dealing with a highly
sensitive matter that can have serious implications in a
volatile region.

As a country that is firmly committed to the
elimination of all weapons of mass destruction and to
non-proliferation, South Africa does not wish to see a
nuclear-weaponized Iran or the denial of the right of
any signatory to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
to exploit the peaceful applications of nuclear
technology with appropriate safeguards. Also, South
Africa does not want to see a war break out over the
nuclear programme in Iran.

The suspension of enrichment activities may
under no circumstances become a goal in itself. In
addition, it is incumbent on the Council to assure Iran
that the call for suspension is not a smokescreen for
any indefinite suspension or termination. In this regard,
it would also be important to terminate the sanctions
once the IAEA has addressed the remaining issues.

We would have preferred that the resolution not
contain the controversial provision that allows for
searches of certain Iranian vessels and aircraft, even
subject to very strict limitations, as this could spark
confrontation and further threaten international peace
and security. Furthermore, the restrictions on dual-use
goods and on loans and credits must not be allowed to
have a negative impact on the civilian population of
Iran. Members of the Security Council that will vote in
favour of the current resolution, including South
Africa, have a special obligation to the Iranian people
and must exercise the highest degree of scrutiny and
oversight of the implementation of sanctions to ensure
that there are no unintended consequences and that the
focus remains solely on the nuclear programme.

Whilst we have decided to vote for this
resolution, it is imperative that we should now work
creatively to defuse the confrontation in order to allow
for a resumption of negotiations towards a sustainable,
peaceful solution of this issue.

Finally, South Africa wishes to reaffirm the
principle that once the peaceful nature of the Iran
nuclear programme has been establish, Iran will enjoy
the rights and responsibilities that any member of the
NPT also enjoys.

