Mr. Milanovie (Serbia): Allow me to start by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency for this month. On behalf of my delegation, I
wish you every success. Allow me, of course, to extend
our appreciation to the delegation of Azerbaijan for its
excellent presidency for the month of October.

First of all, I would like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Valentine Inzko, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and to thank him for his report to the
Council (S/2013/646, annex).

As a guarantor of the Dayton Peace Agreement, the
Republic of Serbia continues to be strongly committed
to respecting the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe that the future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina should be decided by its citizens
and political leaders without outside interference and,
in that context, we support any agreement accepted by
the two entities and the three constituent peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Serbia considers Bosnia and Herzegovina to be one
of its closest partners and has a very strong interest
in promoting mutual relations to the highest possible
level on the basis of good-neighbourliness. We shall
work for the promotion of those relations at the central
level, as well as for the expansion and intensification
of cooperation with the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the further deepening and enrichment
of special relations with the Republic Srpska. Since the
formation of the new Governments in the two countries
in 2012, bilateral cooperation has improved, as
evidenced by the frequent meetings at the highest level.
Cooperation within international organizations and in
regional forums has been promoted, too. Particularly
noteworthy is the promotion of cooperation between
the Parliaments of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which is best reflected in the friendship groups that were
formed in both Parliaments in 2012 and by last week's
visit of the high-level delegation of the Parliamentary
Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina to Serbia. Also
last week, the Serbian Government and the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina signed a security
agreement in Belgrade that will provide for even better
cooperation between the two countries in that field.
In the forthcoming period, cooperation will
be exemplified by a number of practical steps and
measures. On 26 and 27 November, the Government
of the Republic of Serbia and the Council of Ministers
of Bosnia and Herzegovina will convene for a joint
session in Belgrade. The President of the Republic
of Serbia, Mr. Tomislav Nikolie, is expected to visit
Bosnia and Herzegovina soon. The Interstate Border
Commission will meet. The Standing Joint Committee
on Succession is also expected to meet. Furthermore,
Serbia is interested in activating the work of the
Interstate Council for Cooperation.

Serbia is a firm supporter of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
European integration and the strengthening of mutual
cooperation in that process, particularly in the area of
the work of the commission for the implementation of
the action plan of the memorandum for cooperation
in the field of European integration. We share the
interest of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the exchange of
experiences on fulfilling the Copenhagen criteria for
EU accession and the readiness for coordination on the
road to the European Union. Serbia is ready to assist
Bosnia and Herzegovina by making available to it the
part of the questionnaire of the European Commission
for Serbia related to foreign affairs. We also stand ready
to help in respect of the other technical conditions for
membership with which we have already complied.

We support cooperation within the Instrument for
Pre-Accession Assistance programmes for cross-border
cooperation. A total of €11.52 million has been made
available to the two countries for the 2007-2013 period.
Projects worth €3.24 million have been agreed upon
so far, while projects worth €4.68 are currently being
negotiated.

In the field of economic cooperation, Serbia
has a special interest in promoting trade, investment
and military-economic cooperation and ranks the
establishment of the Joint Commission for Economic
Cooperation as a very good step in the right direction.

Serbia is ready to address all outstanding issues,
now significantly reduced in number, in good faith
and in mutual interest. That is particularly true of the
questions ofdemarcation, refugees and missing persons,
as well as those related to succession. We particularly
welcome the concerted position on the need to have
direct contacts and exchanges of views without outside
mediation.

My country firmly supports comprehensive
development and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and has taken a number of important steps towards
promoting reconciliation in the region. We are
committed to extensive regional cooperation and, by
extension, a politically and economically stable South-
East Europe, which we perceive as a basic precondition
for our own sustainable development. To that end, we
are committed to the strengthening of cooperation,
and welcome the successful cooperation with Bosnia
and Herzegovina that is being realized within many
organizations and processes, including the South East
Europe Cooperation Process, the Regional Cooperation
Council, the Central Europe Free Trade Agreement, the
Central European Initiative, the Adriatic and Ionian
Initiative and other forums.

