I am grateful to Germany and the Dominican Republic for holding this debate within the framework of the women and peace and security agenda. I am honoured to speak alongside Special Representative Patten and our brave colleagues from Myanmar and the Central African Republic. Entrenched discrimination in society and the gendered impact of sexual violence demand that actions be taken for survivors. I would like to speak today about one of the most overlooked groups of survivors: children. When resolution 2467 (2019) was adopted last year, it was the first to put survivors and their needs and rights at the centre of all actions. But resolutions, words on paper, are just that - promises. What counts is whether the promises are kept. As every member of the Council knows, there is nothing worse than to break a promise to a child. Yet that is what we are doing year after year to countless children. The fact that we will never meet them does not lessen the betrayal. I have met child survivors of sexual violence, as well as domestic violence, trauma and abuse, everywhere. There is no continent untouched by these crimes, and there is no country, rich or poor, that should not take a hard look at its own laws, its own agencies, its own media reporting of these issues, its own treatment of survivors and its own social attitudes. But I want to start, if | may, with one example. When the so-called Islamic State attacked the Yazidi community in Iraq in 2014, it abducted, enslaved and tortured thousands of women and children. Many children were murdered, but nearly 2,000 have returned. Many suffer from post-traumatic stress, anxiety and depression. They experience flashbacks and recurrent nightmares that are typical for children who have experienced trauma and abuse. Many of the children witnessed the murder of their relatives and the rape of their mothers. One doctor, who has provided medical care for hundreds of Yazidi women and girls, said that almost every girl she had treated between the ages of 9 and 17 had been raped or subjected to other sexual violence. In some cases, victims were girls under the age of 9. They suffer serious health issues, including traumatic fistulas and scarring, in addition to trauma, difficulty accessing education and even a struggle to prove their identity. Yet according to a forthcoming report by Amnesty International, based on interviews with survivors, humanitarian workers and other experts, there are still very few services available for Yazidi child survivors and children born of rape. What few services there are have been largely focused on women survivors, who have immense trauma and unmet needs of their own, made worse by displacement, poverty and the lack of access to sexual and reproductive health and rights. The reality is that no one is getting the care they need. But there is a specific lack of dedicated care for children. One mother, whose daughter was abducted when she was 6 years old and survived three years of beatings and abuse, could not get medical help for her, because she was considered too young to treat. Every humanitarian worker interviewed for the Amnesty report said that psychosocial services and programmes currently available to Yazidi children fall far short of meeting their long-term, specialist needs. I have heard this replicated in every conflict setting I have visited in nearly 20 years with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. To be clear, the lack of services flows from the failure of the international community to provide the funds to make this possible, as well as a lack of political will. Sexual and gender-based violence is the most chronically underfunded sector of the humanitarian appeals of the United Nations, receiving less than | per cent of humanitarian assistance. Just think how many lives could be saved if we even simply doubled that percentage. I pay tribute to all the humanitarian workers, medics, lawyers and human rights defenders doing everything in their power to help survivors around the world, often with next to no support. But my concern and my question to the Council is this: If we are not able to live up to our promise of a survivor-centred approach for Yazidi children, who make up just one relatively small group of survivors, then how many more children and young adults are suffering in silence at the global level? And how many more will suffer because of violence exacerbated by the coronavirus disease and a distracted international community? The answer is, we do not know. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict has said that sexual violence crimes against children - which are only one of the ways that children's rights are being violated globally - are "vastly underreported". The Secretary-General's report on conflict-related sexual violence last year described a "disturbing trend ... of sexual violence perpetrated against very young girls and boys (S/2019/280, para. 18) in multiple countries. It added that girls and boys are targeted "in order to terrorize their communities, because of perceived affiliations of their parents or their perceived utility or market value." (supra) Nobel laureate Dr. Mukwege speaks of treating babies as young as six months old in his hospital for rape victims. For all the efforts that have been made, we live in a world where child survivors of these crimes - and violence of all kinds - live with stigma and the fear of retaliation at the hands of powerful perpetrators; where, in some countries, rape is not illegal and girls are forced to marry their rapists; and where survivors face an endless cycle of denial of their rights, as well as stigma and ostracization - lasting decades after the conflict has ended, as in Bosnia and Herzegovina or Uganda, and passed down across the generations, to innocent children. More often than not, in many settings, including Syria and Myanmar today, not a single perpetrator of alleged systematic conflict-related sexual violence has been held to account. These are all choices, the choices of United Nations Member States, our choices. We have to be prepared to admit where we have failed, and do the hard work to support survivors, change laws and attitudes and bring perpetrators to account, over many years. Resolution 2467 (2019) also promised sanctions, justice and reparations for victims, and recognition for children born of rape. These are all promises that must be kept. I urge the Council to recommit to these promises today: to move beyond rhetoric and to implement their decisions. Please hold perpetrators to account. Please address the root, structural causes of gender-based violence and discrimination in your countries. And please urgently increase funding for programmes that address the needs of all survivors, and especially the invisible victims - children.
