Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, I would like to
join others in thanking the Chilean presidency for having
brought this very important issue to our attention. I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Patriota; and
Nobel Peace Prize laureate Leymah Gbowee for their
comprehensive briefings, which provided good food for
thought for our discussions.

We fully share the holistic vision of international
security, as proposed by the Chilean presidency,
in which the three pillars of the United Nations
system - peace and security, human rights and
development - are closely interlinked. Indeed, the
main challenges to the legitimacy and stability of
nation States and governance of their societies lie in
socioeconomic, gender, ethnic, tribal, religious and
ideological tensions, and addressing those challenges
in a timely manner at the domestic level is paramount
to preventing threats at the international level.

The United Nations, as the flagship of the
international community, should take a leading role in
conflict prevention, assisting Member States in dealing
with transnational challenges and negative foreign
influences, which represent some of the major factors
that fuel internal conflicts in many countries that no
single nation could tackle on its own. Promoting stable
societies in which there is no place for radicalization,
violence and extremism; promoting universal respect
for and compliance with the fundamental norms and
principles of international law; and strengthening the
rule of law at the national and international levels could
provide a long-term strategic solution to these problems.

As Georgia is a multi-ethnic and multi-confessional
nation, inclusive development is especially crucial
for my country, and my Government is committed
to doing as much as humanly possible to prevent the
marginalization of its communities on any grounds,
be they racial, ethnic, social, gender, religious,
cultural or economic. My country, having over 20 per
cent of its territory under illegal foreign occupation,
remains committed to a peaceful, pragmatic, flexible
and constructive course of action with a view to
strengthening the policy of engagement with the
Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali, South
Ossetia, and to providing a favourable environment for
reconciliation and a comprehensive settlement.

Engagement through cooperation, which is the
State's strategy with regard to the occupied territories,
includes in particular the provision of health-care
services to the residents of the occupied territories; the
establishment of advanced mechanisms to receive and
continue education in the rest of Georgia and abroad;
the maintenance of effective instruments, such as
the status-neutral travel document, for exercising the
freedom of movement; and support for and facilitation
of confidence-building measures and people-to-
people contact through meetings among professional
communities, the training of experts and teachers, study
visits, including to foreign countries, the updating of
archive documents, and the improvement of knowledge
about cultural heritage areas.

Cooperation, and in certain cases integration
processes with international organizations play a
special role in reconciliation and lasting conflict
resolution. In this context, the European Union-Georgia
Association Agreement and Association Agenda
represent a special element. Georgia is seeking ways
to share the benefits and opportunities resulting from
the European Union-Georgia cooperation with the
populations residing in the occupied regions. In this
way, establishing open and human-centric policy is at
the core of the peacebuilding process. In this context,
one of the key directions of the work undertaken by
the Government of Georgia has been to alleviate the
consequences of the installation of barbed-wire fences
and other physical barriers by the occupying forces in
villages adjacent to the occupation line. Addressing the
needs of the local population on both sides of the divide
and improving the living conditions of communities
that have been torn apart are important not only from
a purely humanitarian View, but also from the human
security and peacebuilding perspectives.

On the subject of dividing lines and artificial
barriers, I cannot fail to touch upon another important
aspect, which is the negative foreign influence
when addressing the challenges to efforts to achieve
inclusive development. In today's world, no single
country can be considered in isolation from others.
As I mentioned at the beginning of this statement,
in too many instances transnational challenges and
negative foreign influences are important factors in
creating domestic tensions, often resulting in dividing
lines such as those witnessed in Georgia and Ukraine.
These dividing lines did not appear naturally as the
result of the local socioeconomic situation or cultural
fabric; rather, they were artifically established through
outside involvement, such as foreign occupation and the
annexation of territories.

Last year was especially dreadful for our region.
Following the annexation of Ukraine's Crimea, today
Russia is taking further steps towards the annexation
of Georgia's occupied territories of Abkhazia
and the Tskhinvali region of South Ossetia. The
so-called treaties on alliance and strategic partnership
or integration signed with the de facto authorities in
Abkhazia and being prepared for signature shortly
with the Tskhinvali region of South Ossetia are clearly
directed against Georgia's sovereignty and territorial
integrity, as they envisage further integration of the
occupied regions into the Russian Federation in all
spheres. The direst effects of these so-called treaties
will include the reinforcement of the occupation
line, which will undermine person-to-person contact
and freedom of movement and, consequenrly,
confidence-building between the communities. It
will also seriously affect the situation of internally
displaced persons and refugees by placing a permanent
obstacle to the implementation of their right to safe and
dignified return. All this will seriously undermine the
efforts aimed at ensuring inclusive development.

Having suffered enough from this plague, and while
dealing with the negative impacts of foreign occupation,
my country firmly believes that the path to a peaceful
and secure future will be through good governance
and the resilience of inclusive political, economic
and legal institutions. Armed conflict, by destroying
the political, social, economic and cultural fabric of
societies, seriously undermines development and is
perhaps its greatest obstacle. In conclusion, therefore,
I wish to fully subscribe to the statement contained in
the concept paper to this discussion (S/2015/6, annex)
and to mention again that Georgia aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the head of the delegation of the
European Union.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Morocco.
