Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to extend my
sincere congratulations to you, Mr. President, on
your delegation's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month, and on your outstanding
leadership in the work of the Council, including its
deliberations on the many important issues being
addressed during this period. Moreover, I thank you,
Sir, for convening today's open debate on the subject
of "Maintenance of international peace and security:
reflect on history, reaffirm the strong commitment to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations". It is a cause for much pain that our discussion
on this topic comes at a time when peace and security
are absent in many parts of the Middle East, Africa,
Europe, Asia and elsewhere.

While the new world order, which was founded in
the aftermath of the Second World War and which is
represented in the United Nations and its Charter, has
succeeded in avoiding a third world war, the sum total
of the wars the world has witnessed in various places
over the past 70 years exceeds in ferocity, effects and
losses a world war, which makes us wonder whether
this system and the Charter have truly succeeded in
maintaining international peace and security. If we
delve into the Middle East region, we will find that
in the past seven decades there have been no less than
15 wars, most of which were associated in one way or
another with the question of Palestine, and the agony
caused by some of these wars continues to affect the
region to this very day.

Whoever studies the situation of the region and
the wars that have taken place must draw the following
conclusions. First, the international community,
represented by the Security Council, has failed to
prevent and terminate occupation. We are therefore
continuing to see the Palestinian people deprived of
their right to self-determination and the establishment
of their independent State on their national territories in
accordance with resolutions of international legitimacy
adopted by the United Nations. This situation has led to
the outbreak of numerous armed conflicts in the region.

Secondly, the international community has failed to
protect peoples from the massacres committed against
them by authorities who have lost their legitimacy.
Rwanda was a flagrant example of paralysis and
disability in confronting horrific incidents that are still a
heavy burden on the conscience of the world. Similarly,
we see in Syria today the ongoing perpetration of
killings and intimidation against the Syrian people
through the use of aircraft, missiles, poison gas,
blockades, genocide and displacement. These violations
occur while the international community is powerless
to make any progress on the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, let alone the achievement of a fair political
settlement.

Thirdly, the international community has failed
to address current dangers that are taking new forms,
such as the threat of international terrorism. Combating
this phenomenon has often been in the form of interim
and regional solutions that do not deal with the fact
that terrorism is a global phenomenon, disappearing
from one place only to appear elsewhere. Furthermore,
terrorism is not only a security issue, but also an
intellectual issue.

Fourthly, the international community has not yet
been able to lay the foundations and set up the rules to
help countries to overcome post-war and turmoil phases.
We take note of such countries as Liberia and Sierra
Leone, which suffer as they oscillate between phases
of war and peace. Other countries, such as Afghanistan
and Libya, have fallen into the kiln of internal conflicts
following earlier stages of combat and so forth.

Fifthly, the high cost resulting from these situations,
whether in terms of lost lives and property, missed
opportunities, crises of hunger, disease or lost
generations, continues to pose a huge burden on
humankind, as they drain substantial resources. Had
they been directed towards development, construction,
eradication of poverty, illiteracy and disease, our world
today would be more stable, secure and prosperous.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is a founding
Member of the United Nations and one of the first
signatories of its Charter. It is proud of its commitment
to the Charter. Accordingly, the Kingdom has always
been keen to participate in all efforts dedicated to
maintaining international peace and security, promoting
the performance of this international body and bringing
it closer to achieving its noble goals and objectives
as stipulated in the Charter, whose realization we all
look to see achieved. We keep our firm belief that the
ability of the United Nations to carry out its functions
is closely linked to its Members' political will to
implement the Charter's principles, develop and reform
the principal organs of the Organization, and make
them more representative of and adapted to our world
and the changes that have taken place over the course of
the history of the United Nations.

A short while ago, we heard the representative of
Israel addressing this vital subject in a cynical manner
and with arrogance and mockery. We saw how he gave
himself the right to play Oscar voter, giving out awards
left and right, while forgetting, or pretending to forget,
the extreme absurdity of his country's appointment to a
position on the commission dedicated to the elimination
of occupation when it is an undisputed occupier. He also
forgot to include in the awards he gave out the Oscar
for Best Horror and Murder, for the crimes his country
has committed in Gaza, Qana, Deir Yassin, Sabra and
Shatilla, Bahr el-Baqar and elsewhere. Moreover, he
should have given Israel the award for Best Forged
Documentary, for its false claims on Jerusalem, Hebron
and the territory of Arab Palestine, as well as the award
for Worst Actor, for its representative's talk of human

rights, democracy and justice while his country violates
all these concepts on a daily basis.

In the end, before we pat each other on the back and
exchange congratulations on the seventieth anniversary
of the international Organization, we must review and
retrace its deficiencies and exercise a certain humility
and objective self-criticism in recognizing that this
system in its current form continues to fall short of
its Member States' aspirations and hopes, and in
effectively addressing current issues and problems. The
most important initiative we need today is the revision
of some concepts and institutions. The starting point
should be recognizing that what was suitable for the
mid-twentieth century is no longer appropriate for this
century. We must recognize that the United Nations
system is in urgent need of comprehensive reform that
would rejuvenate and restore vitality to its institutions
and organs.

Accordingly, it is reasonable to say that the Council
should start considering how to develop its work and
increase its efficacy, credibility and the legitimacy
of its representation. If the Council can attain such
results, then you, Sir, should be proud of what this
meeting has achieved under your presidency. However,
if this occasion passes like any other, then we will find
ourselves in a vicious circle of discussion and dialogue
without the ability to achieve a solution.
