Mr. De Mistura: Let me say how pleased I am,
Mr. President, that we have been able to hold this
briefing before the end of your presidency. I wish a
happy Bid to you and everyone around the world.

I last briefed the Security Council after the seventh
round of the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva, which
concluded on 14 July. Since then, we have been active
in a range of diplomatic efforts and continuing contacts.
I have recently held high-level consultations in Tehran
and Paris, and my Deputy Special Envoy Ambassador
Ramzy was earlier in Moscow and is currently in Saudi
Arabia. Contacts are continuing with other actors as we
seek to lay the ground for further rounds of talks that
bring the parties into a genuine negotiation.

Let me elaborate on how I assess the situation at
present, and what we think we can expect in the period
ahead in de-escalating violence, in combating terrorism
and in advancing the political process.

While undoubtedly there is still violence in Syria,
the trend of de-escalation and the operationalization
of de-escalation zones is indeed continuing. We are
encouraged by the calm in the south-west and the
opening of a trilateral Amman monitoring centre by
the Russian Federation, the United States and Jordan.
Meanwhile, following a series of agreements with
armed groups, including with the active support of
Egypt and the Russian Federation, we have seen a
significant reduction of violence in parts of the Ghouta
de-escalation zone, although not in all of it. In Homs,
we note the Russian Federation's efforts to reach a
ceasefire agreement are continuing. We are, however,
worried about reports of shelling and air strikes north
of Homs city, which we believe require the guarantors'
urgent attention.

Meantime, the situation in Idlib is complex
and complicated and needs close attention. Hay'at
Tahrir al-Sham - or as we all continue to call it, the
former Al-Nusra, a terrorist group identified by the
Council - has taken over territory from other armed
opposition groups in this area. Its stated intention
is to set up some kind of new Al-Nursa-dominated
administration. It is very important that the Astana
guarantors, in liaison with the Government and armed
opposition groups, come to a speedy agreement to
operationalize the de-escalation zone in Idlib. This
will also require a very important element: protecting
civilians, but that will be addressed, I am sure, by my
colleague Stephen O'Brien.

As efforts to combat terrorism continue, we are
seeing the areas of control of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Da'esh being constantly
shrunk - something I think everyone welcomes in the
ongoing fight against terrorism. While the Government
of Syria is proceeding towards Deir ez-Zor, the
Lebanese army has advanced against ISIL/Da'esh on
the Lebanese side of the border. The Syrian Democratic
Forces and the United States-led coalition continue
their efforts to eliminate ISIL from Raqqa, while the
Russian Federation is supporting the Government of
Syria in proceeding towards Deir ez-Zor. While military
operations are under way, rapid, safe and sustained
humanitarian access remains essential, as well as the
work for the release of the arbitrarily detained persons
and at least the shedding of light on the fate of the
thousands of disappeared.

All parties must also do their utmost to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure while this is
happening. As I said, I am sure my colleague and
friend, Under-Secretary-General O'Brien - who I
would like personally, since this is my last opportunity
to do so, to thank him publicly for his immense efforts
on Syria - will further address these issues in his
briefing on the humanitarian aspects. I also want to
thank publicly the United Nations Mine Action Service
for its continued readiness to support humanitarian
demining efforts in Syria.

The developments I have described are the result of
a very timely process of prioritization and cooperation
among key external players, and a realization among
internal players of the need to compromise. The
challenge ahead will be to extend this spirit into the
political realm. This requires clear and new thinking
from the opposition and the Government, and enhanced
international cooperation.

Let me start with the opposition. The opposition
people and representatives who have been invited to
the Geneva talks - the High Negotiations Committee,
the Cairo platform and the Moscow platform, those
which have been specified by name in resolution 2254
(2015) - have important and urgent work to do to
develop common negotiating positions and strengthen
their own unity. It is high time for that. I briefed the
Council last time (see S/PV.7983) on the progress we
have made with them in two rounds of United Nations
technical talks in Geneva and nearby, at which we saw
a lot of important substantive progress. There is not
that much distance between them, except on one or two
crucial points. That substantive progress should now be
used as a springboard for further efforts.

Given that many developments and intense
discussions are taking place elsewhere between the
actors of the opposition, we have refrained from
holding further United Nations technical talks in
order to give time for these developments to unfold
and progress. But time must not be lost. Elevating
common technical commonalities to the political level
remains an imperative. They have agreed at least on the
technical commonalities. Now we need to bring them
to a higher level.

I am grateful to Saudi Arabia for taking the
initiative to convene a new, more inclusive meeting of
the opposition i a Riyadh 2 conference as it is called,
including with the hosting of a preparatory meeting last
week. Our technical work and political support will be
important contributions to those efforts. We will work
closely with Saudi Arabia and all who have traditionally
supported or engaged with the opposition in this
pursuit. I recall in this respect that resolution 2254
(2015) encourages me to be active in any finalization
effort in this regard.

As we counsel fresh thinking and initiatives on the
part of the opposition, we may also need urgently to
do the same with the Government. The Government
has indicated that it would be prepared to intensify
its engagement with a unified opposition and with
clarity on principles that govern the political process.
But there are times when strong public signals are
sent that indicate an exclusively military approach,
and a dismissal of the prospects of any meaningful
political negotiation.

However, we have seen too many instances in
other conflicts where, despite military advances, a
Government has not able to turn those gains into a
sustainable post-conflict situation, due to unmetpolitical
grievance and lack of genuine inclusion of all in the
future of the country. That is why we are convinced that
both the opposition and the Government have, or should
have, a genuine interest now in actually engaging in
serious discussions. Ultimately, it will only be Syrians
who determine the future of their country - we know
that - but an internationally supported and inclusive
political process will be required to lay the foundation
for a sustainable future and for genuine reconstruction.
It is in the profound interests of the long-suffering
people of Syria that the Government and the opposition
realize that the time has come to engage in more serious
and concrete negotiations.

In this regard, I would like to note that we are not
only focused on the Government and opposition, but
are listening to the full range of Syrian stakeholders.
Immediately after the seventh round of our own talks,
our own Office related to the Civil Society Support
Room completed regional consultations in Beirut,
Gaziantep and Amman. This discussion involved over
120 civil-society actors and networks, establishing the
foundation for future consultations in Geneva. It is
becoming increasingly clear from these consultations
that regardless of their perceived differences - and
they do have differences - all Syrians are impatient
for the conflict to end and the political process to
deliver. We will continue to encourage and facilitate
their collective work.
Let me also update the Council on the Syrian
Women's Advisory Board. Following its regular
contributions to the work that was done during the
seventh round of intra-Syrian talks, the 12-member
board is now currently undergoing a rotation exercise to
ensure continuous diversity of perspectives. I count on
the continued support of the Women's Advisory Board
to advise me and my team to ensure the meaningful
representation of diverse women's voices and women's
rights perspectives in the political process as we move
forward. We hope to see the same in the delegations of
both the opposition and the Government.

So how do we now bring all this activity together
into one common effort in the coming months to
genuinely advance a political solution? What is the
path forward?

First, Russia, Iran, Turkey and others - including
the United States of America, Egypt and Jordan - will
need to keep working actively, as they have been
doing, on de-escalation. The next Astana meeting,
now scheduled for 14 and 15 September * and related
meetings elsewhere, both in Geneva and Amman, as we
have seen - should help to address these matters, and I
and my team will be there, in Astana, to help.

Secondly, it will be important for Saudi Arabia and
all who have influence with the opposition to focus, as
they are currently doing, on a single plan to foster the
cohesion and realism of the opposition. On our side,
we shall be actively involved in those efforts as well,
while, let me reiterate, my own Office stands ready to
convene further technical talks to support what Saudi
Arabia has been trying to do in unifying the opposition.

Thirdly, it will be vital for those with influence
on the Government of Syria to assess the situation
carefully and signal a genuine readiness for dialogue
and inclusion on the political future of Syria.

F ourthly, I appreciate the continued engagement and
support of the European Union and view the meeting it
intends to host during the opening ofthe seventy-second
session of the General Assembly as an opportunity to
address future resilience and stabilization efforts and
support the humanitarian needs of civilians.

Bearing all of this mind, it is my intention to
reconvene the formal intra-Syrian talks in Geneva
later in October. In this way, we are giving time for
the dynamics I have just described to reach a further
stage of maturity. It is my hope that both the Syrian
Government and the opposition will come to Geneva
then to engage in formal negotiations.
This is a time for realism and focus, for shifting from
the logic ofwar to that ofnegotiation, and for putting the
interests of the Syrian people first. IfI could identify
one thing above all that can make a difference, it would
be a sense ofunity ofpurpose internationally with clear
priorities and common goals. We need therefore to find
creative ways to proceed along the path of peace that
the Security Council, through resolution 2254 (2015),
has long sought to advance. With that, and our common
encouragement to the Syrians in this regard, we can
make a real difference in this tragic conflict.

I also look forward to the occasion of the
forthcoming opening of the seventy-second session of
the General Assembly to see further opportunities and
initiatives related to an accelerated political process on
Syria. I would like to summarize the foregoing so that
we have some points on our radar screens that may help
us to focus.

First, we have had today's Security Council meeting,
and the Council will hold its own deliberations. Next,
the Astana meeting is due to take place, and we want it
to succeed and look at additional de-escalation areas.
Then there is the opportunity that all of us, including
Council members, will have at the opening of the
seventy-second session of the General Assembly to
promote and push for discussions and initiatives related
to accelerating the political process on Syria. Then, in
October, we hope to see and we will be working and
pushing for the Riyadh II meeting to contribute to
producing a common platform among the opposition
parties, hoping meanwhile that the Government will
be helped also to realize that there is now a need for a
genuine political concrete negotiation.

Meanwhile, hoping, if I may use that word in
relation to Bid - insha'Allah - that Deir ez-Zor and
Al-Raqqa get closer to being liberated, we urge that a
sustainable political solution be found so that Da'esh
will not and should not reappear like it did in Iraq. In
late October, there will be talks in Geneva. This time
we hope to see serious and concrete talks. We are
planning for two weeks back to back.

The foregoing is basically what we are seeing
on our radar screens. Things may happen to move in
that direction or to stop moving in that direction, to
complicate the movement or to move forward, but we
need to have a common vision.

