Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank you, Sir, for convening this briefing
on the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001),
which provides us with an international framework for
combatting terrorism. I would also like to congratulate
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov on his appointment as Under-
Secretary-General of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, and to thank him for his briefing. I
extend my thanks to the Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, Ambassador Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta,
for his work at the helm of the Committee and for his
briefing today, as well as to Mr. David Scharia of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.

Regrettably, the global terrorism threat has become
a pervasive issue and terrorist acts are occurring at an
intolerable rate. The international community must
take united action because it cannot allow terrorism to
continue to take innocent lives and destabilize States,
and because it must protect the rights and values that
terrorists seek to destroy. In his statement before the
General Assembly at its seventy-second general debate
(see A/72/PV.3), Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
referred to the global threat of terrorism with precision
and clarity. We endorse his words, which describe the
complexity of the problem we face.

We value and support the work of the United Nations
through its various organs and entities. We trust that
under the leadership of the recently established Office
of Counter-Terrorism, the fight against the scourge of
terrorism will benefit from renewed impetus. Among
the functions of that new Office, we would underscore
the improved assistance offered to Member States in
developing their counter-terrorism capacity. That
assistance is crucial, especially to those countries that
are most affected by the actions of terrorist groups, in
enabling them to confront terrorist acts with adequate
means and resources, in allowing them to benefit from
cooperation and in exercising their sovereignty.

We consider the role of Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate to be critical
in assessing the status of States' implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and in promoting the adoption
of measures that support its implementation. We also
emphasize the importance of their role in facilitating
technical assistance. We are grateful for the Counter-
Terrorism Committee's visit to Uruguay in March. We
attach great importance to the recommendations that
were made and are taking them into consideration.
We are working to advance the implementation of
various aspects set out in various Security Council
resolutions. Examples include the draft comprehensive
counter-terrorism law and the draft comprehensive
anti-asset laundering law. Both draft laws are currently
before our National Parliament for review and both
include recommendations made by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee.

We are aware of the importance of acting
collectively in this fight and of the need to cooperate
at the bilateral, regional and international levels. We
acknowledge cooperation as a part of our responsibility,
as a member of the international community, to act and
to protect. Cooperation makes us stronger. We believe
that the fight against terrorism must be made in respect
for and accordance with the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and international law, in particular
international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law. We reaffirm
our commitment to working in solidarity and with
responsibility for the success of that task.

