Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), for her continuous, tireless
efforts, as well as those of her team. We believe
that the United Nations, including her good offices,
play a significant role, and we deeply appreciate her
updates to the Security Council. We are also very
grateful to Ms. Mbela for her valuable perspectives
from the ground. We understand that the situation and
the circumstances under which she operates are not
always easy.

We are now less than two months away from decisive
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I was
encouraged by the Special Representative's message
today that the main players are committed to making
sure that the electoral process is successful, because
transparent, credible and inclusive elections would
contribute to peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the entire region. Should
they fall short, all of that would no longer be certain.
The Council must therefore remain actively engaged.
I would like to focus on three important aspects in the
preparations for the elections: confidence-building,
ensuring democratic space, and international support.

Confidence in the electoral process will be key for
the elections to be credible and to produce an outcome
that would be acceptable to all. Important progress has
been made in recent weeks, especially on the technical
aspects of preparations. However, significant challenges
remain to bridge the confidence gaps. In that regard, we
welcome the steps taken by the Independent National
Electoral Commission and Special Representative
Zerrougui to build trust in the electoral process. We call
on all parties to re-engage in consultations to resolve
outstanding issues. The Government, of course, holds a
particular responsibility in that regard.

Disagreement on voting rolls and voting machines,
including the uncertainty around timely delivery of the
equipment, continues to be of concern. There is still
need for greater outreach and public information about
the electoral process, including the voting machines,
from the Electoral Commission, the Conference
e'piscopale nationale du Congo and other civil society
stakeholders. That is especially important in regions
outside of Kinshasa. There now needs to be a clear,
common understanding among the main political actors
as regards the outstanding technical aspects, including
on the voting machines, in order to de-escalate tensions
and quell over-politicization of the issue.

The restrictions on democratic space continue to
hamper the prospects for credible elections, as set out
today by Ms. Mbela. The New Year's agreement and the
confidence-building measures foreseen therein must be
fully implemented by all parties. It is important that
all candidates have the same possibilities to campaign,
including through access to media. National civil-
society-led observations of the elections will play a
crucial role and must be allowed to carry out their work
without interference. Safeguarding the democratic
space through ensuring the full and equal participation
of women is also critical. That includes clear information
about voting rights and registration processes.

The high levels of violence, including sexual
and gender-based violence, and other human rights
violations and abuses must be addressed. As we heard
today, the security situation also has a direct impact on
the Ebola response. We welcome the recent visit of the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Lacroix, and the Director-General of the World
Health Organization, Mr. Tedros, to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Council remains unified
in its support to halt this health crisis, as reflected in
resolution 2439 (2018), which we adopted two weeks
ago. We appreciate the Government's efforts, as well
as those of the United Nations and health workers on
the ground, and we continue to emphasize the need
to prevent the disease from spreading, including to
neighbouring countries. We have heard the concerns
in that regard today by the Special Representative,
including on the security situation in Beni.

We welcome the regional initiatives by the Southern
African Development (SADC) and the African Union
(AU) to support the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with election observation missions. The Government
should be encouraged to also engage with other regional
and international actors in that regard. It is crucial that
the United Nations and MONUSCO continue to assist
the Government and the Electoral Commission before,
during and after the elections. Technical support as
well as the Special Representative's good offices
are essential. MONUSCO should also continue to be
prepared to support the logistical preparations for
the elections.

International and United Nations staff, including
election observers, peacekeepers and experts working
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, must be able
to safely carry out their tasks. The Government bears
the primary responsibility to protect international staff
within its territory and to hold perpetrators accountable.
We would like to recall that attacks on peacekeepers and
United Nations personnel and experts are sanctionable
offenses under the Democratic Republic of the Congo
sanctions regime.

The international community's united support for
credible elections is clearly demonstrated in the joint
communique issued by the African Union Peace and
Security Council and the United Nations Security
Council in July, as well as the joint communique of the
AU, SADC, International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region and United Nations on the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. Maintaining that unity for
the entire electoral cycle, including the post-election
period, will be significant.

In conclusion, bridging the confidence gaps,
ensuring democratic space, addressing violence and
maintaining unified international support will be
critical to ensure credible, transparent and inclusive
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The elections on 23 December are not a panacea for all
troubles, but they would be a crucial step in the work
towards achieving peace and stability in the country
and beyond.
