Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Sandra Honore for
her briefing. I would also like to express our deep
gratitude to her and her team and, through her, to all the
personnel of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), whose mandate is ending in a
few days. I especially thank the United Nations troops
who have made great sacrifices to achieve security and
stability in Haiti.

Egypt welcomes the progress that Haiti has made in
the past year on both the political and security fronts,
and the relative stability that has been achieved despite
all Haiti's challenges. International support, provided
mainly by the United Nations, has played a vital role
in achieving stability in Haiti, and it is therefore
incumbent on us to continue to provide support in
the next phase so as to build and sustain peace, as the
representative of the United Kingdom has said. Since
the new United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) will start its work in the next few
days, I would like to stress the following points.

First, MINUJUSTH should focus on building
national institutions, especially rule-of-law institutions
and the national police, in accordance with the country's
needs and requirements. It should not use its resources
for non-traditional or controversial tasks. I would like
to take this opportunity to commend the work that has
been done to develop the National Police, as well as
President Moise's efforts to build a national army.

Secondly, we callforenhanced coordinationbetween
MINUJUSTH and the United Nations country team,
which will help to ensure that United Nations resources
are used as efficiently as possible. It will be important
to develop the country team's collective capabilities so
that it will be able to meet the requirements of the next
phase, including realizing national development plans
in the areas of infrastructure, health and education
and providing related training, as well as improving
legislation with a view to attracting domestic and
foreign private-sector investment, especially in the
areas of agriculture and tourism. In that regard, we
would like to propose that the Government of Haiti
consider forming a partnership with the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission with
the aim of facilitating comprehensive and integrated
support to Haiti on the political, development and
social fronts while ensuring national ownership. We
should build an international forum that enables Haiti
to engage with its international partners and follow up
on progress at the international level on building and
sustaining peace.

Thirdly, the United Nations has a moral and a legal
responsibility to support the efforts of the Haitian
authorities to combat the cholera epidemic. Both
MINUJUSTH and the United Nations country team
must therefore have the necessary capacity to support
the fight against the cholera epidemic. My delegation
welcomes and supports the three-dimensional strategy
developed by United Nations Special Envoy Josette
Sheeran and discussed in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/840). We also welcome the efforts
to combat sexual exploitation and abuse, which have
resulted in a decrease in such crimes, as well as the
Secretary-General's efforts to apply a zero-tolerance
policy to such crimes at every level of the United
Nations. We also call for continued investigation of
crimes committed in the past in Haiti, with a view to
fighting impunity.

Fourthly, on 29 August, during Egypt's presidency,
the Security Council held an open debate (see S/PV.8033) that addressed the importance of reviewing
peacekeeping operations and enhancing peacekeeping
missions' performance. To that end, I urge the Council
to identify the lessons learned from MINUSTAH and
determine the factors that ensured the Mission's success.
It will also be important to monitor the transition from
MINUSTAH to MINUJUSTH. That will enable the
Council to refer to lessons learned in similar cases
when missions' mandates are about to end.

The peacekeeping phase in Haiti is nearing its
end. The efforts of the international community and
the United Nations should now focus on building and
sustaining peace during Haiti's next phase, especially
since the country has a clear national vision of priorities
that requires support and coordination among the
various components of those efforts.

