Mr. Favre (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate.

At a time when many items on our agenda may
divide us, we should remember what unites us. The
central institution of our multilateral system, the
United Nations, was built on the conviction that future
generations must be saved from the scourge of war. The
Charter of the United Nations remains the common
denominator and the starting point for our ongoing
dialogue. It envisages friendly relations among nations
and international cooperation to solve international
problems. It commits all Member States to settling their
international disputes peacefully.

We have achieved important milestones during the
past seven decades. That is illustrated, for example,
by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change. However, the
challenges facing the international community have not
decreased over the years. A strong multilateral system
therefore remains as important as ever.

Like every good relationship, multilateralism needs
the continued engagement of all States. As a federal
State, Switzerland is accustomed to building bridges
across different political perspectives, cultures and
languages. It is therefore second nature to us strive
actively for a strong, rules-based multilateral system.
Geneva hosts the second United Nations Headquarters,
which is the operational heart of the multilateral
system. Furthermore, Switzerland has a tradition
of providing good offices to conflicting parties and
platforms for international peace talks. The launch of
the Secretary-General's agenda for disarmament in
Geneva is therefore no coincidence.

Houses are built on columns, while multilateral
systems are built on institutions. It is vital that we do
not turn our backs on the multilateral institutions that
we have built together, from the Human Rights Council
to the World Trade Organization and the International
Criminal Court. Supporting strong institutions also
means ensuring a strong United Nations that is fit for
purpose and able to respond to current crises.

It is necessary for the United Nations to be able
to create better conditions on the ground. We are
convinced that the Secretary-General's reforms will
help the United Nations to work in a more integrated
manner across the three pillars - peace and security,
development, and human rights. These reforms will
enable the United Nations to address current challenges
and act more effectively, particularly with regard to the
sustainability of peace.

This brings me to my last point - the role of
the Security Council. The Council has the primarily
responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security. In particular, Chapter VI of the Charter
provides it with important tools to ensure the peaceful
settlement of disputes and to contribute as well to
conflict prevention. As Coordinator of the interregional
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group
and one of the Chairs of the Human Rights and Conflict
Prevention Caucus, based in New York and Geneva,
Switzerland is committed to continuing to support the
Council in the effective use of these tools.

