Mr. Sahel (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset, Madam President, to express to you
and to the other members of the Council our thanks and
appreciation for your prompt response to the Arab
Group's request to convene an emergency meeting of
the Security Council to consider the new escalation in
the occupied Palestinian territories. I also take this
opportunity to thank Ms. Angela Kane for her
presentation at the start of today's meeting.

My country is following with grave concern the
serious situation in the occupied Palestinian territories
and the developments of the past few days. In the face
of the wave of destruction that has reached the
institutions of the Palestinian Authority and the
Palestinian infrastructure, the Government of Morocco
cannot fail to deplore the escalation, the violence and
the campaign carried out by the occupation authorities.
Morocco calls for an immediate cessation of the
intervention by the Israeli army.

The Israeli policy of escalation only further
complicates the crisis with its targeting of Palestinian
Authority officials and the arrest of cabinet ministers
and other officials. We call for the release of all
Palestinian officials arrested by the Israeli army and
reiterate the need to put an immediate end to the
violent campaign in the occupied Palestinian
territories.

The Kingdom of Morocco rejects completely
Israel's dire approach to dealing with the crisis through
a military escalation of the situation at the very time
that the Palestinian factions had reached a political
agreement that would facilitate the resumption of the
peace process. While we recall that there is no
alternative to dialogue, we reiterate that the Palestinian
Authority President, cabinet ministers and Legislative
Council members must be able to move freely within
the territories of the Authority in order to facilitate
political action.

Israeli provocations through violations of Syrian
airspace portend a continuation of the cycle of violence
and counter-violence. It constitutes a grave threat to
international stability and security. In that context,
Morocco calls upon the Security Council and the
Quartet to take concrete measures to put an end to the
Israeli operations against the occupied Palestinian
territories and to bring about the withdrawal of the
Israeli forces without delay, in order to return to the
political process.

The Kingdom of Morocco continues to be
hopeful, despite these difficult circumstances, that
there is a possibility of reaching an end to violence in
the region. The Government of Morocco is firmly
convinced that negotiations are the best way to
establish a just and lasting peace in the Middle East, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the road map.

