Mr. Lucas (Angola): We join other members of the
Security Council in thanking Special Representative
Zahir Tanin for presenting the report (S/2016/666) of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
welcome the participation in today's meeting of
Mr. Ivica Daeie, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
We equally welcome Ambassador Vlora Citaku.

The report of the Secretary-General highlights
positive developments. We remain encouraged that
the overall security situation in Kosovo remains stable
and that political conditions have improved, with a
significant decrease in the pattern ofprotests, aggressive
actions and disruptive tactics by some parties.

We underline the fundamental role played by
the United Nations, through UNMIK, in promoting
security, stability, respect for human rights and
institution-building, as well as its cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo, and its engagement with Pristina and Belgrade.

A number of sensitive issues remain outstanding
in the territory, and political tensions between the
Government and opposition parties continue to
undermine the normal functioning of Kosovo's
institutions. The border demarcation agreement with
Montenegro is the most contentious issue currently
dominating the political debate in Kosovo. Equally,
the agreement for the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities in northern
Kosovo, signed almost one year ago, continues to
be challenged by the opposition's rejection, with its
implementation stalled.

On a positive note, we acknowledge that efforts to
tackle organized crime and corruption in Kosovo have
yielded positive results and that, since September 2015,
no Kosovo citizen has been reported as having joined
the conflicts in the Middle East. We also welcome the
agreement reached by the Joint Working Group on
Missing Persons with a view to increasing information
exchange and organizing more frequent ad hoc
informational meetings. We remain confident that the
political leaders of Belgrade and Pristina will be able to
fulfil their commitments and implement the agreements
reached under the European Union-facilitated dialogue.
We hope that dialogue will proceed in good faith, in a
results-oriented manner aimed at a better future with
economic and social development for all of the people
of the Balkans.

Finally, we underscore that resolution 1244 (1999)
remains the applicable legal framework in achieving a
comprehensive solution for Kosovo through dialogue
and negotiation based on the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and within the
framework of the relevant Security Council resolutions.

