I would like to thank Under Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his informative briefing. I would also like to thank Ms. Amany Qaddour for sharing her views. As pointed out by the Under Secretary-General in his remarks, the overall humanitarian situation in Syria remains extremely desperate. Viet Nam is gravely concerned over the dire condition of millions of people in Syria, which is aggravated by the severe impacts of the current economic crisis and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. It is very distressing to hear reports of 9.3 million people - over half of the population - having to struggle against food insecurity day after day. In addition, the pandemic has become more and more severe in recent weeks, as the north-west reported its first cases earlier this month and the north-east continues to see a rising number of cases. The pandemic not only targets the most vulnerable population, it also attacks health workers, who account for 7 per cent of reported cases, thereby further weakening the already limited health-care capacity. We are also troubled by the reported situation in other areas, including various internally displaced person camps, with the most vulnerable populations. Due to the disruption of the Allouk water station, water insecurity has become a serious challenge for people living in surrounding areas, including the Al-Hol and other camps, especially in the time of COVID-19. To gradually improve the situation, our delegation believes that, first of all, it is of the utmost importance to enhance humanitarian access to areas in Syria. Our delegation would like to reiterate our call for restraint by all relevant parties. Stability is an essential requirement with a view to creating the most favourable conditions for the safe and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian aid throughout the country. Accordingly, we support the call by the Secretary-General for a nationwide ceasefire, and urge all parties to heed that call. We take note of efforts to maintain the March ceasefire agreement in Idlib. However, sporadic insecurity incidents are showing how unstable the situation still is. Any further deterioration of the security situation, especially in this area, would severely impede humanitarian efforts and lead to the suffering of millions of civilians. Secondly, regarding the humanitarian response, our delegation commends the efforts of the international community in providing support for the Syrian people. We welcome the renewal of the cross-border humanitarian assistance mechanism in Syria. The 12-month authorization of Bab Al-Hawa border crossing is encouraging as it will allow the United Nations and its implementing partners to better prepare for their work. However, much still needs to be done to make up for the increasing humanitarian relief needs in the north-west as well as the north-east. Special attention should be paid to improving food security and the health-care system in Syria. We look forward to receiving reports on measures and adjustments to implement resolution 2533 (2020) as well as the impact thereof. The need to facilitate COVID-19 preparedness and response across Syria has become more urgent than ever, especially in terms of testing capacities and protective measures to prevent the spread of the virus. We find it extremely relevant to make sure that the COVID-19-response capability is not impacted by any type of sanctions. We call on the Syrian Government to continue to step up its cooperation with all relevant parties, including the United Nations, to improve and facilitate humanitarian access and response in Syria. In particular, cross-line delivery has to be further strengthened. Finally, the only way out of these many socioeconomic and security challenges remains a comprehensive and sustained political solution led and owned by the Syrian people, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and in full accordance with international law. In conclusion, we are delighted to see that the parties are getting ready for reconvening the work of the Constitutional Committee next month. The successful conduct of the upcoming session is much desired and would be an encouraging sign towards ending the suffering of the Syrian people.
