Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Mr. President, I thank you
for putting this item on the agenda. It was not difficult
to convince you, Sir, as we co-chair the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security. I
thank you very much and I also thank my colleague
from Indonesia, with whom we are penholders on
Afghanistan, so, in a joint move, we put this very
important issue on the agenda.

I would like to start by thanking Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed and Under-Secretary-
General Rosemary DiCarlo for their trip to Afghanistan.
It sent a very important signal to the United Nations
system and the international community, and that
signal was recognized in the country. I also thank them
for their briefings.

I can only subscribe to what they both said with
regard to the issue of women and peace and security.
First, Ms. Mohammed reminded us about the progress
made. When we think of the Taliban of 20 years ago,
we recall the marginalization of women who were not
allowed to get a real education or accept a job, let alone
participate in political life. What we have achieved
today therefore is very good. As the Deputy Secretary-
General said, "women are rising". Women are now in
school. I remember, when I was in Afghanistan years
ago, I saw girls in a schoolroom and was touched
by how eager they were to learn. It is a wonderful
image. Based on the statistics we heard, women now
participate in political life. They have jobs. They are
journalists. They are rising, as Ms. Mohammed said.
More infrastructure - such as schools - is open to
them. A great deal has already been achieved. It has
to be absolutely clear that whatever the outcome of the
political process, the rights that have been achieved
thus far must be safeguarded and guaranteed. And, of
course, we have to go beyond that.

We heard about the positive aspects, but our
briefer Jamila Afghani informed us of what is on the
negative side of the equation. The conflict is ongoing.
We would like to express our condolences about the
recent attacks that occurred. Women - and children
for that matter - continue to be the primary victims of
conflict. They have to survive in a situation ofviolence,
and they have to figure out how their families will also
survive. We hear that sexual and gender-based violence
continues to occur in the country. Much therefore
remains to be done.

In terms of women's participation, we heard that
they are participating but not on the front lines. It is
wonderful that there are three female vice-presidential
candidates but there is no female presidential candidate.
We are pleased that Afghanistan's Permanent
Representative to the United Nations is a woman,
although she is not here today. Germany has not yet
had a woman Permanent Representative to the United
Nations. We have to change that- perhaps not too
quickly- but that must change.

With regard to what needs to be done in the
negotiations, Germany helped to put together the
intra-Afghan dialogue, in which 20 per cent of the
participants were women - we were very pleased that
Jamila Afghani was one of the participants - but this
is not enough. In the negotiations taking place in Doha
between the United States and the Taliban, we must
ensure that women do not remain in the background
but that they are at the table, listened to and able to
make a real impact so that their rights are respected.
The country will not be at peace if women's rights are
not protected or if they do not have equal opportunities.
In addition, accountability for crimes that have been
committed is extremely important.

I thank Ms. Mohammed for her remarks on the
work of the United Nations. I very much welcome
cooperation with the European Union-United Nations
Spotlight Initiative. There is perhaps one operational
point within the United Nations system: in the local
staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan more women could be employed, which, I
think, will also have a strong impact.

In her plea for more women's participation, which
we all support, J amila Afghani said that the international
community must stand with the women of Afghanistan.
I can confirm that the Security Council does support
them, and I hope everyone will join that support. The
international community also stands behind her and her
work. I wish her every success in her efforts.

