Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening and participating
in this open debate on the Middle East, including the
question of Palestinian, a subject that the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela considers crucially important.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his participation.

Our delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered later by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Sadly, the Middle East is enduring a terrible
situation marked by war, sectarian violence, instability,
extremism and foreign interference, which has resulted
in massive violations of its peoples' fundamental
human rights and an unprecedented expansion of the
terrorist organizations that have been ravaging the
territories of the region with an unusually powerful
military capacity. But while the entire situation in
the Middle East deserves our attention, the situation
of the Palestinian people and the occupation of their
territories is a root cause of the conflict in the region
and a permanent threat to peace. The Palestinian issue
is the most emblematic of all the armed conflicts and of
the continuation of colonialism and foreign occupation
in the Middle East, a remnant of the colonial partition
that followed the Second World War. From 1948 until
today the Palestinian people have been subjected to
a systematic process of colonization and expulsion
from their own territory, as evidenced by the more
than 7 million Palestinians who have been forced to
live outside of Palestine, in contravention of General
Assembly resolution 194 (III), which proclaimed the
inalienable right of Palestinians to return to their land
and to be compensated for the damages they have
suffered.

Israel's occupation of Palestinian territories and the
settlement process that it has conducted as an occupying
Power have developed in contravention to the Charter of
the United Nations and international law. The Security
Council has adopted more than 68 resolutions on the
question of Palestine, and Israel has openly ignored all
of them. It seems that when it comes to the Palestinian
question, there is a double standard among the
countries in the Security Council, which is responsible
for ensuring peace, the human rights of the Palestinian
people and the respect for international law. The
impunity with which Israel behaves is a decisive factor
in the worsening ofthe conflict, which, after more than
60 years, could become a terrible failure on the part
of the Security Council. This represents a challenge
for the Council to act constructively in the quest for a
peaceful solution to this question. We firmly believe
in multilateralism and in the need for this matter to be
resolved through the decisive action of this body of the
United Nations.

Venezuela deems it crucial that the Security
Council work decisively on a definitive solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian crisis. This involves an end
to the occupation of the Palestinian territory and the
establishment of a free, sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within internationally recognized pre-
1967 borders.

The Venezuelan delegation reaffirms its full
support for the right to self-determination, which would
allow nationals of the State of Palestine to live within
internationally recognized borders, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council.

Our country calls for an immediate end to the
settlement process of which the Palestinian people are
victims. The construction of Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories must end. We reject the
demolition of Palestinian homes and the construction of
new Israeli settlements, which form part of an expulsion
and colonization process that the Security Council has
spent more than 50 years discussing without having put
an end to this illegal situation.

We must also put an end to the recurring practice
of the blockading and destruction of the Gaza Strip, the
territory where the Israeli occupying Power is carrying
out systematic violence, transforming it, sadly, into
a new ghetto that is home to human tragedy and the
despair of an entire people.

The impunity with which Israel acts in denying the
Palestinians their right to an independent future and
in the indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force
against the Palestinians was made very clear in the
middle of last year, when Israeli military forces spent
more than seven weeks indiscriminately bombing the
Palestinian population in the Gaza Strip, using all of
the sophisticated weaponry at their disposal, including
arms banned by the United Nations, such as cluster
bombs and phosphorus bombs.

Let us recall that 2,220 people were killed
during that short period of time, of whom 551 were
children - children whose deaths, like those of all the
other children who have been killed there throughout the
years, leave an indelible mark on the human conscience.
Our country calls for an end to impunity and for the
necessary accountability of those responsible for these
crimes against humanity.
There is a particular and unfathomable cruelty to
the violence ofthe occupying Power against Palestinian
children. Since 2000, more than 10,000 children have
been imprisoned in Israeli detention centres, resulting
in psychological consequences that are difficult to
overcome. The latest UNICEF report indicates that
within the Israeli military detention system, the
mistreatment of Palestinian children would appear to
be widespread, systematic and institutionalized.

Besides the victims that are counted in the various
reports of the United Nations agencies referring to the
Palestinian question, we cannot overlook the number
of internally displaced persons (IDPs) in the area as a
result of the violence. According to estimates by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
more than 500,000 people were displaced last year
during the most recent Israeli military operation against
the Gaza Strip, which represents the highest number of
IDPs since 1967.

It is high time for the Council to express to the people
of Palestine its unanimity as to a political solution to
the conflict based on the peaceful coexistence of two
States: the Israeli State and the State of Palestine. We
cannot accept the denial ofthe existence ofa Palestinian
State, otherwise there can be neither peace norjustice.

As the Israeli military occupation is the main cause
of the clear violations of human rights of the Palestinian
population and of international humanitarian law,
Venezuela calls for the establishment of a timeline
that would put an end to the unsustainable and illegal
occupation of territories belonging to the State of
Palestine, in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 446 (1979), inter alia.

Our country encourages the parties to continue
negotiations to achieve a firm and lasting peace where
both States can live as sovereign and independent
countries in safety, within internationally recognized
borders.

A comprehensive political solution to the
conflict must include a commitment to respecting
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Lebanon and Syria.

Lastly, we invite the Council to take a proactive
stance aimed at shoring up the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process, which would make it possible to break the
current deadlock. A negotiated political solution to this
question would be decisive for peace and security in the
Middle East.

Although we call for a negotiated solution based on
the peaceful coexistence of two States, then Palestine
must be recognized as a State and a full Member of
the United Nations, and to do so it must benefit from a
resolution of the Council establishing that fact.

Lastly, we call on this organ to assume the
responsibilities that the Charter of the United Nations
has conferred upon it in its Article 4.

