Mr. Lopes da Rosa (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): I wish first of all to welcome His
Excellency Alhaji G.V. Kromah, Member of the
Collective Presidency of the Liberian National

 

Transitional Government, and to thank him most sincerely
for the information he has conveyed to the Council.

During the formal meeting of the Security Council on
25 January 1996, the delegation of Guinea-Bissau expressed
its views on the fifteenth progress report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL). We wish none the less to take this opportunity
to reaffirm our position and to make a number of comments
before the Security Council adopts the draft resolution
before it.

My delegation wishes first to express its thanks to
Ambassador Albright and her entire delegation for having
submitted the draft resolution. We endorse that text because
it covers all the concerns expressed in the debate on the
report of the Secretary-General. My delegation will
therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution, laying
particular stress on the fourth preambular paragraph and on
operative paragraphs 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 11 and 16.

The delegation of Guinea-Bissau is gravely concerned
by the slow implementation of the peace process and by the
recent attacks against the troops of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) and against the civilian population. We
believe that these hostile acts must end immediately so as
to enable ECOMOG and UNOMIL to carry out fully their
arduous and complex task of maintaining peace and
stability in Liberia.

Accordingly, we believe that the status of the
personnel of ECOMOG, of UNOMIL and of humanitarian
agencies must be strictly respected by all Liberian factions,
so that this personnel can continue to ensure the delivery of
humanitarian assistance throughout the country in
accordance with the relevant rules of international
humanitarian law.

As we have already said, the political will and the
firm determination of the parties concerned are critical for
the settlement of this conflict. The Liberian parties should
respect and fully implement all agreements reached and all
the commitments they have undertaken, particularly with
respect to the cease-fire and to the disarmament and
demobilization of combatants, with a view to national
reconciliation. We think this could make an important
contribution to ensuring continued support by the
international community for the peace process in this
brotherly nation.

My delegation appeals urgently to the international
community to keep the promises it made at the
Conference on Assistance to Liberia, held on 27 October
1995, and to continue to provide financial and logistical
assistance to the personnel of ECOMOG and UNOMIL.
In that connection, we wish once again to thank all
countries that have provided assistance, and we encourage
others, within their means, to do likewise.

