Mr. Al Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kazakhstan, Mr. Kairat Abdrakhmanov,
for convening today's important meeting, which
demonstrates the importance of establishing effective
regional and subregional partnerships in order to
strengthen security and development. It reflects the
provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, which underscores the clear role of regional
and subregional organizations in resolving conflicts
through peaceful and diplomatic means. I would
also like to thank the delegation of Kazakhstan for
preparing the concept note (S/2018/7, annex), which
demonstrates the importance of effective partnership
in restoring development and security in Afghanistan,
which only serves to strengthen security in Central
Asia and throughout the world. I would also like to take
this opportunity to commend the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his excellent
briefing at the start of the meeting.

The holding of today's meeting, under the presidency
of friendly Kazakhstan, demonstrates the importance the
countries of Central Asia attach to a return to normalcy
in Afghanistan and to the restoration of stability and
security. The meeting highlights the efforts made to
develop a long-term political and economic plan for
Afghanistan that involves the country's neighbours.
Given the complex regional environment, we emphasize

that close cooperation among neighbouring States is
essential for strengthening stability and prosperity and
will contribute to ensuring sustainable peace.

My Government appreciates the visit of the Security
Council to Afghanistan under Kazakhstan's presidency
of the Council, which took place few days before
the convening of this meeting. The visit underscores
the interest and support of the Security Council
for the Government and the people of Afghanistan
as part of the efforts of the Government and of the
international community to achieve security, stability
and reconstruction. It also demonstrates support for
democracy and Afghanistan's full return to its normal
place in the international community.

Kuwait also notes the important role played by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We appreciate the vital role of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, as well as that of all other
United Nations personnel working on the ground in
an extremely dangerous setting. In that regard, we
note that since September 2010 Kuwait has hosted the
UNAMA Support Office. We would like to continue our
cooperation with that Office in order to overcome all
the difficulties it could encounter. We must ensure that
we provide all the assistance necessary to the Office.
The State of Kuwait underscores that it is important
to strengthen regional partnerships, as well as the
role of all United Nations agencies in restoring peace
and security in Afghanistan. My country welcomes
all international and regional initiatives aimed at
supporting such efforts, in accordance with resolution
2344 (2017).

Kuwait would like to express its continued support
for the Secretary-General's call for efforts to be made to
prevent threats in Afghanistan and Central Asia, and to
ensure that conflict prevention and resolution become
the main focus of the work of the United Nations in
the region, while stressing the importance of preventive
diplomacy through, inter-alia, constructive engagement
on the part of Member States in order to ensure long-
term stability, security and development.

Concerning the importance of preventive diplomacy
and regional cooperation, it is important to note the role
of the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia, which is an example of
political engagement and preventive efforts on the part

of the United Nations to support its Member States. We
encourage Afghanistan to cooperate with the Centre.

Afghanistan has for four decades been experiencing
unstable and difficult political and security situations,
with negative impacts on the economic and humanitarian
situation as well as on regional and international peace
and security. It is therefore important to pool the
efforts of the international community to tackle these
complex challenges. The deterioration of the security
situation in the country has slowed economic growth
and hampered progress in the political process. We
note that the parliamentary elections to be held in July
2018 and the presidential elections in 2019 have been
delayed, and that we were looking forward to see them
held according to the set timetable.

The deterioration of the security situation has also
aggravated the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan.
The number of civilians requiring urgent humanitarian
assistance has reached 3.3 million people. Millions of
Afghans have become internally displaced persons or
refugees. The worsening of the security situation has
also led to an increase in the unemployment rate to
25 per cent, while 40 per cent of the population lives
below the poverty line.

We would like to express our concern regarding
the continued threats to security and stability in
Afghanistan owing to the presence of terrorists and
extremist groups such as the Taliban, the Haqqani
Network, Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant. We note also the presence of other illegal
armed and criminal groups, including producers and
traffickers of narcotics. We are also worried about the
threats that this represents for the region, in particular
for Central Asian countries. That is why we call on
all States to effectively implement all the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, in particular those
pertaining to combating terrorism, and to strengthen
international and regional security cooperation so as to
promote information exchange and border control, law
enforcement and criminal justice, in order to improve
the capabilities to address the threats, including that of
the return of foreign terrorist fighters.

Kuwait would like to see a zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in the
region. We welcome the contribution made by the States
of Central Asia to non-proliferation, including the
Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia,
and we encourage them to increase their cooperation in

preventing illicit trafficking in nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons and other radioactive materials.

In conclusion, Afghanistan must not be seen as a
threat to regional security but as a key partner. Achieving
sustainable peace and stability in Afghanistan and in the
region requires peaceful and diplomatic solutions. All
parties involved must come to the negotiating table and
participate effectively and constructively in diplomatic
efforts aimed at restoring peace. Military solutions,
as history has demonstrated, have never led to lasting
solutions for peace. We urge all parties to participate
constructively in diplomatic efforts to establish peace,
so that Afghanistan and its people can enjoy prosperity
and well-being.

