Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, for
the information given to us concerning the grave
situation in Somalia. We commend the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia for its work, along with the
United Nations team working on the development of a
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy for Somalia. We
encourage further efforts in this direction in order to
find a solution to the protracted crisis besetting the
country.

We have taken note of all of the efforts that have
been deployed by the Transitional Federal Government
aimed at implementing the transitional political process
and national reconciliation. Taking account of the
situation in the field and the difficult security and
humanitarian situation in Somalia, I would like to
outline a number of points concerning the political
dialogue process, the humanitarian situation and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

In spite of its weaknesses, the convening of a
national reconciliation congress is an important
milestone in the process of national reconciliation. In
this regard, it is crucial that dialogue between the
parties continue, including the opposition groups, both
within and outside of the country. We agree with the
Secretary-General that the Transitional Federal

Government should show the political will and must
adopt a stance of openness when dealing with the
opposition groups. In turn, the Government must also
implement the recommendations adopted by the
Congress, including the development of a road map, in
order to accomplish those tasks that are enshrined in
the Transitional Federal Charter, in particular the
constitutional process, as well as the preparations for
the national census, the elections to be held in 2009
and the implementation of the national security plan
and the national stabilization plan. On the other hand,
the opposition groups must renounce violence and must
agree to the Transitional Federal Charter in order to
create the necessary conditions for reconciliation. All
parties must understand that it is only through an
inclusive dialogue and through a genuine political
process that a sustainable peace will be achieved.

Considering the humanitarian situation, we are
disturbed to hear about the lack of security and how
this has increased the vulnerability of the population.
The humanitarian situation has worsened, given the
rise in violence. Access to humanitarian assistance is
limited; it has been impeded because of the increasing
lack of security, because of the roadblocks that have
been created that block access to overland
consignments of the World Food Programme (WFP),
and pirate activities on the coast of Somalia that are
preventing aid and assistance from reaching areas that
require it.

According to the last report of the Secretary-
General, there are currently in Somalia some 750,000
internally displaced persons, of which 350,000 have
only recently become displaced. In the light of this
dramatic situation, we must urge all parties to
guarantee strict compliance with the principles of
international humanitarian law and human rights.
Moreover, the situation must be tackled, as the
humanitarian crisis persists and the ongoing violence
could dissipate all political efforts. To that end, we
welcome the fact that the planning of a unified appeal
for 2008 has begun, and we welcome the pledges for
contributions that have been received.

With regard to AMISOM. and its financing - and
these are my concluding comments - we commend
AMISOM's troops for their professionalism in
fulfilling their duties, working in a highly difficult and
risky environment. We agree with the report of the
Under-Secretary-General concerning the need to
maintain AMISOM, to ensure that it remains operative,
and to strengthen its capacities through new deployments
of troops in order to provide more effective and urgent
assistance for the stabilization of the country.

