Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): It is a pleasure for my delegation to see you,
Sir, presiding over the Security Council for the month of
December. We are confident that your wisdom and skill
will help to expedite the Council's work. My delegation
has always thought that you have a quiet strength that can
move mountains. My delegation is at hand to assist you
in your task.

My delegation takes this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Al-Khussaiby for the way he presided over
the Council last month. Thanks to his great wisdom, skill
and diplomacy, he was able to help the Council make
remarkable progress in its work. My delegation also
wishes to thank the Secretary-General for his report on
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(UNAMIR). Furthermore, we would like to thank those
who drafted today's resolution and the countries
contributing troops to UNAMIR. I wish to assure them of
the cooperation of the Government of Rwanda with
UNAMIR during the period of this new mandate.

(spoke in English)

 

I have promised to speak in English. I would like to
address the contradictions based on the positions taken by
the Secretariat and the Security Council decision on the
recent situation faced by Rwanda.

The first contradiction is based on the fact that
appropriate action was taken before and during the genocide
in Rwanda.

1 would begin by reminding the Council of the history
of UNAMIR. The Mission was established on 5 October
1993 by Security Council resolution 872 (1993) with a
mandate to, among other things, assist in ensuring the
security of Kigali - I repeat, the security of Kigali;
monitor the security situation during the final period of the
transitional Government's mandate, leading up to the
elections agreed on in the 1993 Arusha peace agreement;
and investigate and report on incidents regarding the
Rwandese gendarmerie and police.

In the early part of 1994, high-ranking personnel of
UNAMIR, United Nations agencies and the diplomatic
corps in Kigali were aware that members of the former
Government were planning mass killings of Rwandese. That
information was also well known at United Nations
Headquarters and some influential members of the
international community. Despite that clear knowledge and
UNAMIR's mandate to ensure security, at least in Kigali,
UNAMIR personnel, as soldiers and human beings,
appeared unable to assist innocent unarmed civilians,
women and children among them, as well as hospitalized
patients.

In April, when genocide was launched on an
unprecedented scale, the response of the Security Council
was to withdraw UNAMIR. In response to that grave
situation, this decision seemed peculiar. On 21 April, two
weeks after the killings began, the members of this very
Council decided, by resolution 912 (1994), to reduce
UNAMIR's force level from 2,500 to 270, a number
incapable of responding to the extensive trauma being
experienced by Rwandese society at that time. The mandate
and size of this symbolic force made it ineffective in the
face of the mass slaughter organized by the State.

As a result, by the end of June 1994 - after only
three months - approximately one million Rwandese had
been massacred in a genocide unprecedented in Africa, the
third genocide of this century, watched by the entire world
on international television. In the meantime, the Member
States that had ratified the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide were hesitating

 

to act. In a three-month period, one eighth of Rwanda's
population was exterminated.

Operation Turquoise, another solution proposed by
the Security Council, only exacerbated an already
complex situation. In spite of its mandate to provide
security and to protect displaced persons, refugees and
civilians at risk, Operation Turquoise provided a safe
haven for the perpetrators of genocide, who would later
use it as a base to attack innocent civilians and the forces
of the new Government of Rwanda. The camp at Kibeho
was a typical example of this. It was the Rwandese
themselves who, single-handedly, took on the mammoth
task and stopped the massacres on 4 July.
The second contradiction is based on the
implementation process based on earlier decisions taken
by the Security Council. Four months later, in September
1994, UNAMIR was redeployed at a strength of 5 ,500 -
a redeployment that was far too late and too large. That
is why its mandate, which was defined on 17 May by
Security Council resolution 918 (1994), was not
appropriate. The situation had drastically changed inside
Rwanda.

In fact, UNAMIR's mandate could have been best
implemented outside Rwanda in refugee camps to prevent
the intimidation of refugees in the camps outside Rwanda,
facilitate the refugees' return to Rwanda and implement
the Security Council's resolution on the arms embargo
against the former Rwandese Government, which has
been consistently violated. Simultaneously, the
international community had an obligation to arrest and
detain those responsible for planning and committing
genocide and to ensure the speedy functioning of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda. All of this had to be
done outside Rwanda.

Following the Rwandese victory over genocide, a
policy of national reconciliation, as established in the
Arusha Agreement, has been fundamental in the
reconstruction of a traumatized Rwandese society. In that
context, a Government of National Unity comprising the
main opposition parties was formed. A National
Parliament representing all political parties was
constituted. Over six million Rwandese, including new
and old returning refugees, are living together peacefully
inside the country. Intensive contacts are in progress with
Governments and refugees in neighbouring countries to
facilitate the return of more recent refugees. There has
been a reintegration of former administrative personnel
into the new public service and the new Rwandese army

 

has reintegrated large numbers of soldiers and high-ranking
officers of the former regime.

All of these policy decisions and actions constitute
national reconciliation for the Rwandese. This contrasts
with other interpretations of what national reconciliation
should be, such as implicit proposals for the integration of
the leaders/planners of genocide into the Government by
various strategies, including regional conferences.

As far as we Rwandese are concerned, national
reconciliation is in progress. The new Government of
Rwanda, with the cooperation of a large number of Member
States, has been able to accomplish a great deal in the past
few months, in spite of an acute lack of resources and
limited and conditional support from some sectors of the
international community. It has been able to establish a
climate of security and stability within the country. Much
progress has been made in economic and social
rehabilitation. The recent appointment of Supreme Court
judges by the Rwandese National Assembly has contributed
to the revival of the national judicial system, which is
essential to putting an end to the spirit of impunity which
has prevailed in Rwanda for decades.

Despite the tremendous efforts of the Rwandese
Government, it is important to understand some of the
problems facing Rwanda. They include bringing the
perpetrators of genocide to justice, both nationally and
internationally; putting an end to infiltration and sabotage
by the former Rwandese armed forces along Rwanda's
western border; the intimidation of refugees in the refugee
camps; and the economic and social reconstruction of
Rwanda.

At the present time, UNAMIR cannot and is not
expected to respond to any of these priorities. Nevertheless,
the Government of Rwanda has appreciated the assistance
provided by the Mission, particularly by the small force left
in Rwanda during the dark days of genocide, and by its
commander, his staff and others who lost their lives
assisting Rwandese. UNAMIR has played an important role
in facilitating transportation and providing logistical support
in areas of need in Rwanda. In that respect, UNAMIR's
departure will leave a gap in those areas. The loss of
transportation and office, communication and medical
equipment, to name a few things, as a result of pillage by
the former Rwandese Government and the former armed
forces has left Rwanda in great need.

For that reason, the Government of Rwanda has
requested the donation of some of UNAMIR's non-lethal

 

equipment to the Government and the people of Rwanda
on UNAMIR's departure. The entire world knows that
Rwanda is in need and that such donations would be a
gesture of good will on the part of Member States and the
Secretariat to a people who have experienced an
unprecedented tragedy and its aftermath during the past
20 months. Rwanda's request is based on precedents in
the case of Cambodia and other United Nations peace-
keeping missions.

Regarding the present status of UNAMIR, the
Government of Rwanda is willing to extend the presence
of UNAMIR for three months on condition that its
mandate be adjusted accordingly. During that period and
later, the Government of Rwanda will continue to ensure
the security of all persons in Rwanda, including UN AMIR
personnel, personnel of international organizations,
members of the international community and personnel of
the International Tribunal for Rwanda. Additional
measures have already been agreed on between the
Government of Rwanda and the International Tribunal to
ensure the protection of the Tribunal personnel. Any other
needs in the area of security will be considered by the
Rwandese Government, as appropriate.

