Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): We thank the Foreign
Minister of Mexico for coming to New York to preside
over this important meeting. We welcome the

Secretary-General's comprehensive report
(S/2009/l58), which covers compliance and progress
towards ending the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflict and other grave violations. We also
welcome the presence of the Deputy Secretary-
General, Ms. Migiro, in our midst. We thank
Ms. Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Ann Veneman, Executive Director of
UNICEF, for their briefings. My delegation is grateful
to Ms. Grace Akallo, who was with us this morning
and who has shared her experience, as a former
abducted child, on the plight of children in armed
conflict.

My delegation is pleased to note that the
preparation of the report involved broad consultations
with all key stakeholders, especially the country-level
task forces on monitoring and reporting. We are
convinced that focus on this participatory approach
will yield better results in ensuring more effective
protection for children affected by conflict in situations
of concern.

Uganda is fully committed to and supports the
various efforts by the United Nations, including those
of the Security Council, to promote the protection of
children in armed conflict. My delegation condemns
the continuing recruitment, use and abuse of children
in armed conflict in violation of applicable
international law.

The negative psychosocial consequences on the
mental health of the affected children cannot be
overemphasized. While we acknowledge that there has
been significant progress as indicated in the report, we
are deeply concerned at the slow pace of
implementation. We have noted, for instance, that out
of the total of 56 parties listed and those not listed in
annex I and II of the Secretary-General's report, only
four parties had signed action plans, one had signed an
action plan that did not meet the required minimum
standards, and there were three or four cases of
ongoing dialogue to translate commitment into action
plans.

Those statistics clearly demonstrate that quite a
lot of work remains to be done. We therefore call upon
Member States, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
country-level task forces, United Nations peacekeeping
and political missions and non-governmental
organizations to redouble their efforts.

The Government of Uganda signed and
implemented an action plan regarding children
associated with armed forces and continues to allow
regular access to the United Nations to any Uganda
People's Defence Forces (UPDF) facilities upon
request to monitor compliance. The report of the
Secretary-General clearly attests to this by pointing out
that there were no cases of recruitment and use of
children by the UPDF or the now-disbanded local
defence units, and that the UPDF has accordingly been
de-listed.

Uganda continues to be vigilant in the
implementation of resolution 1612 (2005), and
tremendous progress has been made, resulting in the
release of many formerly abducted children and their
reintegration into their families and communities. The
most recent example of this commitment was the
rescue, reintegration and ongoing rehabilitation of
Catherine Ajok, the last of the 139 Aboke girls who
were abducted by the terrorist Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA), including Ms. Akallo, who was here this
morning.

As we have heard from the testimony of
Ms. Akollo, one of the most disturbing issues
considered in the report, which is unfortunately
common in most armed conflict situations, concerns
sexual and gender-based violence, with young girls as
the largest and most vulnerable group of victims.
Uganda strongly supports the recommendations by the
Secretary-General and the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict that the Security Council should
consider, at a minimum, including rape and other acts
of grave sexual violence as additional criteria for
inclusion in the annexes.
My delegation also expresses concern at the
increase in the reported cases of indiscriminate killings
of children caught in situations of armed conflict and
war as well as attacks on schools. We condemn these
inhuman acts and call upon the perpetrators to desist
from carrying out such gross atrocities. We also call
upon the international community to take decisive
action against all those committing crimes and
violations against children, including the LRA.

Finally, my delegation calls upon the parties to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child to strengthen
measures geared towards preventing the recruitment of
children into armed forces. We welcome the Secretary-
General's recommendation concerning effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes as vital for the well-being of children
associated with armed forces and groups. It is therefore
imperative that the respective Governments and donors
ensure that such programmes, including the provision
of social services and amenities, be community-based
and receive adequate and timely resources and funding
for their long-term sustainability. We agree with the
observation that this is an increasingly crucial factor
for durable peace and security.

We are grateful to the delegation of Mexico for
preparing the draft presidential statement, which my
delegation fully supports.

