Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): In honour of
New Zealand's presidency of the Security Council, I
would like to use the Maori greeting "Kia Ora" to first
address you, Madam President.

I align myself with the statement made on behalf
of the European Union a few moments ago. However, I
would like to underline the following.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully supports
the statement made on behalf of Italy, also as part of
our cooperation related to the upcoming split term
in the Security Council. As my Italian colleague just
emphasized, we are currently defining our cooperation
around shared goals and values in the firm belief that
this agreement sends a positive political message of
cooperation to tackle common challenges here at the
United Nations.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his detailed and thorough report (S/2016/768). I would
also like to thank Special Representative Yamamoto
for his briefing. I wish him well in his new position.
I would also like to thank my good friend, Permanent
Representative Saikal, for his statement.

Today I will focus on three issues, namely,
reconciliation and security, the Brussels Conference,
and gender issues.

In our view, issues ofpeace and reconciliation are of
paramount importance. We would highly welcome the
swift signing of an agreement between the High Peace
Council and the Hezb-i-Islami as an encouragement for
other insurgent groups to engage in serious peace talks.
The need for peace and reconciliation is underlined
by the security situation in Afghanistan, as has been
mentioned by many of our colleagues. The report of
the Secretary-General states that the overall security
situation has deteriorated since the beginning of the
year, and it is the people of Afghanistan who have borne
the brunt of violence and terrible atrocities committed
by the Taliban and other armed groups.

Civilian casualties have increased are currently at
the highest level since 2009, according the UNAMA
midyear report. That has resulted in many internally
displaced persons and refugees, as our Australian
colleague just mentioned, and increasing pressure
on migration, including through Europe. The intense
fighting that took place in Tarin Kowt last week, which
is a place of particular concern for the Dutch because
we serve there, shows the fragility of the region and, in
particular, its security situation. In addition, in Kabul
last week, 41 innocent people were killed and more
than 100 were wounded in the two major attacks that
took place there. Our thoughts and condolences go to
the victims and their families.

In our view, those developments demonstrate the
urgent need to improve security for ordinary Afghan
citizens. We commend the Afghan special forces and
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces for
their competent and professional response in countering
the Taliban and other insurgents. The international
community, including the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
has supported those forces for over a decade now, and
we will continue to do so, as was announced in Warsaw.

We look forward to the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan, at which the Minister for Foreign Trade
and Development Cooperation of the Netherlands,
Ms. Ploumen, will participate. We believe the
Conference will be an important moment where the
international community will renew, as it should, its
commitment to the Afghan people.

We commend the Afghan National Unity
Government for pursuing an ambitious reform agenda,
especially with regard to tackling corruption and
fostering regional stability and economic growth.
All these issues require stability and the long-
term commitment of both the Afghan Government
and the international community. We now urge the
Government to implement those ambitious plans
without further delay.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes
the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework, which clearly demonstrates the
resolve of the Afghan Government with regard to
Afghanistan's near future. We look forward to seeing
concrete action to implement the plan in line with the
commitments under the Self-Reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework.

With regard to gender issues, much progress has
been achieved so far. Millions of women and children
in Afghanistan now have access to basic services,
such as education and health care. Women and girls
are actively taking part in social life, and Afghanistan
has experienced a sharp increase in girls enrolling
in school. Let us not forget that this was unthinkable
during Taliban rule.

At the same time, Afghanistan still faces many
challenges in that context. The position of women
remains precarious. Accordingly, we welcome the
adoption of the Afghan national action plan on
women and peace and security. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands will continue to cooperate with the
Afghan Government and civil society partners to
expedite the implementation of the plan. Women are the
cornerstone of society. Women need to play a crucial
role in rebuilding the country. Women are crucial for
peace and for the long-term sustainable development
of Afghanistan.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
has been an enduring partner of Afghanistan. We
have contributed significantly in the areas of peace,
justice and development. We remain committed to
supporting Afghanistan throughout the transformation
decade - one of ever-greater Afghan ownership and
Afghan leadership. In this spirit of partnership, the
Afghan people can count on us standing by their side.

