Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Let me thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this important meeting on
post-conflict peacebuilding. I am convinced that
discussions of this nature can significantly contribute
to the improvement and streamlining of practices
in peacebuilding and post-conflict construction and
initiatives. 1 would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson; the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme,
Ms. Helen Clark; and the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), Ambassador Patriota of Brazil, for
their valuable contributions.

As the Council knows, my country went from a
post-conflict situation to a contributor to peacekeeping
operations. Our experience alone is an indication that
indeed post-conflict peacebuilding is an important
process in dealing with both the aftermath of conflicts
and conflict-prevention. We recognize the importance
of peacebuilding in creating conditions conducive to
achieving sustainable and irreversible peace.

However, the international community faces
the critical gap between applying existing top-down
strategies and the realities on the ground. Too often,

post-conflict peacebuilding is regarded as a purely
operational process, using blueprints that stipulate what
institutions must be established and what systems must
be introduced, with technical aspects tending to take
priority. Many cases of countries on the PBC agenda
lead us to question whether local political mechanisms,
capacities and conflict dynamics have been taken into
account and whether mechanisms have been put in
place to safeguard their continued existence and avoid
a relapse of conflicts.

The situation in the Central African Republic
speaks for itself. Despite being on the PBC agenda for
nearly six years, political instability and administrative
weaknesses persisted and, in 2013, the situation in the
Central African Republic worsened. Community-based
militias were established and the stage was set for
simmering violence between Christians and Muslims.
In South Sudan, although not on the PBC agenda,
renewed fighting occurred in December 2013 despite
the United Nations in South Sudan having a strong
peacebuilding mandate.

Those two cases demonstrate that the international
community in general and the United Nations in
particular need to learn how to do things differently.
They must adopt targeted post-conflict measures
that address the root causes of a particular conflict
while at the same time respecting the specificity of
each situation, including the local political dynamics,
cultural, religious and ethnic configurations and other
elements that might play a critical role in post-conflict
settings.

We believe that the focus should be on the means
and potential available to the international community
to support locally driven and locally defined priorities
with a clear implementation plan and benchmarks to
build local capacities. We are aware that building
national capacities in a post-conflict situation already
requires an existing capacity from a third party. In
that regard, we welcome the establishment of pools
of civilian capacity through the CivCaps initiative,
which aims at strengthening the capacity of the
United Nations system to deliver effective, timely and
coordinated support to strengthen national institutions
in the aftermath of conflict.

Like some ofmy colleagues, Rwanda also commends
the Secretary-General's seven-point action plan on
gender-responsive peacebuilding, which encourages
Governments to directly involve women in setting
peacebuilding priorities, identifying beneficiaries and
monitoring implementation. In addition to the potential
for women to contribute to successful peacebuilding,
their participation should also be encouraged on the
basis of fairness and justice. It is common knowledge
that, in countries afflicted by conflicts, women account
for half the population, and therefore should be part of
the decision-making that would have an impact on their
future. Furthermore, women are greatly victimized
during conflicts, and therefore deserve to be heard.

There are many avenues through which the
inclusion of women in post-conflict peacebuilding can
bolster peacebuilding initiatives and thereby contribute
to a positive peace outcome. For example, individual
women and women's organizations adopt a variety of
strategies for reducing fear and uncertainty following
conflict and for fostering an environment of trust
and collaboration. Furthermore, women who adopt
positions of political leadership could provide a direct
alternative to traditional political actors, adding to the
post-conflict impetus of change and addressing the
injustice of the past.

As we commemorate the twentieth anniversary
of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, it
should be recalled that shortly after the genocide
it was estimated that the majority of the Rwandan
population was female. In their victimization and
endurance, women of Rwanda immediately got up
and started rebuilding their home country. They
assumed non-traditional social and economic roles as
heads of household, community leaders and financial
providers, meeting the needs of devastated families and
communities. Moreover, there was a concerted effort in
the Government and among women's groups to address
the needs of Rwandan women and engage them in the
all-important processes of national reconstruction and
reconciliation.

Today, the Rwandan story represents in many ways
a process of collective social learning. The Government
of Rwanda does not regard the aims of including
women as a philosophical idea, but as a necessary
practical mechanism for reconciliation, reconstruction,
sustainable peace and development.

The post-conflict recovery path adopted by the
Government of Rwanda since 1994 can be shared
through the initiatives highlighted heretofore. In the
spirit of South-South cooperation, for example, and in
line with the recommendations from the 2013 report
of the Secretary-General on civilian capacity in the
aftermath of conflict (S/2014/5), we stand ready to
work with United Nations entities that have expressed
interest in having Rwanda participate in both initiatives.
Rwanda has already provided high-level expertise on a
number of issues, including experience and expertise
in, inter alia, aid coordination, specialized police
capacities, military institution-building and security
sector reform.
On the role of the international community, we
are grateful that within the United Nations system the
Peacebuilding Commission has been given the role of
proposing and advising on strategies for post-conflict
recovery and of bringing together all the relevant actors
involved in resource mobilization and the political,
financial and technical aspects of post-conflict
recovery. That continues to be an important, yet very
complex and challenging, role.

But in the nearly 10 years of the PBC's existence,
the United Nations and the Security Council should
have been able to identify some best practices and
lessons learned to make it more effective and relevant
in peacebuilding activities. We also believe that the
Security Council can and should contribute to the
Commission's efforts to play such a role. Furthermore,
Rwanda believes that the Commission can make an
impact only if it is able to leverage its unique membership
structure and bring political support to its engagement
in the field, as well as within intergovernmental forums
and through strong advocacy. The collective support
from the PBC membership should focus on building
national capacities.

To conclude, let me emphasize that there is a
need for enhanced coordination and coherency within
the United Nations and with the other relevant actors
involved. We believe that the PBC should support the
United Nations in delivering as one, remain focused on
nationally identified priorities in the field and ensure
that the United Nations entities at Headquarters and
their guidance in the field missions is aligned with
national peacebuilding priorities.

