Mr. Holmes: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council.

On this day in 1945, 50 States gathered in San
Francisco to sign the United Nations Charter in an
expression of their determination, in the words of the
09-38266
Preamble, to save succeeding generations from the
scourge and the untold sorrow of war and to ensure the
use of armed force only in the common interest.

That determination to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war remains unfulfilled in all too
many parts of the world. The sorrow and, I would add,
brutality of war continue to be felt by untold millions
of civilians, trapped by conflict or forced into flight. It
is precisely against them and their rights and interests
that armed force is so often used with devastating effect.

As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/277) before the Council today makes clear, a
large part of the reason for that distressing state of
affairs lies in the fundamental failure of parties to
conflict, deliberately or otherwise, to respect and to
ensure respect for their obligations to protect civilians.

It is a failure that demands, in the words of the
Secretary-General, a reinvigorated commitment from
us all to the Council's agenda on the protection of
civilians and to promoting respect for the principles of
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law.

In the last 10 years, the protection of civilians in
armed conflict has assumed a prominent place on the
Council's agenda, as manifested in these regular open
debates, the Secretary-General's periodic reports and
the four thematic Security Council resolutions on the
protection of civilians.

Most importantly, concern for the protection of
civilians has increasingly permeated the country-
specific deliberations and decisions of the Council.
Regular meetings of the Expert Group on the
Protection of Civilians and the systematic application
of the revised aide-memoire - a published, user-
friendly version of which has been distributed to the
Council this morning i should further enhance the
Council's response to protection issues in a more
comprehensive and systematic way.

Yet, and as the five months since my last briefing
have once again shown (see S/PV.6066), the reality on
the ground has not changed in the same way at all. We
cannot be remotely satisfied with the situation that we
see in so many parts of the world today. Lip service to
the principles of international law is no substitute for
real action. And the latter is in sadly short supply.
Much greater efforts are required to enhance
compliance and, for that matter, accountability on the
09-38266
ground - that is to say, compliance by all parties to
conflict with the applicable law and with the demands
and decisions of the Council, and accountability for
those individuals and parties that fail in those respects.

The Secretary-General's report sets out five core
challenges. The first is enhancing compliance by
parties to conflict with international humanitarian law
and human rights law, with particular concern over the
conduct of hostilities. The lack of compliance leads not
only to the death and injury of hundreds of civilians in
conflicts every week, but to the displacement of
thousands more. The word displacement does not do
justice to the reality - that is thousands of innocent
civilians forced every single week to flee attacks and
the destruction of their homes, their communities and
their livelihoods, and to fall into an existence marked
by danger, suffering and psychological anguish.

While the weapons have finally * and
thankfully-fallen silent in Sri Lanka, deaths of
civilians in places such as Somalia, Afghanistan and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo constantly
remind us of the urgent need for parties to conflict to
be much more scrupulous in their efforts to spare
civilians from the effects of hostilities.

In the Somali capital Mogadishu, for example,
the eruption last month of renewed hostilities between
forces aligned with the Transitional Federal Government
and non-State armed groups has been marked by the
bombing of civilian areas and street battles, with little
or no regard for the safety and security of the civilian
population. Since the first week of May, more than 200
civilians have been killed and over 800 wounded,
while some 160,000 people have fled their homes.

In Afghanistan, the number of civilians killed and
injured in the fighting continues to rise as the conflict
intensifies, particularly in the south.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan reports that 261 civilians were killed in
May alone. Anti-Government elements remain
responsible for the majority of these civilian deaths
through attacks on residential areas and schools, the
use of improvised explosive devices and, often,
targeted or otherwise reckless suicide attacks.

Suicide attacks and bombs left in public places
have become so commonplace, not just in Afghanistan
but also in such places as Iraq and Somalia, as to
warrant no longer the same degree of attention and
3
outrage as they once did. Yet their impact on civilians
is no less devastating, the responsibility of those who
orchestrate them no less grave, and the need for
systematic and effective condemnation from those in
positions of authority and influence, including religious
authorities, no less urgent.

Civilians continue to die in Afghanistan also as a
result of the actions of pro-Government forces,
particularly during air strikes. I welcome recent
statements from the incoming leadership of United
States and international armed forces in Afghanistan on
the need to reduce civilian casualties, review rules of
engagement and ensure their strict observance.

We will monitor such efforts closely, just as we
continue to carefully monitor the situation of the
civilian population in the North and South Kivu
provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Since January, a wave of attacks on the civilian
population by the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda, including all too common acts of rape and
other forms of sexual violence, has driven more than
370,000 people from their homes.

Alarmingly, the allegations of Violence and abuse
committed against civilians extend to members of the
Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo engaged in Operation Kimia II in South Kivu.
Elsewhere in the region, the Lord's Resistance Army
continues to spread fear and death among the civilian
population, with frequent attacks and abductions in
Haut Uele.

The choice of weapons is critical in minimizing
and reducing the impact of hostilities on civilians. We
have seen significant progress in efforts to address the
humanitarian impact of cluster munitions with the
adoption last year of the Convention on Cluster
Munitions. Such progress is welcome, but there is a
broader concern, expressed in the report, at the
indiscriminate and severe humanitarian impact of
explosive weapons more generally, particularly when
used in densely populated areas, as we have seen in
recent conflicts. I join the Secretary-General in urging
Member States, in consultation with relevant United
Nations and other actors, to consider this issue further,
including addressing the widespread use of improvised
explosive devices in densely populated areas.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report, the
Council has an important role to play in promoting
systematic compliance with the law in situations on its

agenda. This includes consistently condemning
Violations, without exception, and demanding
compliance. It also includes the threat and application
of targeted measures in cases of non-compliance, and
requests for reports on Violations and the mandating of
commissions of inquiry where concerns exist regarding
serious violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law.

But the Council's concern cannot be limited only
to those situations formally on its agenda. Even
conflicts that are not perceived by all Council members
to have implications for international peace and
security can have a dramatic impact on the protection
of civilians and can warrant Council action.

As I mentioned in my briefing in January (see S/PV.6066), it is relatively straightforward, if not always
productive, for us to raise concerns over the conduct of
hostilities and other protection issues directly with
States and national armed forces. But, as humanitarians,
we cannot talk only to one side. We must be able to
engage and seek compliance by all parties to conflict,
including non-State armed groups - the second of the
five challenges identified in the report.

Unpalatable though this may be for some States,
the simple yet brutal reality is that the failure to engage
armed groups is always likely to mean more, not fewer,
civilians killed and wounded. It is essential also to
gaining access to those in need and to establishing a
safe and secure environment in which the activities of
humanitarian organizations are accepted and respected.

Various initiatives can and have been pursued to
this end. These include training and the conclusion of
special agreements or codes of conduct, through which
groups commit to comply with their obligations. As
recommended by the Secretary-General, as a first step
towards a more comprehensive approach to addressing
the actions of non-State armed groups, I would urge the
Council to convene an Arria formula meeting to discuss
the experience of United Nations and non-governmental
actors in engaging armed groups, and to help identify
additional measures that the Council and Member
States could take to improve their compliance.

The inclusion of protection activities in the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping and other
relevant missions has been a significant feature of the
Council's efforts to improve protection on the ground.
From Sierra Leone in the past to the present-day
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan,
peacekeeping operations have made and continue to
make important contributions to the safety and security
of civilians. The challenge now, as identified in the
report, is to maximize their impact by addressing the
disconnect between mandates, intentions, expectations,
interpretations and implementation capacity.

Practically, that means providing clear and
practical guidance to heads of missions and force
commanders on implementing protection mandates. It
means the development, on a more systematic basis, of
mission-specific protection strategies and the spread of
best-practice innovations. It also means, to paraphrase
resolution 1674 (2006), ensuring not only that
protection is prioritized in decisions concerning the use
of available capacity and resources, but more crucially
still that the capacity and resources provided are
genuinely appropriate for the task of protecting
civilians.

These and other issues will be addressed in the
forthcoming independent study commissioned by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, to be
completed this summer. Its recommendations for
improving the impact of protection mandates will be
shared with the Council.

Among the protection tasks assigned to
peacekeeping missions, creating conditions conducive
to the provision of humanitarian assistance has in many
cases been critical. It has, no doubt, helped save lives
in such places as Chad, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Sudan, but peacekeeping missions are
not present in all situations. Moreover, humanitarian
organizations should not need to rely on such missions
to help ensure their access to civilians in need. The
Council itself has called on all parties concerned,
including non-State actors and neighbouring States, to
cooperate fully with the United Nations in providing
safe, timely and unimpeded access to civilians in
armed conflict.

Yet, as detailed in the annex to the report, our
access to conflict-affected populations is too often
unsafe and not timely enough, and too frequently
impeded. Millions of vulnerable people are deprived of
assistance as a result. Enhancing access to those in
need is identified as the fourth challenge in the report.
Many factors interfere with access, but three
constraints are the most severe and most widespread.

First is burdensome bureaucracy. Permissions and
travel notifications restrict the movement of
humanitarian actors, while customs and quotas on
goods stifle the flow of aid. The result is that those in
need do not receive the assistance they need when and
where they need it.

In Gaza, for example, the criteria used by the
Israeli authorities for allowing the import of goods
remain unpredictable. Medical supplies can be subject
to particularly long delays. Israel's decision in March
of this year to allow the unrestricted entry of all
foodstuffs from Government-approved sources remains
unimplemented and, despite major shelter and
reconstruction needs following the hostilities earlier
this year, only a fraction of the required construction
materials have so far been allowed into Gaza.

In the Sudan, the convening of the now-expanded
high-level committee represents significant progress
towards renewed cooperation to facilitate humanitarian
action in Darfur. The committee must now be
replicated at the State level in Darfur in order to
eliminate inconsistencies in implementation and
maximize aid effectiveness, especially given the
upcoming hunger gap and rainy season.

Secondly, all too often parties to conflict neglect
to ensure the well-being of conflict-affected populations
during intense hostilities, even when they need
emergency medical assistance. In Somalia, for
example, the renewed hostilities in Mogadishu have led
some humanitarian actors to cease activities in recent
weeks, including providing medical services for the
civilian population at a time when humanitarian needs
are significantly rising. It is critical that parties to
conflict allow and facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance in such circumstances,
including through such operational measures as
de-conflicting arrangements, days of tranquillity, and
humanitarian pauses. They must also allow safe
passage to civilians seeking to flee zones of fighting.

The most abhorrent and worrying constraint on
access stems from violence against humanitarian
operations and staff themselves, which has steadily
increased over the past decade, including a sharp rise
in attacks affecting United Nations agencies since
2006. The year 2008 was the worst on record for all
humanitarian actors taken together.
I am currently particularly concerned for
humanitarian personnel in Afghanistan, Chad, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia. The
dangers and deaths in Somalia and Afghanistan are
well known. Three local humanitarian workers with
non-governmental organizations were murdered earlier
this week in Afghanistan. In Chad, violent criminality
continues to impede humanitarian operations, including
situations where humanitarian convoys accompanied
by armed escorts have been caught in the crossfire. In
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, attacks on
humanitarian workers have averaged one every three
days since the start of 2009.

Such incidents are unfortunately not aberrations,
and they will not disappear without concerted action.
Humanitarian workers are targeted on occasion for
political reasons. Relief supplies and assets are viewed
as soft targets for criminal exploitation.

Critical in this regard is broadening the
understanding and acceptance among all actors, State
and non-State, of the purpose of independent, neutral
and impartial humanitarian action. The Council has an
important role to play in bringing this about. Possible
steps in particular situations include calling on parties
to allow and facilitate the provision of assistance, to
allow safe passage for civilians seeking to flee zones of
fighting, to conclude and implement agreements to
expedite the deployment of humanitarian staff and
assets and to condemn systematically acts of violence
targeting humanitarian workers.

Above all, the Council should ensure that
constraints on access have consequences for those that
impose them and not just those that suffer because of
them. That means, for example, applying targeted
sanctions against individuals obstructing access or
perpetrating attacks against staff, and even being ready
to refer situations involving the prolonged and wilful
impediment of relief, or attacks against humanitarian
workers, to the International Criminal Court (ICC).

Just as constraints on access must have
consequences, so too must other violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law -
and with obvious good reason. It is to a large degree
the absence of accountability and, worse still, the
absence in many instances even of any expectation or
fear of accountability that allows violations to thrive.
Addressing this culture of impunity is the fifth
challenge identified in the report.
Ensuring accountability begins with training
combatants on the law, issuing manuals, orders and

instructions setting out their obligations and establishing
effective disciplinary measures to ensure their
observance. It includes adopting national legislation
for prosecuting genocide, crimes against humanity, war
crimes and other serious violations of human rights
law. And it extends to ratification of the ICC Statute
and full cooperation with the Court and similar
mechanisms.

For the Council, it means insisting on such
cooperation and, if necessary, enforcing it through
targeted sanctions. And it means systematically requesting
reports on violations and mandating commissions of
inquiry to examine situations of concern.

In practical terms - in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, for example - this translates into
ensuring accountability for the seemingly endless and
appalling stream of acts of sexual violence attributable
to all parties. It also means that allegations of
violations committed by members of the Armed Forces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (FARDC),
including but not only in the context of Operation
Kimia ll, be investigated and their perpetrators held to
account. The establishment by the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo of a rapid response and early warning cell to
collect information on cases of ill-discipline and
human rights violations committed by the FARDC is a
welcome step, but in the meantime the FARDC must
redouble its efforts to instil discipline and respect for
the law into its troops.

In Afghanistan, accountability means prompt and
credible investigations into air strikes and other
incidents causing the death or injury of civilians or
damage to civilian property, with adequate and timely
information provided on the outcome of investigations
and payments made to those affected. And in situations
like that of Sri Lanka, it means key members of the
international community and this Council supporting
international calls for an independent investigation into
alleged violations committed during the hostilities.

Accountability also means reparations. I would
urge the Council to call on States to establish, or itself
to mandate, in relevant contexts, mechanisms to
receive claims alleging violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
The last 10 years have provided us with a
tantalizing sense of the potential of the agenda on the
protection of civilians. We now have to realize that
potential by meeting these five core challenges.

We will consult with Member States on further
possible steps to make the most of the tools at the
Council's disposal in advance of the next debate on
protection of civilians, in November, which will mark
the tenth anniversary of the Council's consideration of
the protection of civilians as a thematic issue.
Ultimately, the aim must be to enhance compliance and
accountability, not just in respect of the law but also,
crucially, in respect of the demands and decisions of
this Council. The Council's willingness and ability to
uphold and enforce its own demands and decisions is
inevitably the real test of its commitment to the
protection of civilians.

