Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): The
representative of the Netherlands will shortly be
making a statement on behalf of the European Union in
this discussion. The United Kingdom fully subscribes
to that statement.

Like the two previous speakers, I should like
warmly to welcome to this meeting Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Timor-Leste and Head of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), and to thank him for his briefing, and to
thank him and the civilian police and military
components of UNMISET under him for the work that
they have been carrying out.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2004/888)
makes clear that Timor-Leste continues to make
progress towards self-sufficiency. But, as the
Secretary-General also points out, major challenges
remain. We acknowledge the important role of
UNMISET in helping the Timorese people and
Government to address those challenges in the
remaining months ahead. In that respect, we note the
Secretary-General's recommendation that UNMISET
should maintain its current tasks, composition and size
until May 2005. If there is to be no further drawdown
of UNMISET before its final departure, then it is all
the more important that the Mission should prepare and
begin the implementation of an effective exit strategy
without further delay.

I wanted to make only four brief points, rather
than a comprehensive statement.

First, we welcome the continued strengthening of
Timor-Leste's relations with Indonesia, but we note
with disappointment that an agreement has still not
been reached on delineation of the land border. We
encourage both countries to work together to resolve
that issue as swiftly as possible.

Secondly, we very much recognize the difficulties
faced by the Government of Timor-Leste in addressing
the veterans issue - on which Mr. Hasegawa has
briefed us - and the violence between martial-arts
groups. We urge the Government to continue its efforts

to address those issues in a manner that is consistent
with humanitarian law.

Thirdly, we welcome the launching by the
Timorese Government of a reporting process on its
implementation of seven core human rights treaties to
which Timor-Leste has acceded. We see that as an
important signal of the Government's determination to
ensure the full implementation of those treaties.

Fourthly and finally, like the Secretary-General,
we welcome both the work of United Nations agencies
and the role of bilateral and multilateral assistance in
Timor-Leste. All of that plays an important role in
facilitating the transition from a peacekeeping
operation to a traditional, sustainable-development
assistance-framework. For its part, the United
Kingdom is working with Australia and with the
Timorese Government and people to provide training
and assistance to the Timorese police. Under that
programme, the first in a series of "train-the-trainers"
courses began on 11 October.

