Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French):
Bulgaria has voted in favour of resolution 1441 (2002),
convinced that it offers a genuine chance to achieve
peace. My country was among the first members of the
Security Council that declared themselves in favour of
a resolution that would give Iraq one final chance to
convince the international community that it possesses
no weapons of mass destruction and that it is prepared
to destroy, under the supervision of the inspectors of
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), any such
weapons that it might possess.

Now, the resolution is a fact. It has been approved
unanimously. We welcome that. We have worked
tirelessly to reach such unanimity. We are very
gratified that all of our proposals to improve the text
have been taken into account. We thank the sponsors of
the resolution, the United States of America and the
United Kingdom, as well as all other members of the

Security Council - particularly the French
delegation- that contributed to reaching this
consensus.

This resolution is not a pretext for automatic
recourse to the use of force. Rather, it attests to the
international community's determination to work
tirelessly for Iraq's disarmament through peaceful
means. We welcome the fact that it contains a
strengthened and clarified mandate for UNMOVIC and
IAEA inspectors. I take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his extremely
useful efforts to resolve the issue of Iraq's
disarmament. As stated a short while ago, his wisdom
and far-sightedness have always been present and will
be useful to us in the coming months.

I should also like to reaffirm Bulgaria's full
support for Mr. Hans Blix, for Mr. Mohamed
E1 Baradei and for their teams. We have full confidence
in their professionalism, impartiality and
independence. We appeal to the Security Council and
to all Members of the United Nations to continue to
offer them their unswerving support now that they have
been given one of the most difficult and highly
responsible missions ever assigned in the history of the
United Nations. Bulgaria solemnly urges Iraq to
cooperate fully with the inspectors.

My country welcomes the fact that the resolution
categorically reaffirms the centrality of the Security
Council in our decision-making process. Resolution
1441 (2002) is in perfect harmony with my country's
dedication to multilateralism as a governing principle
of international relations. My country believes that the
resolution sends a strong message to the Baghdad
authorities concerning the consequences of any Iraqi
failure to comply with Security Council resolutions.
The Iraqi authorities hold the fate of their country in
their own hands. If they comply with the resolution, the
lifting of sanctions would be at hand.

