The President: I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Viet Nam. Viet Nam would like to extend its appreciation to His Excellency Antonio Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations, and His Excellency Dato Lim Jock Hoi, Secretary-General of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), for their presence and profound insights into cooperation between the United Nations and ASEAN. The importance of cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations has been recognized since the founding of the United Nations, as set out in Chapter VIII of its Charter. We express our strong support for deepening such cooperation and are pleased to see _ substantial progress in collaboration between the United Nations and ASEAN. For the United Nations, ASEAN is a_ very important, active and reliable partner, with outstanding achievements in the fields of peace and security. If the United Nations marks its success in saving succeeding generations from the scourge of war, ASEAN is recognized for its success in turning Southeast Asia into a region of friendship and cooperation and its crucial role in maintaining peace, security and stability in the region and beyond. We believe that ASEAN, with its commitment, efforts and experiences over more than five decades, could make a greater contribution to the work of the United Nations. Founded on shared values, the United Nations and ASEAN have been working closely to promote multilateralism and to uphold the principles of international law. From the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia to the ASEAN Charter, ASEAN's long experiences in shaping and communicating norms should be shared to help inspire and reinforce peaceful and friendly relations in various corners of the world. The establishment of the ASEAN Community in 2015, the first community in Asia, is a powerful example of how to work in unity and harmony and of how to work together in the face of common challenges and in pursuit of common interests. Engagement with external partners through ASEAN-initiated mechanisms is another prominent success of ASEAN as a testimony to the values of genuine dialogue, mutual understanding and respect. Mechanisms such as ASEAN plus 1, ASEAN plus 3, the East Asia Summit, the ASEAN Regional Forum and the ASEAN Defence Ministers Meeting-Plus, with ASEAN playing the central role, have served as avenues for consultation and cooperation and created a conducive environment for all parties concernedto build trust and confidence, strengthen preventive diplomacy, navigate differences and engage in issues of common concern. Those mechanisms, with the passage of time, have instilled a culture of peace as a force for harmony, peace and stability in the region and beyond. Such ASEAN success stories could complement the efforts of the United Nations in the maintenance of international peace and security. That said, we welcome the 2011 Joint Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership between ASEAN and the United Nations and the subsequent adoption of the Plan of Action to Implement the Declaration for the period 2016-2020. The fact that more than 90 per cent of the Plan of Action has been implemented reflects the unwavering commitments of both the United Nations and ASEAN to advancing cooperation, both in scope and in depth. The convergence between the United Nations and ASEAN has gained greater relevance in today's context of the complex and growing challenges that we face - from terrorism to transnational crimes, from human trafficking to people smuggling and from cybersecurity to climate change. No country is immune to and no region is insulated from such challenges, which necessitate more effective collaboration between the United Nations and ASEAN under various forms, including capacity-building activities, dialogue, exchange of information and sharing of expertise, experiences, lesson learned and good practices. It is necessary to emphasize the importance of, and continued support for, the centrality of ASEAN in the regional architecture and the central role of the United Nations in the global multilateral system. It is necessary to strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and ASEAN in the various areas agreed upon, including the peaceful settlement of disputes, preventive diplomacy, disarmament and _ non-proliferation, maritime cooperation, maritime security and disaster management, as well as to explore other potential areas of cooperation, taking into account that both sides are embarking on developing a new plan of action for the next five years. It is necessary to render greater support and assistance in order for the United Nations and ASEAN to successfully implement the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the ASEAN Community Vision 2025. In that regard, Viet Nam, as the Chair of ASEAN in 2020 and a non-permanent member of the Security Council, is committed to pursuing a more fruitful partnership between the United Nations and ASEAN and calls on the support of the Council to achieve our three priorities in 2020. First, we must enhance the efficient and effective participation of ASEAN member States in peacekeeping operations. We deeply appreciate the triangular partnership projects and look forward to therefore further cooperation in the areas of capacity-building, equipment and gender mainstreaming. Secondly, we need to promote the women and peace and security agenda at the regional and national levels by strengthening the participation and contribution of ASEAN women. As the twentieth anniversary of the women and peace and security agenda is approaching, the Government of Viet Nam plans to host a global event with a focus on the role of women in building and sustaining peace.Thirdly, we must focus on implementing the Complementarities Roadmap 2020-2025 between the United Nations 2030 Agenda and the ASEAN Community Vision 2025. In that regard, we propose the convening of a high-level dialogue between the United Nations and ASEAN on sustainable development on the occasion of the United Nations-ASEAN summit, to be held in Viet Nam later this year. Today's meeting will help bring ASEAN closer to the United Nations and bring the United Nations closer to ASEAN. We hope that the momentum created today will be carried into the future to forge a more robust cooperation between the United Nations and ASEAN. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. There are no more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.
