Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening and chairing today's meeting. Your
presence here today clearly demonstrates the importance
Jordan attaches to today's open debate. I also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.

My delegation associates itself with the statements
to be delivered by the representatives of Iran and Saudi
Arabia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.

We have all heard loud and clear the message
conveyed by the Secretary-General to the Council
repeatedly on the untenable situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory. The situation on the ground is
undeniably moving further and further away from a
two-State solution on a daily basis. Over the years, we
have witnessed relentless and systematic actions by the
Israeli authorities to chip away the conditions for a two-
State solution. This includes the expansion of illegal
Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory
in complete disregard of international law and the
overwhelming views of the international community.
The escalating settlement constructions further led
to the demolition of Palestinian homes, the forced
displacement of Palestinian families and increasing
violence and provocations by Israeli settlers.

We have heard condemnations by the international
community, but no real action has been taken, including
by the Security Council, to halt the emerging one-State
reality. Instead, the international community continues
to tackle the symptoms of the problem, such as the
humanitarian crisis and terrorism, since it lacks the
political will to address the root causes of the problem
and end the longest occupation in modern history.

Based on repeated failures in bilateral negotiations
for the past four decades to resolve the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, Malaysia believes that the time
has come for the international community in general,
and the Security Council in particular, to lead the
way to end the status quo in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Prolonged foreign occupation of Palestine by
way of oppression, injustice and discrimination will
do nothing to safeguard Israel's long-term security
concerns. Instead, it has brought about despair, anger
and extremism, with repercussions that continue to
resonate far across the globe.

For those who insist that the only way to create
a Palestinian State is through bilateral negotiations, I
urge them to apply the same standard to Israel. Would
the State of Israel have existed if the international
community had insisted that Israel could be created
only through direct bilateral negotiations with its
neighbouring Arab countries? Is it not time for the
Council to act decisively on the creation of a Palestinian
State, just as the General Assembly did in 1947 to create
the State of Israel?

One aspect of the unsustainability of the situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory that Malaysia
wishes to highlight is related to the gross violations
of Palestinian children's rights. About 300 Palestinian
children are now being detained by the occupying forces
in the West Bank, including in occupied East Jerusalem.
Over the past three years, the number of child detainees
has increased by 87 per cent. Moreover, the existence of
a juvenile military court in Israel, the only such court
in the world, is clearly in violation of the Convention on

the Rights of the Child, the Fourth Geneva Convention
and other provisions of international law.

According to Defence for Children International,
more than 700 Palestinian children are sentenced
in Israeli military courts every year. Ill treatment of
Palestinian children in the Israeli military detention
system is widespread and systematic and nearly three out
of four kids experience some form of physical violence
during arrest, transfer or interrogation. Such practices
are causing widespread trauma, the loss of childhoods
and increasing radicalization. Malaysia condemns
this unacceptable situation and calls for the release of
Palestinian children detained by Israel. We urge Israel
to adhere to its obligations under international law,
including the Convention on the Rights of the Child, to
which it is a State party.

Malaysia welcomes the recent accession by
Palestine to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. Such action will go a long way towards
ending impunity and deterring war crimes and crimes
against humanity by both sides. Similarly, we welcome
Palestine's decisions to accede to various international
and multilateral conventions and treaties. We continue
to support the peaceful, legal and multilateral efforts by
Palestine to be a respectable member ofthe international
community who abides by international law, norms and
standards.

After last month's poignant final briefing by the
outgoing Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, we have seen some
positive momentum among Council members to
initiate concerted efforts towards resolving the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. Malaysia stands ready to play
a constructive role in the Council in realizing a two-
State solution. We reiterate our long-standing support
for the inalienable right of self-determination for the
Palestinian people and a just, comprehensive and final
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

