The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Burundi, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nkingiye
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/ 163, which contains the sixth report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operations in Burundi.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has taken note of the
Secretary General's sixth report on the United
Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB), and
approves his recommendations.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned
by the continuing violence carried out by the
Forces nationales de liberation (FNL) and the
fighting between them and the Burundian army,
by the human rights abuses committed by both
sides, as well as by factors of instability
remaining in the region. It calls for the immediate
cessation of hostilities and human rights abuses.
the

It welcomes President Nkurunziza's commitment
to bring to justice those responsible for such
abuses and encourages the Government of
Burundi to work closely with the United Nations
human rights monitors to this end.

"The Security Council welcomes the
statements recently made by the FNL leader,
Agathon Rwasa, in Dar es-Salaam, expressing his
readiness to negotiate with a view to put a final
end to violence. The Council urges both parties to
seize this opportunity for negotiations with a
View to bringing peace to the whole country.

"The Security Council requests in this
context the Secretary-General to keep it regularly
informed on developments in the situation, and,
in consultation with the Government of Burundi,
on ONUB's disengagement plan.

"The Security Council welcomes the
progress made by the Government of Burundi
since the completion of the transition, in
particular its efforts to reduce poverty.

"The Security Council encourages the
Burundian parties to continue on the course of the
reforms agreed in Arusha, while maintaining the
spirit of dialogue, consensus and inclusion which
made possible the success of the transition in
their country.

"The Security Council invites the States of
the Regional Initiative to continue to work with
the Burundian authorities on the consolidation of
peace in the country and in the region. It
encourages the international community -
including the relevant United Nations agencies -
to continue to support the Burundian authorities
in the long term."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2006/12.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

