Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Jan Kubis for his briefing on
the situation in Afghanistan and his introduction of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/535), as well as
to the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for his
very comprehensive statement.

The alarming situation in the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan remains at the centre of the international
community's attention, especially as the country is
nearing a watershed - the year 2014 - that will largely
determine the dynamics of the situation, not only in
Afghanistan, but in the region as a whole. We have
repeatedly underscored our vision of Afghanistan's
future as that of an independent, peaceful, neutral and
prosperous State free from terrorism and drug-related
crime. That concept was reflected in the Bishkek
declaration, adopted by the Heads of State of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization on 13 September.

We are closely following the transition process in
Afghanistan, a key element of which is the transfer to
Afghans of responsibility for security in their country.
We cannot fail to note the efforts of the Afghan leadership
to strengthen the capacity of national security forces to
effectively counter the security challenges facing the
country.

At the same time, we must note that the political
and military situation in Afghanistan remains far from
stable. We are especially concerned by the fact that the
conclusion of the transfer of responsibility for security
from the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) to Afghans is taking place against a backdrop of
increased subversive extremist activity, including along
the northern perimeter of Afghanistan. The level of
the terrorist threat originating in Afghanistan remains
critical. Unfortunately, benchmarks for the transfer of
authority process are diverging from ISAF's optimistic
plans.

A number of issues related to ISAF's mandate
remain unresolved, including those related to the supply,
equipping and training of the Afghan armed forces,
among which there is increasing inter-ethnic tension.
The drawdown of the international military presence in
Afghanistan is frought with the risk of further negative
developments and could complicate the holding of the
presidential election in 2014.

What also remains unclear are the international
partners' plans with regard to the format, objectives
and legal basis of the remaining military presence in
Afghanistan. We are not in favour of maintaining a
long-term presence in the country. It is important that
there be clear temporal and legal frameworks; efforts
to make the presence open-ended gives rise to serious
questions about its real objectives.

The projection of force in the region does not
only concern us alone. Absolute clarity is necessary
with regard to the troop numbers and objectives of a
possible NATO operation in Afghanistan, which can be
established only after ISAF has fully reported to the
Security Council with regard to its implementation of
the current mandate. Any new international military
presence in Afghanistan must be based on a clear legal
framework. Reformatting ISAF into a new international
mission without a corresponding United Nations
mandate would create serious legal problems for any
logistical support in this field.

A major concern is the alarming situation of illegal
drug production and trafficking from the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan. It is a threat to international
peace and security. Suppressing drug trafficking would
enable us to more effectively counter terrorism financed
by drug trafficking.

We remain deeply concerned about numerous
cases of civilian deaths as a result of indiscriminate
and disproportionate use of force by combatants.
Furthermore, the report does not mention the civilian
deaths caused by unmanned aerial vehicles - so-called
drones. We recall that responsibility for ensuring the
population's security and strict compliance with
international humanitarian law lies with all sides,
including the international forces.

An orderly process of national reconciliation is a
precondition for improving the situation in the country.
The participation of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) must be subsidiary
in nature. A dialogue with the armed opposition could
have a positive impact only ifa leading role is played by
Kabul and the combatants comply with the principle of
national reconciliation, including by laying down their
weapons, recognizing the Constitution of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan, and breaking their ties with
Al-Qaeda and other extremist organizations once and
for all.

A clear confirmation of this necessity was the
failure of attempts to launch the national reconciliation
process through the Taliban contact office in Doha.
It merely introduced additional complications and
exposed the true intentions of the Taliban, who
have no interest in talks with Kabul but are seeking
political legitimacy for using force to take power
after the international forces' withdrawal. We have to
learn the lessons of this undertaking, rid ourselves of
illusions about the Taliban's true goals and take a more
responsible approach to the issue in the future. The
price of an agreement with the Taliban cannot be the
erosion of the achievements the country has made over
the past 11 years. In that regard, the task of increasing
the effectiveness of the Security Council's sanctions
regime, a crucial anti-terror tool, is particularly urgent.

The role played by regional cooperation is more and
more important. Strong cooperation between the United
Nations, the SCO and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) is a significant contribution
to settling Afghanistan's problems. We welcome
UNAMA's intention of stepping up collaboration with
those organizations, something that cannot be said about
NATO, which is stubbornly ignoring the CSTO's calls
for improving bilateral cooperation on Afghanistan,
particularly in the area of the fight against drugs. Even
the few incidences where ISAF has conducted various
successful operations to destroy heroin laboratories on
the basis of information from their Russian colleagues
show that combined operations could be achieving
much more.

In the context of the expected rise in the profile
of the United Nations in regulating Afghan issues
after ISAF's departure, we believe that UNAMA will
remain the chief coordinator of international efforts
to stabilize the situation in Afghanistan. We expect
that, in providing assistance for the preparation and
conduct of the 2014 presidential elections, the Mission
will act strictly within its mandate's guidelines and will
maintain a neutral position. Russia has consistently
and respectfully supported the Afghan Government's
efforts to create the conditions conducive to the rapid
stabilization of the country and the region. We will
continue to help the Afghan army by supplying it with
certain types of arms and munitions and by training
specialists in Russia's senior military academies, and
so forth. We are open to partnering with all concerned
States in the work of implementing projects meaningful
for Afghanistan, including in the areas of energy and
infrastucture. We also continue to provide humanitarian
assistance to the brotherly Afghan people.

Finally, I would like to tell our Afghan friends
that we wish the Afghan national football team every
success in the World Cup competition to be held in
Russia in 2018.

