Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, my delegation would like to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Nikola Spiric', Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would
also like to welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, the new High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Special Representative of the European Union. We are
very grateful to him for his detailed report (see S/2009/246) and welcome his efforts to orient and
coordinate initiatives related to the implementation of
the Peace Agreement. We recognize a healthy dose of
realism in his report, in which he recounts the positive
advances and the current limitations in the situation in

Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that regard, my country
would like to make the following specific observations.

First of all, it has not been easy to leave behind a
conflict that cost so much sacrifice in human lives, nor
has it been easy to create a multi-ethnic and
multinational State. The Dayton Peace Agreement and
all the subsequent agreements and declarations of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
(PIC) are a solid, consistent framework that points an
unambiguous way forward towards peace and political
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Secondly, we are aware of the fact that it is hard
to bring all positions into agreement towards the
achievement of a political system and dynamic
endorsed by all participants. But a way has been shown
by political movements that have committed to
dialogue, and there is a route leading to constitutional
reforms to consolidate the democratic foundations and
modernize the political structures of the country.
Unilateral positions are not acceptable if they
jeopardize the efforts made towards that end.
Sensitivity and openness to dialogue must prevail in
the attitudes of all political forces without exception.

We note with concern some pockets of resistance
that complicate the job and mandate of the High
Representative and imperil the decisions of the Peace
Implementation Council. According to those decisions,
there are five objectives and two conditions that must
be met before the transition from the Office of the
High Representative to the Special Representative of
the European Union can be completed. My country is
carefully monitoring compliance with these agreements
and finds it advisable not to force the deadlines if the
political conditions for this transition are not
sufficiently mature. Respect for agreed institutions is
indispensable. We urge the High Representative to
redouble his efforts with all actors to establish a
political climate that will facilitate the adoption of the
necessary legislation before the 2010 elections and the
constitutional reforms equally necessary to consolidate
the stability achieved.

My delegation welcomes the adoption on
26 March 2009 of the first constitutional amendment
since the Dayton Peace Agreement. It is a healthy sign
of a system that values ethnic, cultural and political
diversity.

We welcome the entrenchment of the rule of law
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is one of the five

goals set up by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council. The firm commitment to the
rule of law, and particularly in cases of war crimes,
deserves special praise. The adoption of the War
Crimes Strategy is welcome, as is cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal. Transparency and
cooperation with the Court and adherence to the
principles of law are very important elements of the
fight against impunity. In that vein, we would like to
highlight our concern for human rights and the
humanitarian aspects of the situation. We believe that
the situation of refugees and internally displaced
persons deserves special attention.

