Saint Vincent and the Grenadines joins Council members in congratulating the Niger, our partner in the group of three African countries that are members of the Security Council, on what we anticipate will be a purposeful and successful presidency. We also express our appreciation to Indonesia for its excellent work as President in the month of August. This morning we extend very special thanks to Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General Williams and Ambassador Sautter for their presentations. Libya is at a very critical juncture. The increasingly volatile situation, as well as ongoing regional tensions, amid the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, are extremely worrying. My delegation continues to monitor very closely the unsatisfactory, highly polarized and polarizing circumstances unfolding in and around Libya. We deplore the incessant violence, in particular the indiscriminate attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructures. We also reaffirm our position that resolving the conflict in Libya is equally crucial for neighbouring countries, the wider African continent and Europe. We welcome the recent call for a ceasefire by Libyans but remain mindful that previous calls have not been respected. The only path to peace in Libya is for the watring parties to immediately cease all hostilities, agree to the United Nations draft ceasefire agreement within the framework of the intra-Libyan 5+5 Joint Military Commission and engage in an inclusive dialogue for a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political solution. It is our firm conviction that there can be no military solution to the conflict and that a permanent ceasefire is key to the restoration of peace and stability in Libya. We reiterate our support for the efforts of the United Nations, led by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, the African Union, the League of Arab States, the European Union and all other constructive initiatives toward finding a peaceful solution. Further, it has been more than six months since the resignation of Ghassan Salame, and the complexities surrounding the situation in Libya demand the immediate appointment of a new Special Representative of the Secretary- General to advance the Libyan process within the framework of the United Nations three-point plan. Peace in Libya requires that the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations be strictly upheld. The proliferation of weapons and terrorist activities in and around Libya, with scant regard for United Nations sanctions, remain extremely troubling. My delegation calls on all external actors to immediately desist from providing military support to the warring parties. Resolution 1970 (2011) and all other relevant resolutions on Libya must also be strictly implemented. It is unconscionable that Libya has been transformed into a conflict of proxy dimensions where some seek to advance narrow political agendas instead of assisting in alleviating the suffering of the Libyan people. Libya's territorial integrity and sovereignty should be completely respected. We acknowledge the sharp increase in the number of people requiring humanitarian assistance following the review of Libya's humanitarian response plan 2020 and encourage the international community to continue providing support. We stress that atrocities meted out against civilians, especially against groups made most vulnerable, should not go unpunished. To that end, we call for thorough investigations into violations and abuses and for perpetrators to be held accountable. Similarly, all parties must respect the principles of international humanitarian and human rights law. Simultaneously addressing the multiple challenges in Libya, including by ending the almost 10-year crisis, combating the ever-present threat of the COVID-19 pandemic, addressing the dire humanitarian crisis, tackling the economic impediments and creating the ideal space for reconciliation, are indeed taxing, if not overwhelming, objectives. However, Libya's ultimate goal of bringing sustained peace, security and development to its people and the international community's support to keep the process on track must never be derailed. My delegation remains in solidarity with Libya. We renew our commitment to assisting the international community in finding a peaceful solution to the conflict.
