Mr. Motoc (Romania): I would like to
congratulate Ambassador Arias of Spain and his team
for the report presented to the Council today
(S/2004/124), for their capable stewardship of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and for their
undertakings for reform. Let me also express our
appreciation for the work performed by all members of
the Committee in the process of negotiating the report
on the revitalization of the CTC.

As Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
made shortly by Ambassador Ryan of Ireland on behalf
of the European Union, I will confine myself to only a
few brief comments.

The international community faces a new and
most dangerous threat to peace and security: global
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Combating special threats always requires special
measures, adopted at a global level and universally
implemented. The active participation of all members
of the international community is crucial. It is
primarily the responsibility of the United Nations and
the Security Council to act as a catalyst for all those
efforts. Likewise, by assuming the leading role in
fighting terrorism, the Security Council reconfirms its
capacity to deliver on its responsibilities under the
United Nations Charter.

Romania joined the efforts to fight terrorism at
the international, regional and subregional levels in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
applicable international law and the relevant human
rights provisions.

As the CTC is the Security Council's specialized
subsidiary body in this area, we attach the utmost
importance to its revitalization and reinforcement. The
CTC must be provided with adequate means to carry
out the responsibilities arising from advancement to the
next stage of its work. Consequently, we consider the
finalization of the report and the timely adoption of the
draft resolution to be vital steps towards a more
effective CTC.

Enhancing the CTC's ability to monitor
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) is the
cornerstone of the process for its revitalization,
currently under way, since full compliance with the
resolution's provisions by all States is an essential
prerequisite for effectively combating terrorism. We
note with deep concern that many States continue to
face difficulties in fully implementing resolution 1373
(2001), including elaborating and presenting the
required reports to the CTC. One indicator in that
respect is the increasing number of States which are
late in submitting their reports.

This leads to my next comment, concerning the
importance of granting Member States the necessary
technical assistance. We trust that the establishment of
the new executive structure will generate a more
proactive role for the CTC in identifying needs and
facilitating technical assistance to Member States.
Romania acknowledges the important role played in
that respect by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in Vienna through its Terrorism Prevention
Branch.

Romania considers the signature, ratification and
full implementation of all relevant United Nations
conventions relating to terrorism to be an essential
component of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). We encourage all Member States to become
parties to all those conventions as soon as possible. I
would like to inform the Council that Romania is in the
final stage of ratification of the last of those
conventions: the International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings.

I would like to make one final point concerning
another important pillar of the future activity of the
CTC: increased cooperation and coordination with
other United Nations bodies and the relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations.
The goal of successfully combating the global scourge
of terrorism cannot be accomplished except through the
joint efforts of the international community as a whole.

