Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the adoption today of the
Security Council's first-ever resolution addressing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. This
resolution underlines the international community's
determination to tackle a real, urgent and horrific
threat: that these deadly weapons or materials might
fall into the hands of terrorists or other non-State
actors. In the face of that threat, we argued that it was
not only appropriate for the Council to act, it was
imperative for it to do so. We are therefore glad that
the Council has responded with such conviction,
demonstrated by its unanimous vote this morning.

This resolution is an effective multilateral
response to threats not covered by existing regimes. It
is consistent with the goals of disarmament and the
multilateral treaty framework. The resolution therefore
requires all States to adopt robust national legislation
that will criminalize attempts to acquire or traffic
weapons of mass destruction and the requirement to
establish controls that thwart such efforts.

The Chapter VII legal base stresses that we are
dealing with a clear threat to peace and security. It
underlines the seriousness of our response and the
binding nature on all States of the obligation it
contains.

Let me quite clear on the extent of the obligations
arising from this resolution. They apply without favour
to all Members of the United Nations, be they
permanent members of the Security Council or any
other Member State. The obligations in the legally
binding areas set out in this resolution are exactly that:
a binding obligation on all States.

Throughout the discussion of the resolution, the
sponsors sought to work closely with Council members
and, perhaps uniquely, with the wider United Nations
membership. We are grateful to all those who engaged
with us in that dialogue, helping to improve this
resolution and, we hope, make its implementation truly
a common endeavour.

We hope that the Council Committee established
by the resolution will be the heart of that cooperative
and collaborative approach. We recognize, as does the
resolution, the potential importance of technical

assistance.

It is our hope that the cooperative and inclusive
measures that the resolution envisages will reduce the
risk of any future tragedy. We thank the Council and
United Nations Members alike for their help in taking
forward this collaborative multilateral action and look
forward to building on this joint endeavour in future.

