The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

I thank Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo for his report
and his briefing. When a Government attacks civilian
populations instead of protecting them; when the
atrocities committed sear the human conscience; and
when the stability of an entire region is affected, the
international community has a responsibility to
intervene and to protect civilians. That is what we done
in Libya.

Since mid-February, faced with the atrocities
committed by Libyan leaders, the Arab League, the
African Union and the Secretary General of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference have
condemned the grave violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. The Security Council
also reacted quickly, by unanimously adopting, on
26 February, resolution 1970 (2011), which referred the
situation in Libya to the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court.

In his report, the Prosecutor confirms the fears
expressed by the Council. Attacks by security forces
against peaceful demonstrators were, as of
17 February, systematic and widespread. Civilians
suspected of being associated with demonstrations
were arbitrarily detained, abducted and tortured.

The Prosecutor also lists the war crimes
committed in the context of the armed conflict. In
Misrata and elsewhere, it is not military targets that are
the priority targets, but rather the civilian
population- through the use of fragmentation shells
and snipers, attacks against hospitals and the mining of
ports to hinder the evacuation of civilians. The
Prosecutor also indicated that he will examine any
allegation of attacks against African migrants.

By referring the situation in Libya to the
International Criminal Court, we took an important
decision and we took it unanimously. It was an
informed decision aimed at ensuring that those mainly
responsible for these crimes were prosecuted, judged
and imprisoned. The judicial process is under way and
must run its course.

As the Prosecutor explained, the International
Criminal Court will prosecute only the leading
perpetrators: those who organized, ordered or financed
crimes. There is still time for those who were misled
into becoming involved in the criminal campaign led
by Al-Qadhafi against innocent civilians to dissociate
themselves from it. There can be no political or other
kind of solidarity with those who order or commit such
crimes.
14

France welcomes the fact that, in accordance with
resolution 1970 (2011), States and regional
organizations have offered their full cooperation to the
Prosecutor, thus enabling his investigation to make
rapid progress. In the future, whatever the decisions
taken by the judges, the Council, united and
determined, will have to support them.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.25 am.
11-32142
