Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): I have the
honour to make the following statement on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union, Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania and Slovakia and the Associated country
Cyprus, as well as the European Free Trade Association
countries members of the European Economic Area, Iceland
and Liechtenstein, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union warmly welcomes the publication
of this report. The European Union applauds the Secretary-
General for this authoritative and wide-ranging document,
which brings together many ideas and approaches as a
comprehensive policy and at a particularly opportune time.
The Secretary-General has provided a clear and candid
analysis of the sources of conflict in Africa and the reasons
why they persist. The report contains concrete
recommendations on ways to prevent and address conflict
in Africa and on how to lay the foundations for subsequent
durable peace. This holistic approach, as you yourself,
Mr. President, called it this morning, is most welcome, and
the European Union looks forward to further comprehensive
discussions on all the aspects covered in the report.

The report encourages the European Union to continue
its efforts in the field of peace-building and conflict
prevention, management and resolution, and to enhance
African capacities in these areas. The European Union is
committed to a proactive policy on conflict prevention
and resolution, focusing on preventing the outbreak of
violent conflicts at an early stage as well as on post-
conflict peace-building and using the full range of policy
instruments available, including development assistance.
These goals are set out in the European Union's common
position on conflict prevention and resolution in Africa,
agreed in 1997.

The European Union supports the Secretary-
General's recommendations that the United Nations
should develop closer relations with African regional and
subregional organizations and arrangements and has itself
established a consultative mechanism with the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) which we wish to
develop. The European Union also supports increased
cooperation between the United Nations and subregional
organizations in the areas of conflict prevention,
management and resolution. It commends in particular the
initiative of African States in the region to establish the
Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of
the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) peacekeeping operation
in the Central African Republic, and the role of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
in the resolution of the crises in Liberia and Sierra Leone.
It also recognizes other regional initiatives such as the
efforts to promote political dialogue in Burundi.

We also very much support the efforts which the
United Nations and the OAU have made to follow up the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations'
recommendations last year on efforts to enhance African
peacekeeping capacity. The informal meeting on the
subject, which Under-Secretary-General Miyet chaired,
was a great success and provided a multilateral
framework for activities in this area. We welcome the
new role of the United Nations as a clearing house for
information on such activities. Additional contributions to
the United Nations trust fund for enhancing African
peacekeeping capacity would also strengthen the efforts
of the United Nations.

The European Union also subscribes to the
Secretary-General's idea that where necessary, early
warning must be complemented by early action. The
European Union has followed this approach by
encouraging diplomatic efforts at early stages in unfolding
crises, for example, through the appointment of its own
special envoy to the Great Lakes region of Africa.
Humanitarian assistance, like diplomatic efforts, is also an
integral component of early action. As the largest donor
of international humanitarian aid, the European Union

 

fully endorses the Secretary-General's call for greater
coordination in the provision of such aid and the need to
ensure the security of humanitarian personnel. The
European Union also welcomes the Secretary-General's
initiative in calling for the establishment of an international
mechanism to assist host Governments in maintaining the
security and neutrality of refugee camps and settlements,
and it looks forward to examining these ideas in greater
depth.

The Secretary-General's report also examines
sanctions as a tool which may be used in cases of threats
to international peace and security. The European Union
welcomes the Secretary-General's recommendation that
sanctions should be better targeted at decision makers and
endorses the call for more rigorous enforcement of
sanctions by the international community. In particular, the
Union supports the Secretary-General's focus on the need
for effective measures to ensure the strict implementation
of arms embargoes.

The European Union welcomes the Secretary-
General's call for all African countries to participate in the
United Nations Register of Conventional Arms. The Union
will continue to support efforts aimed at the establishment
of effective national control measures on the transfer of
conventional arms, combating illegal arms trafficking and
the banning and clearing of anti-personnel landmines. Last
year, the European Union agreed to a programme to combat
illicit trafficking in conventional arms. As part of the
programme, an international seminar involving the
European Union and southern African countries and non-
governmental organizations from both regions will take
place in Johannesburg in May with a view to identifying
practical solutions to the problems of illicit trafficking in
southern Africa. The European Union also participated
actively in the recent seminar in Oslo to discuss the
proposal by Mali for a moratorium on the import, export
and manufacture of light weapons in the Saharo-Sahelian
region.

The European Union fully endorses the hope of the
Secretary-General that the international community should
strive to complement African efforts to resolve Africa's
problems. The European Union welcomes the emphasis
placed in the Secretary-General's report on the further
development of regional cooperation and integration among
African countries across a wide range of different fields.
The European Union is due to host the third in a series of
ministerial meetings between the Union and the Southern
African Development Community in Vienna in November
this year, and it is working to enhance its dialogue with
subregional organizations, for example, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) in
Eastern Africa and ECOWAS. The European Union is
also in discussions with the OAU and its member States
regarding a proposed European Union/Africa summit for
the year 2000.

The Secretary-General's report rightly focuses on the
importance of creating an environment in which durable
peace is sustained and economic growth promoted.
Recognizing that peace and security are indispensable
preconditions for sustainable development, the European
Union fully supports the emphasis in the report on the
need for good governance, including respect for human
rights and the rule of law. European Union member States
are also working towards a common position on human
rights, good governance, democracy and the rule of law
in Africa which will complement their agreed position on
conflict prevention. Like the rule of law, good governance
is also crucial to economic growth, the promotion of
social development and the alleviation of poverty. Such
values are also essential pillars of the European Union's
own development policy, which over several decades has
been centred on a genuine partnership with Africa.

"Deeds not declarations", as my good friend the
Ambassador of Nigeria said in his statement on behalf of
ECOWAS. The European Union is the world's leading
source of development assistance to Africa: over 50 per
cent of all aid received by developing countries comes
from the European Union, and the European Development
Fund has earmarked over $15 billion for mainly African
countries up to the year 2000. The European Union also
offers, under the Lome Convention, the most open
markets for exports from African countries, and is
Africa's largest trading partner. Presently, the European
Union is engaged in a comprehensive dialogue with the
developing countries on how to strengthen and revitalise
their partnership and in particular to assist them with their
integration into the world economy. Against this
background, the European Union welcomes the Secretary-
General's recommendations on restructuring, international
aid, reducing debt burdens and opening international
markets. The European Union also applauds the emphasis
in the report on the need to tackle poverty in Africa, and
reaffirms its commitment to international development
targets, in particular the aim of reducing by half the
proportion of people living in extreme poverty by the year
2015. European Union member States are also committed
to reducing the debt burden on African countries through
measures such as the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Debt Initiative.

 

Throughout this report, the Secretary-General
reinforces the View that it is in the interest of all States, not
only African countries, to work towards the political, social
and economic regeneration of Africa. The European Union
supports this analysis and stands ready to play its part to
ensure meaningful and effective follow-up of the many
proposals and recommendations the Secretary-General has
made. The European Union hopes that the Security Council
will take early action on these where appropriate, and looks
forward to opportunities in other United Nations bodies and
forums to debate other aspects of the report more fully. The
European Union believes that it is imperative that the
political momentum generated by this report not be lost,
and it is committed to working to ensure that Africa
remains on the international agenda at the highest level.

