Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): At the outset, I would like to express Estonia's full support to the work of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and Special Representative Annadif. I also wish to think Mr. Annadif for his excellent briefing. Estonia notes positively the formation of the transitional Government in Mali. We call on all the parties to ensure that it is operational and to start preparing for the elections ahead. It is important to refrain from any build-up of tensions and for all parties to work together. The rule of law and constitutional order in Mali must be restored without any delay. The role of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union is essential in easing the tensions in the political crisis in Mali. We commend ECOWAS for its swift reaction and continuous engagement in supporting the restoration of constitutional order in Mali, and welcome their announcement on Tuesday on the lifting of sanctions. The Algiers Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation on Mali remains the basis for a political solution and peace in Mali. We are encouraged by the positive tones that the transitional Government has taken regarding the implementation of the Agreement, and we now urge the parties to follow up their promises with concrete steps. The tasks ahead of the transitional Government are not going to be easy since many challenges to achieving lasting peace in Mali remain. We urge all Malian parties to address the grievances of the society in earnest. It is important to implement the much-needed reform agenda and deal with the structural challenges. In this regard, the full and meaningful participation of women in political processes remains of key importance. We remain concerned about the overall deterioration of the security situation in the country. The growing number of clashes between the terrorists and other armed groups are only further exacerbating the plight of civilians. Estonia continues to support Mali through various international platforms. At the same time, it is important to stress that lasting peace in the country can be achieved only through full engagement and cooperation between the Malian parties. Estonia strongly condemns all violations of human rights in Mali, and we call on the authorities to conduct full investigations and hold perpetrators accountable. The allegations against the national security forces and the authorities need to be taken especially seriously. A lasting solution can only be built on trust between the people and the Government.
