The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.

With the same interest as always, we have listened
to the briefings by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock,
on the implementation of resolutions 2451 (2018) and
2452 (2019). In that regard, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea welcomed the dialogue initiated between
the Government of Yemen and the representatives of
the Houthis - a dialogue that took shape with the
signing of the Stockholm Agreement and that is being
implemented relatively well on the ground.

Our delegation would once again like to emphasize
here that any solution to the conflict must come from the
negotiating table. The latest indications from the parties
to the conflict ofa willingness to negotiate are therefore
very encouraging and deserve the full support of the
international community. The Stockholm Agreement
has indeed given the Yemeni people an initial spark of
hope for a peaceful solution to the conflict after several
years without any sign of a possible way out. In fact,
there has been a significant decrease in hostilities in
some areas affected for years, which we are certain is a
positive sign that boosts the confidence of all involved
with respect to the likelihood of finding a solution to
the conflict.

However, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
understands that the process of implementing resolutions
2451 (2018) and 2452 (2019) is neither easy nor quick;
but we believe that it is essential that every effort in that
process should be firmly supported in order to alleviate
the enormous suffering that the Yemeni people are
enduring. In that regard, we urge all parties to fulfil all
the commitments made in Stockholm and to cooperate
closely in a constructive manner and in good faith with
Special Envoy Griffiths.

As we have just pointed out and Mr. Griffiths
mentioned in his briefing, although the overall situation
in Yemen is moving in a positive direction, we must
nevertheless acknowledge that we are still a long way
from the kind of stability that is required. The focus that
we have rightly placed in recent agreements must not
diminish our commitment and efforts to make progress
towards resolving the conflict throughout Yemeni
territory, including in regions that are not yet covered
by the agreements. We invite all parties to demonstrate
goodwill in actions taken outside the already agreed
upon framework. Only in that way will more areas be
able to experience a decrease in violence. More than
ever, peace is needed in Yemen, and for that reason
political will is key to achieving it.

Strong emphasis should continue to be placed on
alleviating the humanitarian crisis. The humanitarian
situation continues to be catastrophic, and the flow of
humanitarian assistance and its access to all areas where
such assistance is needed is a high priority. The human
suffering being experienced in Yemen, as Mr. Lowcock
described in his briefing, is one of the worst of our time.
Tens of millions of people are in need of humanitarian
aid, including 11 million children. Almost 3.5 million
people are displaced, and more than 10 million people
are at a real risk of starvation. That sad and worrisome
situation must move the international community
and all parties directly and indirectly involved in the
conflict to deploy all the necessary efforts to find a
rapid solution to the crisis.

I will conclude my remarks by congratulating
Major General Michael Lollesgaard on assuming the
leadership of the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement. We wish him every success
in that new role, especially on effectively implementing
the Al-Hudaydah agreement to achieve concrete results,
following the excellent work he carried out in his
previous role as Force Commander of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali. I also extend our long-standing appreciation to
Mr. Griffiths for his commendable work as the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, particularly
for achieving the Stockholm Agreement, and we
encourage him to continue its implementation in its
three phases, including the release of all prisoners, with
enthusiasm and his usual diplomacy.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

