Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Nigeria for organizing this open debate, and
you, Mr. President, for your statement. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his statement.

In the context of the maintenance of international
peace and security, security sector reform plays a
primary role in two ways. It enables the establishment
of the elements that contribute to lasting stability in
post-conflict situations and prevents such situations
from relapsing into violence.

In crisis situations, the implementation of
transparent, effective and fair security institutions,
working within a system of good governance and
respecting democratic principles and human rights,
is essential to restoring a sense of confidence and to
providing an environment conducive to the development
of a State. SSR can consist of defining a national
security strategy or even a legislative strategy; it can
also be a support for governance structures of security
institutions or used to strengthen the competence and
professionalism of the security services, which must
evolve in a judicial and penal context that respects
human rights.

Among all the foregoing measures, the
rehabilitation of police and gendarmerie services and
relaunhing justice services are priorities. Because of
their Visibility in everyday places, police officers and
gendarmes are part of restoring the population's sense
of security and trust in the State. We see that in the
Central African Republic. Faced with the collapse of the
State and with organized, stirred-up and manipulated
intercommunal Violence, everyone feels threatened
and no lasting political dialogue will be established
if the citizens do not see police patrolling for their
safety, judges prosecuting perpetrators of crime,
and criminals going to prison. All those actions help
build the security system that countries need and to
which we can subsequently transfer our peacekeeping
responsibilities. They are therefore the basis of our exit
strategies.

Of the 47 resolutions adopted by the Council in
2013, 24 make explicit reference to SSR, which is a
sign that the Council will not be satisfied with a short-
term response to crisis situations. For example, the
SSR missions are central to the mandate of the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire. The SSR unit seeks
to foster the fusion of two armed forces that clashed
in the past. The goal is to set up a united and cohesive
army. Training is therefore being conducted in the field
of human rights, and support for equipping the forces
is being provided.
It is not easy. In South Sudan, we have failed. The
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
was present at the creation practically ex nihilo of
police forces that have been committing human rights
violations since December. That is unacceptable. It
shows - as ifthat were necessary - the full importance
of the Secretary-General's policies, in particular his
due diligence policy on human rights. SSR missions
cannot benefit from forces that are guilty of massive
violations of human rights. The Council must now bear
all the consequences of that.

SSR cannot give tangible results without the full
support and cooperation of national authorities. The
State must be prepared to commit itself to a thorough,
long-term effort. Permanent and inclusive dialogue
among the units in charge of SSR, civil society and
authorities is essential. In addition, security sector
reform must be based on close coordination between

the host country and the various actors who support the
programme.

For several years, the number of actors involved
in SSR has markedly grown. We are pleased to see
the international community and Member States
mobilize on those matters. The European Union has
thus become a leading player. It is present in Somalia
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo through
advisory missions and training missions, and through
its significant financial support .

In its national capacity, France has participated
through its bilateral cooperation - conducted by the
Security and Defence Cooperation Directorate - not
only in Africa but also in Bosnia, Kosovo, Afghanistan
and Haiti. We have also created, within the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs, a pool of national experts in security
sector reform, which shows the importance we attach to
SSR and justifies our decision to co-sponsor the draft
resolution that will be adopted this afternoon. But the
increased number of actors does not mean we can do
without close coordination. Too often, support for SSR
involves duplication of effort. The draft resolution is an
opportunity to emphasize the necessary effort that is
key to the success of SSR missions.

Finally, we believe that the United Nations must
develop a more coherent approach to SSR. Indeed,
SSR is a complex process that is based not only on an
accurate analysis of the needs ex ante, but also on a
regular assessment of results and improvements to be
made. That recommendation is made in the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2013/480), and the Council
must do its all to ensure that this evaluation exercise is
conducted in a systematic fashion. It is important that
the Special Representatives and Special Envoys of the
Secretary-General take full measure of the importance
of SSR and give it the place it deserves in their missions.
Quality support to SSR is the guarantee of the success
of those processes and, ultimately, a factor that favours
stability and development in the countries concerned
and thus a guarantee of their efficiency for the United
Nations.

