Mr. Ripert (spoke in French): I wish at the outset
to welcome you, Sir, and to assure you of the full

09-2716]
cooperation of my delegation, on which you may
count. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General and
Mr. Romano Prodi, Chairman of the panel, for their
statements, as well as all the other speakers. I am
grateful to the Secretary-General for having established
the panel and for having briefed us on the report
(S/2008/8l3), and to the Libyan presidency for having
organized today's debate, at which the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of South Africa has
honoured us with her presence.

Nearly 18 months ago, the President of the
French Republic led a Security Council meeting at the
level of heads of State and Government on the topic of
Africa and challenges to international peace and
security. That meeting enabled us, inter alia, to
underscore the key role of the African Union in that
area. That role has since been further strengthened
through numerous interventions both to prevent crises
and to help resolve them. France and the European
Union are and have long been fully involved in helping
the African Union to enjoy the necessary resources to
meet those challenges.

Naturally, I fully associate myself with the
statement to be made by the representative of the
Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union,
which I would recall is the top financial partner of the
African Union. The African Peace Facility of the
European Union alone has allocated for €440 million
since 2004, and a further €300 million for the next
three years.

We support the African Union in the operations it
leads. We endorse the strengthening of its structural
capacities, the building of an African Peace and
Security Architecture and the formation of an available
and trained African Standby Force, to which France,
together with Italy in particular, provides major
operational support. France supports nearly 20 African
regional training centres throughout the continent.

Moreover, the European Union has established
with the African Union a genuine strategic partnership
in the field of peace and security. I take this
opportunity to recall that the emergence of the
European Union's foreign security and defence
policies, which has enabled it to become effectively
involved on the African continent in peacekeeping
missions, makes it a reliable and trustworthy partner
both for the United Nations and for the African Union.

The report (S/2008/8l3) before us today
represents one phase of a process. In effect, the
Security Council will have to incorporate three
elements into its consideration. The first is a general
approach. The panel has presented guidelines on how
to ensure better support to African Union operations.
The Security Council must study in detail the
recommendations that the Secretary-General will
present to it in that regard. On issues of organization
and financing, its expertise is irreplaceable.

The second element is how to implement the
support sanctioned by the Security Council to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
Resolution 1863 (2009), which we adopted in January,
requested the Secretary-General to set up a trust fund
to support AMISOM. and the joint Somali security
forces, and sanctioned the principle of a logistical
support package to AMISOM. financed by the United
Nations. It is vital to concretely implement those
measures. The Secretary-General has started to do so.
We would hope that he also takes stock of that in his
next report to the Security Council.

The third and last element is the need to take into
account the consideration that the Security Council has
just begun, at the initiative of France and the United
Kingdom, on peacekeeping operations in cooperation
with all other relevant actors of the United Nations
system. Earlier, the Secretary-General reminded us of
the United Nations system's joint study of
peacekeeping operations that he has just undertaken.

At a time when the number of United Nations
operations and troops is rapidly increasing, the
Organization must collectively consider how to
improve the efficiency of the peacekeeping operations
and to harmonize peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development more effectively in the field.
Peacekeeping forces cannot do everything.

Our first step, therefore, is to consider in detail
the recommendations of the Secretary-General.
However, at this stage France would like to give some
general indications on how we could advance the
process together. We must reconcile the necessary
support to the African Union with the principle of the
universality of the United Nations and with the special
role that the Charter entrusts to the Security Council.

That has two types of consequences. First, in the
political field, there can be no sharing of a priori roles
that would lead to regionalization in maintaining
international peace and security. Clearly, the African
Union has a central role to play, but the Security
Council has the responsibility to act every time that it
deems it necessary. Moreover, we must be careful to
avoid a formalization or institutionalization that
paralyses our relations. It is in the field that we must
strengthen those relations.

With regard to financing, we share the objective
to achieve permanent financing for African Union
peacekeeping operations, but recourse to mandatory
contributions of the United Nations does not seem a
good solution to us. For reasons of effectiveness and
responsibility, the organization that finances the budget
of an operation must control it and head its chain of
command. Beyond that, we cannot ignore the severe
constraints on the financing of the United Nations
itself, which face a growing burden with an annual
budget of nearly $8 billion to finance peacekeeping
operations.

However, there are promising avenues, such as
the establishment of a global standing trust fund with
resources that can be readily mobilized, financed by
voluntary contributions and set up to attract additional
funds, in particular to meet needs not fully assessed at
this stage, such as those directly linked to military
equipment.

To conclude, I would like again to welcome the
efforts of the panel chaired by Mr. Romano Prodi.
Beyond the few differences noticeable today, it is
necessary to stress that we are debating not the
principle of how but the best way in which to support
African Union peacekeeping operations and the
African Union itself. France thanks the Secretary-
General for the first indications that he has given us
today, and we will study in detail and with great
interest the report that he will submit to the Security
Council on this issue in the coming months.

