Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): First of all, on behalf of
the Government of Malaysia, I wish to convey our
condolences to the Government of Turkey at the tragic
occurrence of the earthquake in Turkey yesterday. We
also wish to offer our condolences to the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia on the passing away of the Crown Prince.

Let me now congratulate you, Madam President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council.

Secondly, I wish to align my delegation with the
statement made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Kazakhstan on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.

For more than half a century, the international
community has yearned for a peaceful and just solution
of the Palestinian issue. Decades of strife and politico-
legal arguments have made the quest for a solution
ever more elusive. The United Nations, including the
Security Council, has churned out over 180 resolutions
on Palestine, at last count. However, we are still
grappling with this task today, as no tangible outcome
has been produced. That is partly due to our inability to
bring into effect the very resolutions that we have
adopted at all levels of this Organization.

Malaysia fully endorses the application of
Palestine to become a Member of the United Nations,
as we feel deeply for the people of Palestine, whose
forefathers inhabited the land for virtually the last two
millennia. All of us have to support Palestine in
exercising its natural and inalienable rights, including
the right to self-determination, in the establishment of
5
an independent State of Palestine, based on the 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.

This support is in accordance with the two-State
solution and takes into account the security concerns of
both parties. In the light of the fact that more than two
thirds of the States Members of the United Nations
have recognized the State of Palestine, we call on the
Security Council to expedite this application at the
earliest opportunity. The Security Council has the
moral, political and legal responsibility to ensure that
Palestine is admitted as a Member of the United
Nations without further delay. There is no reason for
the Council not to do so.

In addition, we call on Israel to immediately fulfil
all of its obligations, including refraining from
provocation. The recent Israeli settlement plans in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, are deplorable and are illegal under
international law. Such provocative acts have put the
two-State solution in jeopardy. We therefore call on
Israel to fulfil its international obligations by
completely stopping its settlement activities and to
abrogate all policies and practices that contravene
international law and minimum standards of
internationally accepted basic human rights, including
the immediate lifting of the unlawful blockade of Gaza.

Although the recent agreement between Israel
and Palestine for the swap of over 1,000 Palestinian
prisoners is a step towards achieving peace, we should
not forget that 5,000 Palestinian civilian prisoners,
including children, women and elected officials, are
still imprisoned or arbitrarily detained by Israel. Even
more worrying are the extremely poor, undignified and,
in some cases, life-threatening conditions under which
the Palestinian prisoners are being detained in Israeli
prisons and detention centres.

Malaysia calls on Israel to stop this mistreatment
of Palestinians and to observe appropriate standards
related to the treatment of prisoners. Further, we also
call for the release of all Palestinian prisoners, as such
release is essential for creating a climate of mutual
trust, which is necessary for the resumption of
permanent status negotiations.

Resolving the issue of Palestine requires the
international community to focus all its energy and
efforts on achieving a comprehensive peace in the
region and restoring the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including their right to an

independent State of Palestine. All parties must act
truthfully and sincerely towards achieving these
objectives.

We again urge the Security Council to take
necessary measures, failing which would put the
Council's credibility as the principal organ responsible
for international peace and security at risk. Now is the
time for peace, and we should not let this opportunity
go to waste.

