Mr. Vencel (Slovakia): We would like to thank
the Lithuanian presidency for dedicating this thematic
debate to the issue of the rule of law, which is so
instrumental to ensuring effective peacebuilding.
Slovakia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.

We are pleased that the concept of the rule of law
is gaining ground among Member States and is seen as
a necessary instrument for sustaining peace, improving
stability and providing a legal basis for the protection
of civilians. Slovakia welcomed and supported the
adoption of the high-level Declaration on the subject
last September (General Assembly resolution 67/ 1).

We commend the personal engagement of Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and the many dedicated
experts from the Secretariat and Member States,
especially Austria as the coordinator of the Group of
Friends of the Rule of Law.

The concept of the rule of law is embedded in the
Charter of the United Nations. Its third preambular
paragraph states that one aim of the United Nations is

"to establish conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties
and other sources of international law can be
maintained".

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights of
1948, which was the historic international recognition
that all human beings had fundamental rights and
freedoms, recognizes in its preamble that

"it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to
have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against
tyranny and oppression, that human rights should
be protected by the rule of law".

The rule of law determines the security of everyone
in every aspect of human life. Today one does not ask
whether the rule of law is needed; one asks how to apply
the system effectively in all societies, without regard to
the world's cultural, historical and political diversity.

A justice system must be equal and all-inclusive,
protecting every individual on an equal footing without
regard for whether a person belongs to a minority or
a majority, or for his or her social or political status.
It must not be repressive or discriminate against any
marginalized group. Accountability and the fight
against impunity are the core principles of any society
that respects the rule oflaw as a principal concept.

National ownership is the first key to the successful
and sustainable development of the rule of law. Actors
that commit to making the peace process work in any
given country should be involved from the beginning.

The responsibility of national leaders is an essential
part of national ownership. The Security Council
should thoroughly review the actions of national
leaders, particularly in implementing the mandates of
Council-mandated missions in the areas of the rule of
law and security sector reform. The inclusion of all
stakeholders, including civil society, is a second key to
success. Mandates could then become more effective
by respecting national concerns and needs.

Implementation requires two components, capacity
and willingness. Capacity can be developed by helping
the host nation articulate its needs, engage in strategic
planning, manage reforms and build rule-of-law
knowledge. Willing participation can be strengthened
by demonstrating that those who Violate the peace
process will be punished and those who take risks in
promoting peace will be supported.

Developing effective strategies to overcome deficits
in the willingness and ability of the host nation's
legal system to confront systemic threats, including
the impunity of war criminals, is among the primary
determinants of achieving the rule of law.

More broadly, we would like to highlight the
important role of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
In situations where national jurisdictions are unable or
unwilling to address the issue of accountability, the
ICC should step in as an independent and impartial
judicial body, and thus contribute to reconciliation.
Reconciliation is crucial in building future rule-of-law
institutions in post-conflict States.

Slovakia offers development cooperation to
partner countries with the aim of contributing to
sustainable development, mainly by reducing poverty
and strengthening democracy and good governance.
Slovakia is building on its historical experience and the
specific story of the country, which has experienced
a difficult but successful transformation process. Our
main territorial focus is the Western Balkans and other
countries of the European neighbourhood, but we are
open to cooperation with other countries as well.

Security and justice are intrinsically intertwined
and interdependent but, above all, they are mutually
reinforcing. It is not possible to effectively deal with
one without paying proper attention to the other. Both
security sector reform and the rule of law are essential
concepts in peacebuilding. Slovakia - as a strong
supporter of security sector reform - endorses a
complex approach to the issue, while fully aware that
both processes need to be executed simultaneously.
As soon as the security conditions of the situation
allow, the Council might again become engaged in the
Central African Republic. That is a good example of
learning from the past in order to avoid the repetition
of a situation.

To achieve sustainable peace and development,
people must feel safe and secure. That applies to all
parts of the security sector, including defence, law
enforcement, corrections and justice. Therefore,
building effective and accountable security institutions
that the State and its people can trust and rely on and
that do not discriminate and are based on full respect
for human rights and the rule of law is of the utmost
importance.

Let me again stress that effective, comprehensive
and accountable security sector reform is indispensable
for securing lasting peace and sustainable development
and preventing a relapse into conflict. In that connection,
I welcome with deep appreciation the second report
of the Secretary-General on comprehensive support
to security sector reform (S/2013/480) and encourage
Member States to engage in and fully support the
implementation of the report.

But the reach of the rule of law goes beyond
security and the rights of individuals. The concept of
a sound legal environment is of crucial importance
to sustainable development. A dedicated, complex
approach to building legal systems has been of the
utmost importance for rebuilding, transforming
and developing the economy. It is crucial for foreign
investors to take important decisions leading to long-
term engagement in those processes, thus contributing
to building the three fundamental pillars of stability,
that is, security, law and development.

In conclusion, the rule of law should not be seen
as a by-product of the system; rather, it should be seen
as a process taht contributes to security, stability and
development, a process that builds on international and
human rights law, respects national traditions, culture
and history and effectively uses best practices based on
partnerships. Referring to that philosophy, the concept
of the rule of law should be an integral part of all major
international and global policies.

