My delegation takes note of the concept note addressed to the Permanent Missions to the United Nations on this topic. The Syrian Arab Republic affirms its support for all efforts aimed at combating the phenomenon of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict and the importance of holding the instigators and perpetrators accountable, and calls for extreme caution and objectivity in dealing with this serious humanitarian issue without the politicization that extends the suffering of the victims and hinders its elimination through international efforts. Allow me to refer to the efforts made by the Syrian Government to strengthen the national framework, including the legal framework, to protect women and ensure their rights and empowerment. For example, Syrian national legislation criminalizes many acts, such as so-called honour crimes, some types of cybercrime and other acts of violence against women. There are also competent courts that are responsible for holding perpetrators of sexual violence accountable in accordance with procedural rules that ensure proper enforcement, and there are national plans and programmes to deal with women victims of violence and provide them with the support they need. With regard to women with disabilities, the national legislative framework and plans include providing protection for them, promoting their advancement, ensuring the full enjoyment of their rights and achieving their full integration into society in a manner commensurate with the obligations of the Syrian Arab Republic under the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. We would also like to mention that Syrian legislation imposes severe criminal penalties for perpetrators of sexual assault crimes, in accordance with the Syrian Penal Code promulgated by Legislative Decree No. 148 of 1949 and its subsequent amendments. Moreover, we note that it is an obligation of the Syrian Arab Republic to advance, protect and promote the status and rights of women, together with their empowerment. In this context, several amendments to Syrian laws were made, the most recent of which are the amendments to the provisions of the Personal Status Law (Law 4 of 2019), which establishes the minimum age for marriage; and Law No. 2 of 2020, which cancels article 548 of the Penal Code, therefore, cancelling the pardonable or mitigating excuse relevant to honour crimes. Furthermore, a national interpretation of resolution 1325 (2000) is being prepared in the form of a draft programmatic plan on the content of the resolution. A study is also under way with a view to identifying discriminatory laws in Syria to ensure their compatibility with the Constitution of the Syrian Arab Republic, which guarantees that women enjoy full citizenship rights, equality and no discrimination in any fields. The reports of the Secretary-General continue to refuse to acknowledge that terrorism is the root cause of the long-suffering of Syrian women. They also refuse to indicate the huge challenges that prolong and deepen such suffering. The policies of aggression and occupation targeting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, the unilateral coercive measures imposed on it by several international parties and the politicization that has stigmatized the humanitarian aspect in the Syrian Arab Republic are all challenges that have changed the lifestyle of many Syrian women and led them to experience displacement to escape terrorist armed groups or exposure to the nascent practices of these groups and their extremist beliefs, depriving them of fundamental rights. Furthermore, the Syrian Arab Republic categorically rejects the use by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict of the phrase "parties to the conflict" in her reports, thereby putting the legal and legitimate Government of the Syrian Arab Republic - which is upholding its constitutional duty to protect its people and ensure the safety and territorial integrity of its lands from the danger of terrorism, in accordance with the provisions of international law - on an equal footing with terrorist armed groups created, financed, armed and supported by countries that have employed terrorism as a tool for their war on Syria. In addition, the Syrian Arab Republic regrets the biased approach of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict towards the situation in my country. Accordingly, we consider the analysis of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict to be flawed on the factual and legal levels and that it does not reflect her intended mandate, which requires an objective approach to the reality of the issue. The Office of the Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict continues to ignore the hundreds of identical letters of the Syrian Government addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council, which document the crimes and massacres committed by terrorist armed groups and the so-called Global Coalition to Counter Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, which has had a profound impact on women and compelled them to live in harsh conditions, physical and psychological, including exposure to various forms of violence. On the contrary, the Office of the Special Representative continues to adopt the contents of the reports of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic and to promote the content of these reports. In this regard, we reiterate our rejection of the special and periodic reports and recommendations of the so-called International Commission of Inquiry, owing to the fact that the Commission has repeatedly proved to be a politicized tool that lacks the minimum objective and professional criteria. Since its establishment, the Commission has been a prisoner of the political inclinations of countries that have engaged in hostile acts against my country, either directly or indirectly, thus becoming an example of how United Nations mechanisms are used to twist facts and manipulate legal concepts. Moreover, this deliberate disregard only covers up the practices of terrorist organizations and the individuals and entities associated with them, whose crimes and grave violations have affected tens of thousands of women and children in Syria and Iraq. In this context, my delegation emphasizes the credibility and relevance of what we have repeatedly conveyed in many letters and statements on various occasions, meetings and platforms, by stressing the need to uncover the practices of terrorist organizations, and for the United Nations to play an effective role in coordinating international efforts to support the Syrian Government and its allies in the fight against terrorism.
