Mr. Barttfeld (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, and Ambassador Liberata Mulamula,
Executive Secretary of the secretariat of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
for their presence here today. We also thank the Qatari
presidency for organizing this open debate on such an
important issue as peace, security and development in
the Great Lakes region of Africa.
Recent historic events in the region, such as the
taking of office by democratically elected
Governments in Burundi and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, constitute progress that, despite the
important role of the international community, would
not have been possible without the close and resolute
cooperation of the Governments of the subregion, the
efforts of the African Union and other multilateral
bodies, and the holding of international conferences -
such as the one on peace, security, democracy and
development in the Great Lakes region that took place
in Dar es Salaam in November 2004 and the Second
Summit-level meeting of the same conference, held in
Nairobi from 14 to 15 December 2006.

Nor would they have been possible without
increased cooperation between the Security Council
and regional organizations in the taking of decisions,
the tireless efforts of the peacekeeping missions in the
region, the assistance provided by donor countries and
the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes Region, the
constant monitoring by non-governmental
organizations of human rights violations by parties to
conflicts and, lastly, the parties themselves, who
adopted positions whereby they gave priority to peace
over their personal interests.

We would like to highlight in particular the
importance of the signing, during the Second Summit
in Nairobi, of the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development of the Great Lakes Region and the
declaration on its implementation, through which the
heads of State of the subregion committed themselves
to ensure that the Great Lakes region will regain its
stability and become a region of peace and prosperity.

We also believe that the establishment of a
regional Conference secretariat is a great step forward
in ensuring peace in the region. In that regard, we
congratulate Ambassador Liberata Mulamula of the
United Republic of Tanzania for her nomination as
Executive Secretary of that body.

The new phase now beginning will also require
great efforts and coordinated assistance in order to
establish stable institutions for the reconstruction and
development of the countries of the region during the
post-conflict phase. It will entail bringing those who
violated human rights and humanitarian law to justice,
as well as the active participation of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which has, for example, already decided
to assist the efforts of the Government of Burundi to

strengthen peace. Those are all necessary elements in
generating the incentives needed to reduce the
probability of the recurrence of conflict in the region.

However, we must also underscore that granting
amnesty for serious human rights violations as part of a
strategy to end a conflict usually does not lead to
positive results in the long term, given that combatants
rarely give up their weapons and lasting peace is rarely
achieved when reconciliation is not a viable option for
society. It is possible to end the culture of impunity
only by meting out impartial justice for all violators of
human rights and international humanitarian law. That,
in turn, would provide a solid foundation for long-term
stability in the countries of the region.

We would like in particular to highlight the
special vulnerability of children affected by the various
conflicts in the region. Unfortunately, girls and boys in
the region continue to be recruited, abducted and even
murdered. Those attacks are committed by different
armed groups, including the Lord's Resistance Army.
In some areas members of the armed forces are
themselves responsible for committing those types of
abuse of children. We therefore underscore the need to
put an end to the climate of impunity that facilitates
such abuse. We would also like to reiterate the
responsibility of Governments to protect their civilian
populations.

In conclusion, we would like to thank the
delegation of Tanzania for its work on the draft
presidential statement, which we support.

