Mr. Yamamoto: As I look at the situation in
Afghanistan today, I see opportunity and hope, but
also formidable challenges. The progress made by
the Afghan people over the past 15 years provides
opportunities for further advances. With opportunity
comes hope.

The challenges derive from almost 40 years of war.
Despite very real progress, Afghanistan still has a long
way to go to meet fully the needs of its people. The
upcoming Brussels Conference could provide the time
and space for the Afghan Government to move towards
stability and seif-reliance. The Government should
seize this opportunity. In order to meet its challenges,

the Government must be able to act effectively. The
current precarious political situation, including the
tensions between the two leaders of the Government,
must be brought to a resolution. A way must be found
to ensure stability in the Government for the long-term.

As one of the world's most aid-dependent countries,
it will be difficult for Afghanistan to achieve self-
reliance as long as there is conflict. The conflict diverts
resources that would be better spent on developing
Afghanistan and helping its people. Peace is therefore a
requirement. It is imperative that avenues for peace be
explored with the utmost urgency and seriousness. Let
me briefly talk about positive efforts under way that
give cause for hope.

Sustained international support to Afghanistan
is vital. The Warsaw Summit sent a message to the
Afghan people, including anti-Government elements,
that the international community will continue to
support the security sector at the current level until
2020. Afghanistan is now preparing for the Brussels
Conference, at which the equally vital question of
support for Afghan development will be considered.
In Brussels, the Government will have an opportunity
to secure ongoing development assistance at or near
existing levels through 2020. At the meeting of the
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board (JCMB) on
4 September, the Government demonstrated that its
preparations for Brussels are well advanced.

I welcome President Ghani's comprehensive, long-
term approach to tackling corruption, which seeks to
develop the architecture needed to prevent corruption, as
well as hold those responsible for corruption to account.
The referral of the first cases to the Anti-Corruption
Criminal Justice Centre demonstrates the Government's
resolve. Successful, just prosecutions would go a long
way towards boosting public confidence.

I also wish to acknowledge the Government's
continued progress on other reform and mutual
accountability commitments, in particular with regard
to preparing the Afghanistan National Peace and
Development Framework and successfully negotiating
a new International Monetary Fund programme,
after a strong performance in the area of the staff-
monitored programme, including with respect to
revenue collection.

These achievements establish a firm foundation
for the Brussels Conference. By demonstrating the
Government's commitment to development, economic
growth and stability, they can build confidence that
development funds will used for credible, effective
plans. I particularly welcome the inclusiveness of the
Government's vision for the Brussels Conference. The
Government's attention to poverty reduction at the
recent JCMB meeting was widely appreciated.

Decades of conflict have left many women
widowed and vulnerable, and as President Ghani noted
at the JCMB, the face of Afghan poverty is female.
Serious attention to poverty reduction therefore
requires dedicated efforts to empower women in both
peacebuilding and development. Government planning
in those areas is progressing and a side event at Brussels
will provide a valuable opportunity to discuss the plans
in depth. Similarly, we look forward discussions in
Brussels focused on promoting regional cooperation,
which is key to the stability and prosperity of the region.
Success in Brussels would mark another important step
for Afghanistan towards self-reliance.

The National Unity Government faces fundamental
challenges, both from outside and from within. Security
and political stability are the most fundamental of
those. On the security front, it has been another difficult
year for Afghanistan. Intensive fighting continues in
hotspots around the country. While Kabul has been the
target of a series of horrendous suicide attacks, several
provincial captials, including Lashkar Gah, Tirin Kot
and Kunduz city, have been under serious pressure,
but none has fallen. The Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces have been able to display more
effective responses compared to last year, and coupled
with tactical operations, they have been able for the
most part to hold their ground.

The impact of the conflict on civilians remains
severe, however. It is with a heavy heart that I must
report that yet again, year on year, civilian casualty
figures are trending upwards. Nowhere is this trend more
apparent than for children, among whom there has been
an 18 per cent increase in casualties, with 388 children
killed in six months. The attack claimed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant against a demonstration in
Kabul on 23 July was a particularly gruesom incident,
with 85 civilians killed. The Government promised
to investigate in full. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan will share the findings of its
own investigation with relevant stakeholders.

I must once again remind all parties to the conflict
to strictly abide by their obligation under international
human right and humanitarian law to always place the
preservation of human life above any other consideration
and to give a measurable effect to their commitment
to the protection of civilians, women and children
in particular. Accountability for violations of these
commitments remains weak and must be strengthened
by all parties.

The numbers of people newly displaced by conflict
have been swelled recently by a massive increase in the
number of Afghan families returning from Pakistan.
If current trends continue, Afghanistan will have to
meet the needs of at least 1 million people on the move.
That would require far greater amounts of assistance
and would place an overwhelming strain on already
overstretched health and other social services. Unless
measures are taken soon, many thousands of families
will face the prospect of winter with inadequate shelter
or support.

No effective policies are possible ifthe Government
is internally divided. Tensions within the Government
have surfaced, with public criticism by Chief Executive
Officer Abdullah Abdullah about what he views as the
incomplete implementation of political agreement of
2014. The two leaders have met several times since then
to try to identify the issues and to seek solutions. Efforts
are still under way and further meetings are expected.

The National Unity Government is at a defining
moment. A way forward must be found through a
realistic and flexible compromise and a show of true
statesmanship. The leaders need to come up with a
solution that will allow for the effective functioning
of the Government, in both the short and long terms.
Afghanistan cannot afford political instability. The
leaders must show the people of Afghanistan and
to the international community that they are able to
govern effectively.

As the second anniversary draws near of the 2014
political agreement that established the National Unity
Government, the political opposition has increasingly
challenged the legitimacy of the Government. The
political agenda must progress constructively, political
stability must be maintained and elections must take
place. The recent signing by the President of the
legislative decree on electoral reform is a constructive
development in that regard. The international
community is deeply committed to supporting the
National Unity Government and would be reassured by
continued stability and its effectiveness.

Peace for Afghanistan is a necessity. Without peace,
Afghans will continue to suffer and economic growth
and prosperity will not materialize. The Taliban has
still not demonstrated explicitly a clear commitment to
a peace process, despite the many offers of engagement
by President Ghani and the international community.
The intensive fighting this summer has shown the
conflict to be an endless cycle of gains and reversals,
of destruction instead of development, and of continued
suffering for Afghan civilians. It is my fervent hope
that, as winter approaches and the tempo of the conflict
slows, the Taliban will show their willingness to enter
into talks with the Afghan Government.

The agreement being negotiated between the
Afghan Government and Hezb-i-Islami shows that the
Government is sincere about negotiations. Experience
shows that peace processes can take months and years.
Measures should be taken to build confidence between
the Government and the Taliban in order to prepare
the way for substantive talks. The sooner a process is
started, the less Afghans will suffer. I would therefore
urge both sides to come together to find lasting peace
for Afghanistan.

Afghanistan has an opportunity to build on the
achievements of the past 15 years and to move towards
stability and self-reliance. With an effective Government
and the continued support of the international
community, it has every chance of success.

