Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Allow me to add
some comments in my national capacity on the work of
the three Committees.

With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), South Africa
remains firmly convinced that weapons of mass
destruction do not guarantee security, but rather detract
from it. As long as those weapons exist, humankind
will continue to face the threat of catastrophe. This
conviction informs our firm commitment to the
principles of the disarmament of weapons of mass
destruction and non-proliferation, both of which are
key contributions to the system of collective security
envisaged in the United Nations Charter.

South Africa welcomes the fact that the Council
rallied behind resolution 1977 (2011), which seeks to
establish a balance between the disarmament and non-
proliferation aspects of weapons of mass destruction,
and that the Council has reaffirmed the importance of
fully complying with all relevant obligations. That
balance, along with the improved language on peaceful
purposes, provides an appropriate context for the 1540
(2004) framework.

We wish to thank the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
persons and entities, for his comprehensive briefing on
the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime. We
commend and encourage the Committee in its
continued process of regularly reviewing the 1267 list
to ensure that it remains up to date. We also applaud
the Committee for its approval of the narrative
summaries to improve transparency and effectiveness
in the implementation of the sanctions regime.

As noted in the Chairman's briefing, while
resolution 1904 (2009) has made significant procedural
improvements to the listing and de-listing process,
legal challenges to the procedural and substantive
fairness of the sanctions regime remain. In our view,
those legal challenges threaten the effectiveness of the
regime. I am aware that measures to enhance
procedural fairness and make the listing process more
just have been considered by the 1267 Committee in
the context of the report of the Monitoring Team. We
would hope that those measures will be reflected in the
draft resolution renewing the Committee's mandate.

With regard to the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
terrorism remains one of the most of the dangerous and
serious threats to the maintenance of international
peace and security. The international community's
efforts to counter terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations must continue with renewed
commitment, focus and resolve. It is therefore
appropriate for the Security Council to be the
implementing body of our collective efforts to counter
and subsequently eradicate that phenomenon.
It is also important for the United Nations to
remain at the forefront of that effort, especially as it
will ensure that, in the process of fostering cooperation
among the members of the international community to
counter the scourge, such cooperation is carried out
within the prescripts of international legal norms and
standards to which we are obliged to adhere in
accordance with international humanitarian and human
rights law.

Very recent terrorist attacks are yet another grim
reminder to all of us that we must stay the course in
pursuing our stated objectives to counter and
eventually eradicate terrorism. That work began with
the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001). Almost 10
years later, we note that, since the adoption of that
resolution, the United Nations has made significant
inroads in countering terrorism.

Finally, the Executive Directorate of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee facilitated numerous outreach
activities, country briefings and regional seminars and
workshops throughout the reporting period. Those
initiatives have made positive contributions to
engendering closer cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations; facilitated effective
and integrated operations among the wider United
Nations community and international and regional
organizations; and fostered closer cooperation between
and among Member States, the United Nations and
international civil society. Most importantly, I would
advocate technical assistance to States.

All of that not only bodes well for the United
Nations in dispensing its specific mandates, but also
adds value by making a material contribution to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

