Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
President Jim Yong Kim, Special Envoy Romano Prodi
and the observers of the African Union and European
Union for their briefings and information.

There is no doubt that the most significant event
of recent months concerning the Sahel region was
the joint visit to several countries by the Secretary-
General and the President of the World Bank, along
with representatives of other key partners, such as the
African Development Bank, the African Union and
the European Union. Its significance derives from the
high priority the international community has accorded
to dealing with the many challenges afflicting the
region, and to doing that in a coordinated, integrated
way, taking advantage of the synergies offered by
joint action. In this way, we can move forward while
simultaneously addressing issues of stability and
democratic governance as well as of development
and the humanitarian attention that the people of this
troubled part of the continent require.
We commend the central theme of the Secretary-
General's message, which is that peace and development
must go hand in hand, and that its implementation
requires a broad coalition of international actors in
support of the countries in the region. We are also
encouraged by the good will and commitment shown
by the national authorities and members of civil
society who participated in the various meetings held
during the visit. The Secretary-General and President
Jim Yong Kim spoke today about their reactions to
those interesting interactions. We hope that all the
stakeholders will follow through on the roles that
they must play in dealing with the various complex
challenges the region is facing.

Since this is the second joint visit to Africa by
the Secretary-General and the President of the World
Bank this year, we encourage each of them to continue
their work in their respective areas to ensure that both
institutions give reciprocal support to the region to the
benefit of its member countries. We acknowledge how
vital it is for the Sahel region to break the vicious cycle of
challenges that afflict it, including fragile institutions,
precarious governance systems, unacceptable
socioeconomic indicators, political instability and
civic insecurity, along with the consequences of
climate disasters and their impact on food security.
Almost all of these are cross-border phenomena, and
thus one country's problems tend to spread to others
very quickly; at the same time, individual countries'
achievements also have the potential to spill over to the
benefit of the rest. That is why we support the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.

Like others, we stress the importance of national
and regional ownership of the strategy, whose
implementation is primarily up to the member States of
the Sahel, West Africa and the Maghreb. Of course, the
regional approach should be adapted to each country's
specifics, so that the final outcome will be something
more than the sum of individual situations. We welcome
the decision of the leaders of the region to establish
a follow-up mechanism, the so-called coordination
platform, in order to monitor implementation of the
commitments to be undertaken.

Lastly, we would like to thank our colleagues
in the Moroccan delegation for promoting today's
presidential statement, whose content we fully support
(S/PRST/2013/20).

