Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
the Secretary-General and the other speakers for their
briefings today.

Peacekeeping is an arduous task to which we have
been committed since the Organization was founded.
From the beginning, peacekeeping operations have
been the vital and indispensable tool for carrying out
that responsibility. In the current context, peacekeeping
has given rise to constant and changing challenges that
have imposed on the States Members of the United
Nations the obligation of fulfilling the objectives set
out in the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations.

We recognize the leading role played by
peacekeepers deployed in highly dangerous missions,
where many have lost their lives in the service of
peace. That sacrifice requires the adoption of measures
necessary to equip peacekeepers with the capacities
that will allow them to carry out their duties optimally,
thereby ensuring efficient and effective performance
on the ground.

The provision of humanitarian assistance in
safe spaces depends to a large extent on effective
collaboration between humanitarian action and
peacekeeping. Working closely with humanitarian
actors therefore continues to be a core activity of
peace missions. In order to do that, we must increase
our military personnel's capacities with regard to
humanitarian work and the principles and rules that
govern this area. While we acknowledge the exclusively
civilian nature of humanitarian action, increasing the
coordination between civilian and military efforts on
the ground is essential.
Peacekeepers are under constant threat of attack,
which is an obstacle to their implementation of
mandates, and that is why measures must be taken to
protect them. Adequate training for peacekeepers, both
before deployment and while on mission, is crucial
to developing their skills in various areas with the
aim of ensuring their own safety, their best possible
performance of their functions and the effective
implementation of their mandates. The link between
the training, security and protection of peacekeepers
is undeniable.

Given the new and increasingly varied challenges
threatening international peace and security, we
believe that it is vital to continue supporting concrete
measures to improve training, capacity-building and the
implementation of joint and coordinated mechanisms
by the Secretariat, troop-contributing countries,
regional and subregional organizations and the Security
Council. Some such measures include the collective and
proactive analysis of the specific threats on the ground
that interfere with the fulfilment of mandates, strategic
planning for decision-making in emergency situations,
training in areas related to every context and ongoing
assessments of peacekeepers so that they can be held
accountable when their results are unsatisfactory or
when good work is recognized. In that context, I would
like to highlight some additional points.

It is important to train peacekeepers on gender
issues in order to ensure that they are taken into account
in the design, planning, implementation and evaluation
ofpeace operations. In addition, we must deploy gender
and women's protection advisers and strengthen zero-
tolerance policies for sexual and gender-based Violence
committed by peacekeepers. It is crucial that United
Nations missions prioritize visible and tangible respect
for women's physical well-being and safety. Troop-
contributing countries must also work to increase
women's representation in missions and implement
the necessary legislative reforms for ensuring gender
training prior to deployment.

The Dominican Republic has endorsed the
Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and Preventing
the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. We
believe it is vital that appropriate provisions on the
protection of children be included in all United Nations
peacekeeping mandates, as well as measures to ensure
that all children, including those associated with State
or non-State groups, are treated in accordance with
international humanitarian law.
In some circumstances, effective training on the
impact of climate change on social stability and as a
multiplier of threats to human security is as important
as military training. Through their contact with the
communities they serve, peacekeepers have a two-
way channel of communication that they can use
for collecting information on communities' climate
concerns, thereby raising awareness of the possible
implications for peace and security and contributing
to risk management and resilience-building plans. We
also advocate for peace missions that do not contribute
to environmental pollution and thereby to creating new
climate vulnerabilities. We therefore believe that we
must take concrete steps to achieve sustainable peace
missions, for example by using renewable energy
sources. In addition, the role of young people should
be mentioned in peacekeeping missions" mandates and
reports, as it was for the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia.

In conclusion, as a signatory to the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, between 2000 and today the Dominican
Republic has made modest but significant contributions
to several peacekeeping missions, including in Kosovo,
Cote d'Ivoire, Mali and Colombia. Those missions
have been supported by training programmes and
academic training in areas that include women in
armed conflict, the prevention of Violence against
women, international humanitarian law, human rights,
languages and the rights of refugees. That is because
we believe that investing in peace essentially represents
working towards building a better world for present and
future generations, one based on multilateralism, best
practices and the common good in order to achieve
the inclusive, sustainable and peaceful world we all
dream of.

Lastly, we believe firmly that the maintenance of
peace is everyone's responsibility and that only with
the will to do so andjoint efforts can we achieve lasting
and sustainable peace.

