Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, allow me to welcome the new Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and to
wish him every success during your presidency of the
Council. I also welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon; the Deputy Secretary-
General, Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro; the Chairman of the
African Union-United Nations panel, Mr. Romano
Prodi; the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union (AU), Mr. Ramtane Lamamra; and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa,
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma.

The report of the African Union-United Nations
panel on modalities for support to African Union
peacekeeping operations (S/2008/813) is a useful and
important contribution to the task of identifying more
effective ways of linking the efforts of the United
Nations in the area of peace and security, in particular
those of the Security Council, with those of regional
and subregional organizations.

It is important to remember the inevitable
regional dimension of internal conflicts. This requires
the identification of appropriate strategies that define
actions emphasizing compliance with international law,
the peaceful solution of disputes, respect for human
rights and the strengthening of the rule of law.

This cooperation with regional organizations,
however, is of particular relevance and clearly fruitful
when it occurs within the purview of regional
organizations. We must not overlook this point when
we consider the role of regional organizations. Neither
must we forget that different organizations serve
different purposes in each of the regions - hence the
advantages of exploring this option in the case of the
AU.

We firmly believe that in order to achieve
peacebuilding and peacekeeping in Africa, we need to
work on four main issues: the resolution of conflict -
that is, the establishment of peace; the promotion of
economic development and of institution-building;
respect for human rights; and conflict prevention
through a focus on the causes of conflict and the
eradication thereof.

The shared responsibility of the United Nations
and the AU in achieving those goals is clear. Thus,
drawing on the experience of United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Africa, it is clearly important
for us to have a strategic vision, shared by the AU and
the United Nations, clear and viable mandates and
close coordination between United Nations agencies
and programmes in the field and regional and
subregional organizations when a peace mission is
deployed.

The link between the AU and the Security
Council could be strengthened through exchanges of
information, in particular the presentation of regular
reports on the regional and multilateral peacekeeping
operations deployed on the continent. We therefore
believe that we should explore the issue of mechanisms
to develop AU capacities to take timely action.

09-2716]
However, my country believes that these endeavours
must be aimed at a lasting solution to conflict and
require wide-ranging and effective measures that attack
the roots of conflict and promote long-term stability in
the continent.

We therefore trust that we will soon have an
assessment by the Secretary-General of the report so
that this Council can focus its consideration of this
issue on the next steps we need to take to support AU
peacekeeping operations.

