Mr. Lee See-young (Republic of Korea):
Mr. President, I would like first of all to extend our
appreciation to you for taking the very successful initiative
of organizing this open debate on the important issue of the
situation in Africa. We highly commend the Netherlands'
contribution to the promotion of transparency in the work
of the Security Council, as demonstrated by its initiatives
of having organized already two open briefings and now the
second open debate this month. I would also like to pay my
tribute to Prime Minister Wim Kok for his leadership.

My delegation is also grateful to the Secretary-
General, Kofi Annan, for his comprehensive and timely
progress report on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in his Africa report of April
last year and for his insightful statement yesterday morning.

Mr. President, as we debate the situation in Africa
today, I would like to echo the positive note struck by your
Foreign Minister last week in his address to the General
Assembly:

"Africa is not a land of troubles only but of
happiness as well, not a continent of catastrophe
only but equally one of hope." (A/54/PV.I3)

Indeed, this continent of hope is experiencing
significant positive changes on many fronts. In two key
African States, South Africa and Nigeria, we have
witnessed the swearing-in of democratically elected
leaders, a development that should generate momentum
for democratic forces across the African continent. These
two new leaders, President Mbeki of South Africa and
President Obasanjo of Nigeria, together with many other
African leaders, strongly advocated before the General
Assembly last week the importance of democratic good
governance as a foundation for peace and development in
Africa. We also appreciate the able leadership of
President Bouteflika of Algeria, the current Chairman of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU), and of
Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, OAU Secretary General. Their
role continues to be indispensable in promoting peace and
development in Africa.

Important progress has also been made recently in
some of the most intractable conflict situations in Africa,
including the Peace Agreement in Sierra Leone, the
Ceasefire Agreement in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the electoral transition under way in the
Central African Republic. I am reminded that just a few
days ago, President Chiluba of Zambia made an eloquent
statement to the Security Council on the Lusaka process
for peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which he has mediated with tremendous energy and
commitment. We believe that the international community
must work hard, together with African leaders, to sustain
this hard-won momentum for true peace and stability in
those regions.
Against this backdrop, the Secretary-General has
submitted his report on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in his report on Africa. My
delegation notes with appreciation that, since the issuance
of his comprehensive report on Africa, the whole United
Nations system, under the leadership of the Secretary-
General, and of the Security Council in particular, has
taken various follow-up decisions to address many aspects
of the challenges Africa faces today. My delegation fully
agrees with Secretary-General Kofi Annan that the
problems facing Africa require a comprehensive approach,
integrating security, political and socio-economic

 

dimensions. We believe that this holistic approach is
possible only in the context of the United Nations system,
with the full support of the African countries and the
international community as a whole.

Having said that, allow me to touch upon several
points which, in our view, require the priority attention of
the Security Council. First, my delegation wishes to
highlight the importance of conflict prevention in Africa.
Given the many potential contingencies in Africa, there is
an urgent need to build up the capacity to prevent conflicts
through early warning and early action. We believe that the
establishment of post-conflict peace-building support
structures in Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and other countries, as
aptly described in the Secretary-General's progress report,
has set a good example applicable to conflict prevention in
these and other potential conflict areas.

We also believe that the Secretary-General's Trust
Fund for Preventive Action has served, and will continue to
serve, as a useful vehicle to enhance the capabilities of the
United Nations for conflict prevention in Africa and
elsewhere. My Government has contributed annually to the
Trust Fund since its inception in 1997, and will shortly
announce its additional contributions for this year. We
welcome the decision announced earlier by the United
Kingdom to contribute to the Fund. We call upon all other
Member States that have not done so to make their
financial resources available to the Fund in order to enable
the Secretary-General to expand his initiatives for
preventive action in potential conflict areas in Africa and
elsewhere.

Secondly, we believe that rapid response is crucial to
containing deadly conflict and alleviating human suffering.
Further efforts should be made by African countries
themselves to build and enhance their own peacekeeping
capacity. On the other hand, we also support the various
measures undertaken by the United Nations to upgrade
Africa's peacekeeping capacity, including such measures as
staff-exchange programmes between the United Nations and
the OAU; the United Nations-led training assistance for
African peacekeepers; and the coordination with the
Economic Community of West African States. However,
we share the concern expressed by the Secretary-General
over how to provide logistic support to African troops
involved in peacekeeping operations in the early stages of
conflicts. We consider it necessary to explore the possibility
of establishing a stand-by arrangement for such logistic
support.

Thirdly, my delegation joins others in emphasizing
once again the importance of controlling the flow of arms
in Africa, which has often fuelled the conflicts there. In
the Council's open debate last week, we heard insightful
statements from the Council members, including those of
many Foreign Ministers, on how to bring the proliferation
of small arms under control, particularly in Africa. We
reiterate the belief that arms embargoes should be
imposed and strictly implemented in all conflict situations.
Furthermore, with cross-border arms flows rampant,
country-specific arms embargoes may not suffice to stem
illicit arms trafficking, thus requiring cooperation at the
regional level. In this connection, we support the efforts
made by the Secretariat to encourage African States to
adopt national legislation making the violation of Security
Council arms embargoes a criminal offence.

Fourthly, we take note from the progress report of
the continuing efforts made by the Secretariat and the
Security Council to refine the use of sanctions in Africa.
While we recognize the difficulty in the real world of
achieving "smart sanctions", we believe that there is a
recurring need to minimize the collateral - though
unintended - human suffering, through the imposition of
more specifically targeted sanctions and periodic review
mechanisms. In this connection, we commend
Ambassador Fowler of Canada, Chairman of the Angola
sanctions Committee, for his valuable efforts in tracking
not only the illegal diamond trade and oil sales, but also
illicit arms trafficking by UNITA forces. I wish him and
the Committee all the best in their important endeavour.

Fifthly, we have witnessed the ramifications of the
failure to ensure the security and humanitarian character
of refugee camps in some conflict situations, most notably
in the Great Lakes region of Africa. We appreciate the
successful campaigns undertaken by the United Nations
system to relocate refugee populations to safe areas away
from conflict zones in such countries as Guinea, Liberia
and Chad. My delegation also commends the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
under the leadership of Madam Ogata, for having assisted
many African countries in strengthening their police and
other law-enforcement structures that handle security in
refugee camps.
Last but not least, we share the Secretary-General's
conviction that democratic good governance and
sustainable development are fundamental for long-term
peace and prosperity in Africa. The experience we
acquired in our own development process illustrates that
good governance, based on democracy and respect for

 

human rights and supported by free-market principles,
better ensures peace, stability and prosperity in the long
run. We note with appreciation the numerous achievements
already made in these fields in Africa, as described in the
Secretary-General's report. The international community
should continue to work closely with African countries with
a view to further enhancing their capacity for good
governance and sustainable development.

My Government has always accorded high priority to
the promotion of friendly ties, cooperation, solidarity and
partnership with African countries. The Republic of Korea
dispatched peacekeepers to Somalia, Angola and Western
Sahara and joined electoral assistance missions in South
Africa and Mozambique. We have consistently strengthened
our cooperation with Africa in the field of development,
including human resources capacity-building. Our
relationship with Africa became even greater during our
recent two-year service as a member of the Security
Council. My delegation takes this opportunity to reaffirm
the commitment and readiness of my Government to
continue to make contributions to the collective efforts of
the United Nations, the OAU and African countries for
peace and development in Africa.

