Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): The delegation of Rwanda wishes to pay a warm
tribute to the Secretary-General for his fine report on the
situation in Haiti.

Having read the various reports and
recommendations, we are very pleased to learn that a
secure and stable climate prevails in that Republic, the
victim of so many years of civilian and military
dictatorship.

With the return to power of His Excellency
Mr. Jean-Bertrand Aristide, we rejoice that a new era of
peace, tolerance and democracy has emerged from the
turmoil of Haitian history to reward the efforts of the
Haitian people and the international community in their
quest for lasting peace in that country.

The Rwandan delegation welcomes with great
satisfaction the secure and stable climate that now exists
in Haiti, for which we can in large measure thank the
Multinational Force. Nevertheless, we have to deplore
certain temporary difficulties, which somewhat tarnish the
bright picture of the future.

At a time when the international community is
concerned to uphold Haiti in its efforts to consolidate its
democratic underpinnings, the Rwandan delegation
expresses the hope that socio-economic development in
that country will be the keystone of all the achievements
which they are planning for the short and medium term.

We need hardly dwell at length on peace, democracy
and development, the three pillars of economic prosperity
for any country. The Republic of Haiti was among the
first republics in the northern hemisphere. Unfortunately,
now that the others have become developed, they not
merely have forgotten to hold out their hands to Haiti, but
are actually exploiting it. That is why what this
Organization now calls "preventive diplomacy" should,
for Haiti as for Rwanda, be a diplomacy that takes the
form of multifaceted assistance from the international
community to promote economic growth, which is the
very basis of peace and lasting democracy. We hope that
Haiti's major neighbours in the Organization of American
States will continuously and increasingly help to relaunch
the Haitian economy.

 

In view of all I have said and in view of the solidarity
of countries that have suffered so much from injustice, the
Rwandan delegation is very pleased to be a co-sponsor of
the draft resolution on Haiti and will vote in favour of it.

