Mr. Shiozaki (Japan): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important meeting
and guiding our deliberations.

Japan commends the Government of the Sudan
and the Minnawi faction of the Sudan Liberation
Movement (SLM) for their courageous decision to sign
the Abuja peace agreement. I would like to pay tribute
to the diplomatic efforts of the African Union, led by
Chief Mediator Salim Salim, and of the heads of
African States, including President Sassou Nguesso of
the Republic of Congo and President Obasanjo of
Nigeria, and international partners, particularly the
United States and the United Kingdom.

The Abuja peace agreement is a further step for
the consolidation of peace in Darfur. We call on the
remaining factions of the SLM. and the Justice and
Equality Movement (JEM) to promptly join the
agreement, and we urge all parties to sincerely commit
themselves to implementing it.

I myself paid a visit to Sudan in February of this
year. Although it was a short stay, I visited Juba, spent
a night in Rumbek in southern Sudan and observed
with my own eyes the status of the implementation of
the North-South Comprehensive Peace Agreement. My
impression during the trip was that, despite various
challenges, slow but steady progress had been made in
the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement through well-coordinated efforts by the
United Nations and other actors. If we can do this in
the North-South process, why not in Darfur? I
therefore strongly hope that the Abuja peace agreement
will be implemented as soon as possible with the
strong commitment of the parties.

I wish to take this opportunity to inform the
Council that Prime Minister Koizumi of Japan just
concluded a successful trip to Africa earlier this month.
It was the first visit by the Japanese Prime Minister to
African Union headquarters. While applauding the
dedicated efforts by African peacekeepers, we fully
recognize the need to strengthen the African Union
Mission in Sudan (AMIS) in order to improve the
security situation in the region. During his trip, Prime
Minister Koizumi announced further assistance for
AMIS, amounting to approximately $8.7 million, to
support its activities. We hope that this additional
assistance will contribute to the strengthening of
AMIS.

For transition from AMIS to a United Nations
peacekeeping mission in Darfur, the agreement of the
Government of the Sudan is needed. Japan therefore
commends the recent, more positive response of the
Sudanese Government in this regard. We hope that a
United Nations-African Union joint assessment
mission will be undertaken without further delay. Japan
expects that following the achievement of the peace
agreement, consideration of the deployment of a Darfur
peacekeeping operation will be accelerated.

Japan is gravely concerned over the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in Darfur since the
beginning of this year. Two elements are indispensable
in this matter. First is the cooperation of the Sudanese
Government in facilitating humanitarian activities, and
second is funding for those activities. I am pleased to
report that, during his recent visit to Africa, Prime
Minister Koizumi also announced additional
humanitarian assistance amounting to $10 million. Our
Government will continue to provide the maximum
assistance possible to alleviate the humanitarian
suffering in the region.

Furthermore, as the relations between Chad and
Sudan have a serious impact on the situation in Darfur,
we also hope that both Governments will make utmost
efforts to improve their relations by complying with
and implementing the Tripoli Declaration.

Let me conclude my statement by stressing once
again Japan's continuing determination to extend
assistance for the consolidation of peace in Darfur, and
in Sudan as a whole, in light of the signing of the peace
agreement.

