Mr. Sharma (India): The report of the Secretary-
General which forms the basis of our discussions today is
so far-reaching in its implications that I think most of us
would have welcomed the chance to study it in greater
depth than we have been able to so far. Nevertheless, we
thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to speak to the
Council again on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

I listened with great attention yesterday to the
Secretary-General's eloquent presentation of his report
and to the very moving statement made by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. We share
completely their concern for the plight of civilians in
armed conflict and admire their passionate advocacy. The
problem is an extremely complex one. It is natural and
understandable to be moved by emotion. Indeed, it is this
that leads to a sense of deep concern and engagement.
But the solutions we propose must be pragmatic and
dispassionate; above all, measures to counter illegalities
must themselves enjoy complete legality.

When I spoke to the Council in February, I spelled
out some of the complexities involved, because some of
the experts in the field who spoke to the Council before
me had conveyed a general impression that this was both
a relatively simple matter and a recent problem which
could be addressed by vigorous action from the Council.
Reading the first few sections of the Secretary-General's
report, I note that it acknowledges the validity of several
of the points that we and others had made.

However, the recommendations that the report goes
on to make are far-reaching but require much deeper
consideration. Though it frequently deplores the fact that
legal instruments have been ignored by those who have
accepted their provisions, the report seems to have
followed suit. Like the bishop who recently confessed that
he could not recall more than 5 of the 10 commandments
at any one point of time, the report seems to be selective
about the contents of the Charter, nowhere more so than
in the provisions that relate to the Security Council.

To refresh our memory, Article 24 sets out the
functions and powers of the Security Council, and Article
24, paragraph 2, notes that the specific powers granted to
it are laid down in Chapters VI to VIII and Chapter XII.
In each chapter, the Council's powers are narrowly
defined by the Charter. Where it is given a role in an area
not within its specified competence, as in Chapter XII, the
Charter specifies the limits of the Council's authority. For
instance, Article 83, paragraph 3, spells out that the

 

Security Council should work through the Trusteeship
Council

"to perform those functions of the United Nations
under the trusteeship system relating to political,
economic, social and educational matters in the
strategic areas".

In other words, apart from the strategic and military aspects
of security, the Council has no direct role in any of the
other areas listed in Article 83, paragraph 3. This is a
principle that applies generally to the Security Council's
place in the United Nations system. This being the case, we
find it odd that the bulk of the recommendations in this
report invite the Security Council to take actions in areas
not within its competence.

Recommendation 1 would have the Security Council
urge Member States to ratify major instruments of
international humanitarian law, human rights treaties and
refugee law and, even further, to withdraw reservations they
might have entered. First, this clubbing of three different
sets of law creates a continuing confusion. The report has
tended to forget the distinction between human rights and
the provisions of humanitarian law, and the very different
contexts in which they are applied. Secondly, if it is
proposed that the Council do this, acting under Chapter VII,
to make its decisions binding on Member States, that would
make nonsense of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties, which emphasizes the sovereign right of nations
to decide which international instruments they will accept
and to what extent they will be bound by them. If that is
not the intention, then the Council's call is both
meaningless and redundant.

Recommendation 2 attempts to draw the Council's
attention to the non-state actors who, as we said in
February, commit the most violations of humanitarian law,
are party to no treaties and have no intention of abiding by
international law. But this recommendation leaves
unaddressed the further question we had posed: how does
the Council propose to impose its will on non-state actors?
Will representatives of the Council fly out to Angola, for
instance, to distribute copies of this report, or of any
decision the Security Council may take on it, to UNITA
cadres, threatening a further debate here if they do not
comply?

These fundamental objections apply equally to
recommendations 3 to 6. In particular, recommendation 3
stretches the Security Council's competence under Chapter
VII well beyond anything authorized by the Charter. The ad
hoc tribunals, set up by the Council to uphold law, are
themselves of dubious legitimacy, since the Charter does
not give the Council this right or any role in the
administration of justice. Nevertheless, these tribunals
exist. However, if, for instance, a fugitive from one
country were to take refuge in another, it could hardly be
argued that, if the authorities declined to surrender the
fugitive to an ad hoc tribunal, a threat to peace had taken
place or that there had been a breach of peace, or that the
authorities in the one country had carried out an act of
aggression against the other. We are concerned, therefore,
that the report is recommending that the Council use
enforcement measures to induce compliance with the
orders and requests of the tribunals.

On recommendation 7, the Guiding Principles on
Internal Displacement have been presented to the
Commission on Human Rights, but have no further
intergovemmental approval. The first point, therefore, is
that these principles do not as yet enjoy wide international
acceptability, even though we may not cavil at them. This
being so, simply as a matter of formal procedure, it is
improper to encourage the Security Council to encourage
States to follow these principles, particularly because
internal displacements are problems that are the
responsibility of the States concerned, and matters
primarily within their sovereign jurisdiction.

On recommendation 8, there is no universal
acceptance as yet that the minimum age of recruitment to
the armed forces of States should be 18. Since, in any
case, the maintenance of international peace and security
does not depend on the age at which young men and
women can be drafted into armed forces, there is no role
for the Council here. Nor indeed does the Council have
either the competence or the right to ask Member States
to expedite their negotiations on an optional protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. This is
completely outside the Council's mandate, and a matter
exclusively for the States parties to decide.

We can sympathize with the intent of
recommendation 9 but, again, it has not been thought
through. How, for instance, is anyone to determine
whether combatants recruited by non-State actors are
below the age of 18? Insurgents and terrorists have not
been known in the past to insist on birth certificates being
produced before they recruit to their ranks. If the
language here implies that the Council would
automatically act under Chapter VII, very careful thought
needs to be given to the implications of this
recommendation. The imposition of sanctions under

 

Article 41 follows on the determination by the Council
under Article 39 that there is a threat to the peace or breach
of the peace, or that an act of aggression has taken place.
It would be extremely difficult to argue that the use in
armed conflict of children below the age of 18, however
undesirable, and however unsavoury the non-State actors
who employ them, can fall within the ambit of Article 39.

On recommendation 10, we make the same point as on
earlier recommendations: it is not within the remit of the
Council to ask Member States to ratify an international
instrument. That is the function of the General Assembly.

On recommendation 11, apart from the general
objection that it exceeds the scope of the Council's powers,
there is a further consideration that it is not the Council's
business to concern itself with the protection of all United
Nations and associated personnel. That is a matter that
comes squarely within the remit of the General Assembly;
an invitation from the Security Council is redundant.

Recommendation 12 is completely vague. What is
meant by "deployment in certain cases"? Can certain
symptoms be identified for which preventive peacekeeping
is the cure? If so, these should have been spelt out. We
suspect there are none, and therefore the Council will
continue to take decisions in an ad hoc manner on
situations as they arise. Almost by definition, there can be
no general prescription.

Recommendation 13 implies in part that the Council
has been remiss in doing what it is expected to do under
Chapter VI, and also makes a recommendation that has
little content. What are the "appropriate procedures" that
the Council is expected to recommend? Unless Member
States, including in the Security Council, have a clear idea
of what these should be, they can hardly make an informed
decision on whether these would be appropriate.

On recommendation 14, Security Council working
groups are unlikely either to improve the Council's
understanding of issues or, more importantly, to prevent the
outbreak of violence. For instance, even if such a working
group had been in existence before the massacres took
place in Rwanda, it would have made no material
difference, as the international community did nothing not
because it had not studied the problem in depth, but
because the Security Council lacked the political will to act.
Also, in several volatile situations, permanent members
could have a direct interest or be implicated; by definition,
a Council working group will get nowhere on them. The
only issues on which a working group might be able to
have a broad, academic and dispassionate debate would
be those where the interests of permanent members were
not engaged. The utility of having working groups is
therefore very limited.

Recommendation 15 will damage the integrity of an
extremely important component of the human rights
machinery in the United Nations system. The treaty body
experts and the mechanisms of the Commission on
Human Rights are independent institutions; they are also
supposed to be completely apolitical. The moment their
recommendations start to be used by a body as politicized
as the Security Council, the chances are that these
mechanisms will fall into disrepute, Member States will
be less willing to cooperate with them and, without
adding an iota to the efficiency of the Council, the
functioning of the human rights system will be severely
impaired.

Recommendation 16 makes a perfectly valid point
about the control or closing down of media assets that
foment hate. However, it is completely silent on the
vastly more powerful role that sections of the
international media play in promoting tendentious points
of view, or simply through a concentration on the
dramatic, forcing precipitate, and sometimes ill-judged,
international action. The demonization of target groups by
sections of the international media is a case in point. A
further point, since Council action is being urged, is what
is meant by "appropriate measures"? Does this include,
for instance, the use of military action?

Recommendation 18 would have the Council
demand access, which is not automatic under international
law. As we reminded the Council in February, there is no
automatic right of access under the Geneva Conventions.
Also, in August, the Subcommission on the Promotion
and Protection of Human Rights adopted a resolution
emphasizing that the so-called duty and right of
humanitarian intervention is juridically totally unfounded
under current international law. The second half of this
recommendation, again threatening the use of sanctions,
violates Charter provisions for the same reasons as
recommendation 9.

Recommendation 19 would mean that the right of
humanitarian access - which itself, as I have just said,
is not one sanctioned by international law - would
extend not just to a particular State, but also to
neighbouring States through which assistance would be
delivered. Therefore, the sovereignty of a multiplicity of
States would be automatically diluted to establish a right

 

of humanitarian intervention which does not exist in
international law. The even more extraordinary aspect of
this recommendation is that the Security Council is asked
to urge the States neighbouring a particular country to bring
to the Council's notice, as a matter affecting peace and
security, any issue that might threaten the right of civilians
to assistance. This means that even if there is no threat to
peace and security, such a threat could be manufactured in
the complaint, or that the complaint in itself would be
considered proof that such a threat exists. This would
automatically sow dissension between neighbours, and
undermine regional peace. As a matter of procedure, it
would call into question the sovereign right of nation-States
to make decisions on matters which they consider to be a
threat to peace and security in their region, by laying down
parameters which are arbitrary and ill-defined.

On sanctions, the subject of recommendations 22 to
25, our views have been stated before. We believe that
sanctions are by definition a blunt instrument; whether they
are used indiscriminately, or on particularly painful parts of
the anatomy, the effect is largely the same. Nevertheless,
we entirely support the need for the Council to be much
more selective and cautious in the use of sanctions, for the
Council to take a close look at the effects that sanctions
have had on the civilian populations of the countries where
these have been in effect for some time, and to have it put
in place automatic mechanisms for relief to third countries
affected by sanctions.

On recommendations 28 and 29, there should be an
awareness by now that the Council mandates peacekeeping
operations, but does not have the responsibility under the
Charter to strengthen the Organization's capacity to do
anything. That is squarely a matter for the General
Assembly, and these requirements of the Secretariat should
be put to the General Assembly through the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.

Recommendations 31 and 32 need further
consideration. It is true that there have been instances
where certain national contingents have not behaved well as
part of United Nations peacekeeping operations. However,
it is another matter to make a general recommendation that
an ombudsman or an ad hoc fact-finding mission should
necessarily be put in place for all peacekeeping operations.
Apart from anything else, when every peacekeeping
operation is strapped for cash, it would be difficult, on
financial grounds alone, to justify these extra institutions.
In recommendation 34, the Council is urged to
confirm that regional organizations have the capacity to
operate according to "international norms and standards".
What are these norms and standards? And how would the
Council set about confirming this, unless deficiencies are
established in practice, or unless the Council does an
elaborate vetting of an organization's capabilities, for
which it has neither the expertise nor the mandate?
Instead, what we would like to see affirmed is the
principle that the role of regional organizations must
strictly conform to Article 53 of the Charter.

Recommendation 35 is again far too sweeping. There
is no indication here that the consent of a Member State
is required before international military observers can be
deployed. The alternative would be the implication that,
wherever internally displaced persons or refugees are to
be found, the Council would automatically act under
Chapter VII and order the deployment of international
military observers, even over the objections of a Member
State. Since observers would need protection, an
international military presence must necessarily be set up
at the same time. The implications of this do not have to
be spelt out.

The import of recommendation 36 is difficult to
understand. How is it the Council's business to mobilize
international support for national security forces? Apart
from anything else, what, in practical terms, does the
Secretariat wish the Council to do?

The same question arises from recommendation 37.
The location or relocation of camps is primarily the
business of the country concerned, and among
international organizations, that of the High Commissioner
for Refugees. How, in practical terms, is the Security
Council to mobilize international support for the
relocation of camps?

Before I end, I will draw attention to only two of
several lacunae in the analysis of the problem in the
report. The basic point has not been made that civilians
are at threat in armed conflict, and have been throughout
this century, because of the concepts of total war
introduced during the First and Second World Wars, and
which continue to form part of the strategic doctrines of
the most powerful military States. Unless that basic
problem is addressed, civilians will continue to be at
threat in armed conflict. We had also made the point in
our earlier intervention, and I will simply recall it here
without belabouring it, that, as long as the principal
nuclear-weapon States continue to predicate their security
on the use of nuclear weapons, even against non-nuclear
threats, the safety of civilians cannot be secure.
 

I have spoken at length. but, apart from the
recommendations, not on the other sections of the report.
We have given our responses to each recommendation and
not merely generalized comments, for the sake of clarity,
believing this to be the more practical approach and not in

a spirit of critique. We respect and .share the sense of
concern and the motivation to alleviate suffering and
wrong which motivates the report. The subject of the
report is indeed a very grave challenge before the world
community. I have concentrated on the recommendations
because these are the elements on which the Council is
invited to act. These require much deeper thought and
consideration, including in the General Assembly and
other forums, and we would strongly urge the Council to
regard them as a contribution to further reflection. rather
than as a basis for action.

