Mrs. Yade (France) (spoke in French): On behalf
of France, I would of course like to join my colleagues
in expressing to China and Myanmar our sadness at the
humanitarian catastrophes they are currently
experiencing.

Turning to our meeting today, I should like to
warmly thank Mr. Miliband and the United Kingdom
for presiding over the Council today and for having
taken the initiative to organize this public debate on
post-conflict peacebuilding. Post-conflict
peacebuilding is today at the centre of the international
community's concerns, and especially those of the
Security Council.

During the crucial post-conflict stage, it behooves
the international community to support still-precarious
national institutions and enable them to meet the basic
needs of the population. Of course the holding of
elections is often a crucial and necessary stage for a
country's return to peace, stability and democracy. Let
us acknowledge, however, that that is not sufficient in
itself. Unfortunately, we have before us some very
worrying examples, whether in Timor-Leste or Haiti.

So what answers can we propose to meet those
new challenges?

We must work to strengthen the international
abilities of the United Nations to act during every stage
of a crisis, from the threat of conflict through to
reconstruction via peacekeeping and stabilization. That
is a vision and a commitment that we share with the
United Kingdom, as was reiterated by the President of
the Republic and Prime Minister Gordon Brown during
the Franco-British summit on 27 March. To that end we
wish to act along four axes, without prejudice to the
positions of the European Union (EU), which will soon
be set out in the statement by Slovenia, with which
France is in complete solidarity.

First, we have to strengthen the cohesiveness of
the international community's interventions in post-
conflict phases by integrating its various dimensions -
political, security, humanitarian and development. In
Afghanistan, for example, the entire international
community is convinced of the need to implement a
comprehensive civilian and military strategy. That is
the thrust of resolution 1806 (2008), which has
entrusted the Secretary-General's new Special
Representative with a mission of coordinating the
international community's effort, which includes these
two aspects.

The Peacebuilding Commission is the first effort
to improve the cohesiveness of the international
community's actions. We believe that improvement of
the Commission's working methods is desirable to
enable it to meet that objective.

Secondly, we must also step up our actions in
certain essential aspects of stabilization. Among the
major issues - promoting the rule of law, setting up an
effective and independent justice system and
developing good governance - security sector reform
is an indispensable, often crucial stage. United Nations
endeavours in this field must be encouraged. The
Security Council did so on 12 May (see S/PV5889 and S/PV5890). I wish to renew France's support for the
Secretary-General's work in defining the
Organization's approach to security sector reform.
I also wish to underscore the importance of
combating impunity, which is the main condition for a
genuine reconciliation, without which no lasting peace
or development is possible. France was a sponsor of
resolution 1593 (2005), which referred the situation in
Darfur to the International Criminal Court. It was also
a French expert who elaborated the main United
Nations guidelines for the fight against impunity.

Therefore it is natural for us to support the national
processes begun in Burundi, Mauritania and Togo in
that sense. We will continue to resolutely support the
action of international criminal justice - especially
the International Criminal Court, whose rulings must
be carried out.

The third axis - one which is close to my heart -
is the promotion of and respect for human rights in
societies emerging from crisis. There can be no long-
term peace, no long-term security or no long-term
development if civil and political rights, as well as
economic, social and cultural rights, are trampled
underfoot. How can a State hope to engage in
reconstruction without harnessing the energy,
inventiveness and spirit of enterprise of its people,
without guaranteeing freedom of expression and
assembly, which would enable them to fully express
their potential?

How can we hope to rebuild a stable and
democratic society if the right to education, whether
universal primary education or access to education for
women, is not respected? How can one rebuild a
society whose productive forces have been decimated
by pandemics, or where women are marginalized?

That is why France cherishes the hope of seeing
regulated and equitable globalization, and why we
fight the scourge of child soldiers. It is why France has
set up a forum to follow up the Paris Commitments to
facilitate the financing of programmes for the social
reinsertion of former child soldiers. We should have a
long-term commitment in that regard. It is why it is
also indispensable to strengthen the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, in all its aspects. We must do that both to
combat sexual violence and the impunity that too many
perpetrators of those unbearable acts still enjoy, and to
guarantee the role of women in any peace or
reconstruction process.

Finally, France intends to back United Nations
action in the field of post-conflict stabilization by
mobilizing the capacities of the European Union.
Generally speaking, we support the development of the
potential of regional organizations, including the
African Union, in security questions. We especially
wish to develop cooperation between the EU and the
United Nations in those areas. The EU has a broad set
of instruments and expertise that can be made available
to the United Nations. That is true of missions of the
European Security and Defence Policy in the fields of
security sector reform in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in Guinea-Bissau, the rule of law in Iraq
or Georgia, or police in Afghanistan and Bosnia.

The development of partnership between the
United Nations and the EU on security issues in the
broad sense will thus be a priority of the French
presidency of the EU, and we intend to work on that.

