Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to warmly
welcome Presidents Theodor Meron and Carmel Agius
and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz. I thank them for
their comprehensive briefings. Let me also express our
support for their professional and dedicated service.
I also wish to thank Ambassador Elbio Rosselli of
Uruguay for his work as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals.

When, in early 19905, the Security Council created
two ad hoc Tribunals to try alleged perpetrators of
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and other
serious violations of international humanitarian law,
they found themselves in largely unchartered waters.
The Tribunals faced countless challenges, including
the need to further develop international criminal
jurisprudence, ensure compliance with international
human rights standards to undergird legitimacy and
credibility, address such issues as prosecuting senior
officials and gathering evidence for crimes that
had occurred hundreds, or even thousands, of miles
away, and many others. Yet the achievements of the
Tribunals in the fight against impunity and delivering
justice to Victims are remarkable. And we can say with
confidence that they succeeded in accomplishing their
mandates and in paving the way for a major change in
the functioning of the international justice system.

We welcome the closure of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda,on 31 December 2015, and the
take over by the Residual Mechanism for International
Criminal Tribunals of all its files. The International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) is
also on its way to concluding its functions. We hail the
tremendous work both institutions have accomplished
and their invaluable contribution to the development of
international criminal law.

We note with satisfaction the ICTY's significant
progress in completing its work during the reporting
period by delivering a number ofjudgments, including
the recent conclusion of the trial of Radovan Karadzic.
That decision is clear evidence that those violating
principles of international humanitarian law will be
brought to justice sooner or later.

The number of concluded proceedings by the
ICTY - 151 out of 161 - is a confirmation of the
efficiency of the Tribunal. Taking into account that by
the end of June 2016 only two trials and one appeal case
will remain pending, we would like express our gratitude
to staff members of the Tribunal for their hard work and
dedication. In this context, we are concerned over staff
attrition, as noted by the President of the ICTY in his
report (S/2016/454, annex), and acknowledge the efforts
of the Tribunal to resolve this issue. This problem is
expected to become acute as the Tribunal approaches
the end of its mandate. We therefore encourage the
Tribunal to maintain all measures to minimize the
impact of this challenging situation on the ability to
deliver justice. We support the efforts of the Tribunal to
implement its completion strategy and follow a timeline
to finish its judicial work by the end of 2017.

We recognize the importance of regional and
State cooperation to ensure that those responsible
for crimes are held accountable, and we support the
activities of the Office of the Prosecutor in this regard.
At the same time, we are concerned about the failure
to execute arrest warrants and transfer three indictees
to the Tribunal's custody, in violation of international
obligations to cooperate with the Tribunal. The issue
of regional cooperation, as well as existing challenges
with respect to national prosecutions of war crimes,
require special attention and monitoring by the Office
of the Prosecutor.

As to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, we note that it has assumed
responsibility for a number of functions of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
ICTY, including with regard to a range of judicial
activities, the enforcement of sentences, the protection
of Victims and witnesses, and the management of
archives. One of the main tasks now is to ensure the
smooth transition of ICTY'S remaining functions. We
support the work ofthe Mechanism in taking measures to
improve operations and working methods and to ensure
flexibility in staff assignment. The establishment ofthe
Tribunals was a huge step forward in the fight against
impunity. Their knowledge and expertise should not be
wasted but used in the handling of human rights crimes
cases at the national and international levels. The
Tribunals' archives should be widely accessible. The
lessons of the Tribunals should also be used to increase
the capacity of national courts.

