Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the presidency for having convened today's
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their briefings.

This year is the one hundredth anniversary of the
outbreak of the First World War, whose destruction
and extremely high costs, in both human lives and
material damages, led to the creation of the League
of Nations - an innovative attempt to put an end,
through the establishment of a multilateral body, to
wars between States. Fortunately, its failure to prevent
the Second World War did not end the determination of
the international community to work to promote peace
through the establishment of the United Nations.

Since then, the nature of conflicts has changed
deeply. We are now in an era dominated by internal
conflicts, an era where there are serious violations of
human rights, including genocide. However, something
has not changed, namely, the fact that conflicts can
be avoided. In the vast majority of cases, prior to the
outbreak of a conflict there are clear indications that
should serve as an early warning. Unfortunately,
the international community and the Council have,
in many cases, shown themselves unable either to
recognize those early signs in time or to act decisively
in preventing the conflict.

The multiplication of conflicts has left the
international community and the Council with limited
political and economic resources to effectively tackle
the challenges to international peace and security.
Likewise, we have witnessed the proliferation of
humanitarian crises that are increasingly alarming.
As a result of those conflicts, there has been a certain
reduction in the financing of efforts in the sphere of
humanitarian assistance, which seems to be structural
and not to depend on the situational crisis that is being
dealt with. That scenario means that we must think
seriously about the conflict-prevention role of the
Council, so that it can comply with its obligations in
the maintenance of international peace and security.

The fundamental principle of sovereignty gives
rise to the comptetence and obligation of States to
peacefully resolve international disputes, as established
by Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as the internal conflicts that affect
them, by tackling the root causes of those conflicts.
The action taken by the Security Council applies only
to those situations that threaten international peace
and security, and should avoid any interference in the
internal affairs of States. The Security Council must
focus its conflict-prevention efforts in a coordinated
fashion, and in cooperation with other United Nations
bodies and regional and subregional bodies, as well as
with other agencies that focus their efforts on conflict-
prevention and sustainable development. An undeniable
link exists between the root causes of poverty and
inequity and conflicts at the inter-State and intra-State
levels.
The international community must focus on
addressing such causes through an approach that takes
into account the eradication of poverty and sustainable
development and promotes a comprehensive approach,
one that addresses the basic causes of the problem and
avoids treating the development agenda solely in terms
of security.

We also have to tackle the conditions that lead to the
expansion of terrorism, an element that is increasingly
influential in many conflict situations. The Charter of
the United Nations gives the Security Council a variety
of tools, namely, those of mediation, conciliation,
arbitration and judicial adjudication, which could be
used in conflict settlement. Likewise, we have seen
the effectiveness of the roles played by the Secretary-
General through his good offices and through his
special envoys and special representatives, as well as
by the regional United Nations offices. We believe
that it is extremely important that resolution 2171
(2014), which we adopted today, should encourage the
Secretary-General to continue to use his good offices
in order to facilitate and bring about comprehensive
agreements. We hope the renewal of that commitment
by the Security Council will be reflected in facts on the
ground.

Argentina believes that the Council must bear
in mind, among other things, that the fights against
impunity and for justice are factors that prevent conflict
and arms trafficking. The fight against impunity is
something that prevents conflicts. It make a society
stronger, it strengthens democracy, and in that context,
the International Criminal Court certainly is the most
important factor in international diplomacy and at
the centre of the international justice system. But we
must have an adequate regulation of the transfer of
conventional weapons. We cannot expect the work of
the Council in maintaining international peace and
security to be effective if, at the same time, we allow
Member States to provide weapons to parties to a
conflict.

Lastly, the dimension of conflict-prevention must
form part of the work of the Council in the context of
current international politics. The Council must renew
its commitment to tackle the prevention of armed
conflicts, and the States that make up the Council
must also show a strong political will to use the tools
at the Council's disposal and a true commitment to
multilateralism, thereby overcoming the divisions that
often separate us, divisions which, with regard to some
agenda items, prevent the Council from acting. The cost
of failure is, unfortunately, known to everyone. Both
ethically and politically the international community is
not in a position to continue in this fashion.

