Ms. Jarbussynova (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting, which gives us an opportunity to share
our views on a subject of the utmost importance.
The fight against international terrorism has
become a matter of the highest priority since
11 September 2001. The immediate reaction of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council in the
days that followed the terrorist attacks confirmed the
Organization's strong determination to put its
legitimacy behind effective international action. The
Security Council adopted resolution 1373 (2001),
which tackled terrorism in an unprecedented manner
and upgraded the capability of the international
community to face a new global threat.

Since then, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) has stood at the forefront of the fight against
terrorism. We should like to express our appreciation to
the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
Ambassador Sir Jeremy Greenstock, for his leadership
in steering the work of the Committee. Our thanks go
also to the independent experts for their dedicated
work. The fruitful activities of the CTC and of Member
States aimed at implementing resolution 1373 (2001)
have led to the elimination of numerous terrorist cells
and of the channels of their financial support.

According to information provided by the CTC,
more than 172 national reports were received in the
first round of reporting and 83 reports have been
received in the second round. My Government, fully
committed to implementing resolution 1373 (2001),
has submitted two reports to the Committee thus far
and has engaged in dialogue with the CTC on issues
related to that resolution.

We shall continue to cooperate with the CTC, and
we expect from the Committee more practical results
with regard to eliminating the breeding ground for new
terrorist attacks. That breeding ground, we believe, still
exists in Afghanistan, and it threatens international
peace and security. Resolution 1373 (2001) has set out
a road map for eliminating terrorism, and therefore it is
important that the CTC strengthen its efforts in the
search for those who provide financing and specialized
technical support for terrorists. The United Nations has
the significant task of monitoring the resolution's
implementation through the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee.

Kazakhstan has always spoken out against
terrorism, and it has been actively engaged in
developing a system for countering terrorism at the
regional and international levels. A number of bilateral
and multilateral agreements have been concluded,
including the Tashkent Agreement among four Central
Asian States on joint action to fight terrorism, political
and religious extremism, transnational organized crime
and other factors threatening the stability and security
of the parties; and the Shanghai Convention on
Combating Terrorism, Separatism and Extremism,
signed by member States of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization. Kazakhstan contributed to the
establishment of the Commonwealth of Independent
States Anti-Terrorist Centre, and a similar mechanism
is currently being established within the framework of
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. In addition,
Kazakhstan has concluded bilateral cooperation
agreements with numerous countries on combating
terrorism and international organized crime, and now it
is cooperating actively with other States in the
prevention, identification and suppression of acts
definable as terrorist acts, by exchanging information
and by taking steps to combat the financing of
terrorism and the supplying of weapons and
ammunition to terrorists.

Kazakhstan is reconsidering the international
instruments on terrorism with a view to becoming a
party to them. On 2 October this year, Kazakhstan
ratified the 1999 International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. Now we are
in the process of ratifying the 1997 International
Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings.
In June this year, the first summit meeting of the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building
Measures in Asia (CICA) was convened in Almaty.
The adoption at the summit meeting of the final
documents, of the Almaty Act and of the CICA
Declaration on Eliminating Terrorism has had
extraordinary significance. The documents
unconditionally and unequivocally condemn terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, as well as any
support for or acquiescence to it and the failure to
directly condemn it. They declare the determination of
CICA member States to cooperate on a bilateral and a
multilateral basis to combat terrorism, including its
possible sources. The participants in the process will
unite their efforts so as not to allow terrorism in any
form to be organized, assisted or financed from the
territory of any State, nor to allow terrorists to be
provided safe haven.

In conclusion, I should like to refer to the
statement of the Secretary-General before the Security
Council meeting held on the first anniversary of the 11
September 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States:

"The past year has also given us hope that
terrorism can be defeated if the international
community summons the will to unite in a broad
coalition. As the work of this Council has shown,
the United Nations remains uniquely positioned
to serve as the forum for that coalition, and for
the development of those steps that Governments
must now take - separately and together - to
combat terrorism on a global scale." (S/PV.4607, p- 2)

