Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): The first Security
Council resolution calling for the disarmament of Iraq,
resolution 687 (1991), was passed on 3 April 1991. The
most recent Council resolution on Iraqi disarmament,
resolution 1441 (2002), was adopted unanimously on 8
November 2002. Throughout this 12-year period, we
hoped that Iraq would be disarmed peacefully. Sadly,
this goal was not achieved.

Like most members of the United Nations
community, we too hoped that war could be avoided.
As the Secretary-General said on 17 March 2003,

"War is always a catastrophe - it leads to major
human tragedy. Lots of people are going to be
uprooted, displaced from their homes, and
nobody wanted that. And this is why we had
hoped that the Iraqi leadership would have
cooperated fully and would have been able to do
this without resort to use of force."

We deeply regret that the Government of Iraq
chose not to take the final opportunity afforded it under
resolution 1441 (2002), which was adopted
unanimously, to fully comply with its disarmament
obligations or face serious consequences. The people
of Iraq, who have already suffered greatly from their
Government's failure to comply with its disarmament
obligations over the past 12 years, will suffer the most
from this conflict.

Like many Members, we would have preferred
that the Security Council had again explicitly
authorized military action to disarm Iraq. But the onus
was always on Iraq to avoid a war. Given Iraq's long
history of flouting Security Council resolutions,
Singapore's view was that the Council's inability to
reach a new consensus could not be taken as a reason
for inaction to disarm Iraq.

We cannot turn the clock back. We can only look
ahead. We have to address the immediate challenges in
Iraq, and we have to look for lasting solutions. We note
that the members of the Security Council have
struggled hard to achieve consensus on this issue. We
hope that the Council will soon recover its unity on the
subject, for the international community expects a great
deal from it. As the Secretary-General said only a few
hours ago, "the Council, which has now had Iraq on its
agenda for 12 long years, must rediscover its unity of
purpose".

The immediate challenge is the humanitarian
challenge. Here we would like to make four points.
First, the oil for food programme must be restarted as
soon as possible. Sixty per cent of the Iraqi population
is dependent on food rations procured under the
auspices of the programme. The World Food
Programme has estimated that in the first four weeks of
this conflict, 2.1 million people may need emergency
assistance. If the conflict becomes protracted, the
number of people needing assistance will undoubtedly
use

We therefore support the Secretary-General's
proposals in his letter of 19 March 2003 to the
President of the Security Council, and we hope that the
Council will be able to reach agreement soon on a
resolution that will allow the resumption of the oil for
food programme to meet the humanitarian needs of the
Iraqi people, both during and after the hostilities. In
that regard, we are encouraged by the reports we have
heard of the progress made in this morning's informal
consultations.

Secondly, regardless of the duration or outcome
of the conflict, emergency relief must begin
immediately, with priority given to the worst-affected
areas. We are particularly concerned about reports from
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
that civilians in the city of Basra may be facing a
humanitarian disaster. Urgent measures must be taken
to restore basic utilities to the population there as soon
as possible. We hope that international humanitarian
organizations, including the ICRC, will be able to
deploy their staff on the ground as soon as possible.
Thirdly, we support the Secretary-General's call
for both sides involved in this conflict to respect
international humanitarian law. We believe that these
obligations are clear. Both sides have a responsibility
to ensure that they are fulfilled.

Fourthly, we are encouraged by the pledges that
many countries have already made in support of an
international reconstruction programme in Iraq.
However, a more pressing concern is the provision of
funding for humanitarian relief operations. As the
Secretary-General noted in his statement to the
Security Council last week, the United Nations appeal
for funds currently faces a severe shortfall of nearly
$90 million.

Singapore is prepared to do its part, within our
limited means, to contribute to any such international
humanitarian relief effort. In response to an appeal by
the Singapore Red Cross Society for contributions to a
fund to help refugees and victims of the war in Iraq, the
Government of Singapore has contributed almost half a
million Singapore dollars to provide a quick start for
the fund. We have also appealed to our citizens to
contribute to it.

Finally, we hope that, as soon as the war is over,
the international community will come together again
to relieve the suffering of the Iraqi people, to
rehabilitate their society, to reconstruct their
infrastructure and to pave the way for Iraq's
reintegration into the global community. The Security
Council faces severe challenges in the coming months.
We are confident that it will rise to those challenges.

