Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we would like to thank the
United Kingdom for drafting resolution 2444 (2018).
We also welcome the representatives of Djibouti,
Eritrea and Somalia.

The delegation of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
voted in favour of resolution 2444 (2018) in view of the
fresh dynamic that has emerged in the Horn of Africa,
with the exception of the continued threats and potential
atrocities from the terrorist organization Al-Shabaab,
which the resolution also takes into account. My
delegation has been closely following events in the Horn
of Africa since the current six-month period began.
They mark the beginning ofa new reality in the relations
between countries in the region. Ethiopia and Eritrea
have shown that reconciliation is possible, and that it
produces many more benefits between neighbouring
countries than confrontation does. They have reached
significant agreements resolving a long-standing issue
between their States, thereby defusing one of the most
chronic and protracted conflicts in Africa.

Somalia and Eritrea have re-established diplomatic
ties after a long period of rupture, which is a very
significant step forward in their efforts to resolve their
differences. The normalization of relations between
Djibouti and Eritrea began when the Foreign Ministers
of Ethiopia, Somalia and Eritrea travelled to Djibouti,
a commitment that was subsequently confirmed in a
meeting between the Presidents of Eritrea and Djibouti
in Saudi Arabia in September. We realize that the region
must be able to optimize its undeniable potential, and
it is therefore important that the countries of the region
unite their efforts to avoid their common threats,
particularly Al- Shabaab. We ask that outstanding issues
such as those pertaining to prisoners of war and border
matters be tackled in the positive spirit of today's
resolution, and here we are specifically referring to
Eritrea and Djibouti.

In conclusion, peaceful, brotherly coexistence
between States is a crucial factor that must prevail in the
international political arena. It is vital to guaranteeing
the peaceful coexistence in the region that all countries
should foster with a view to ensuring their States'
successful development. That is the new dynamic that
the countries of the Horn of Africa have decided to
embrace under the leadership of Ethiopia and its Prime
Minister, Abiy Ahmed, and that is the spirit of the
resolution we have just adopted.

