Missing Peace: Independent Progress Study on Youth,
Peace and Security. The inclusion of young women
and girls as partners in the Council's work on conflict
prevention and sustaining peace is crucial. Young
women are consistently subsumed into these different
categories, which renders them vulnerable to being left
out. Young women and girls face double discrimination
due to their sex and age, falling between youth-focused
peacebuilding and prevention programmes and women-
targeted peacebuilding interventions. Ensuring the
inclusion, empowerment and systematic engagement
of young women is crucial to the implementation of
resolutions 2250 (2015) and 1325 (2000).

We should not let fear drive our decisions but, more
than ever, we need courageous leadership that is not
just responsive but empowering and preventive. My
generation craves greater political space to operate and
drive the desired change. My generation is ready to make
an impact that may not be comprehended but cannot be
denied. My generation is ready to set aside unhealthy
competition and foster collaborative partnerships
within innovative and sustainable resourcing.

Young Africa cannot continue to be ignored as the
most youthful population in the world. Young Africa
deserves a seat at the table and in decision-making
positions to make peace possible. There is no better
time to act than now and there is no better time to
promote genuine youth engagement on this agenda.

In 2013, my cousin, through our family community
and local Government support, started a gym project in
our village because he wanted to make a difference and
inspire the unemployed young people of our community
to believe in themselves and to serve. He realized his
power to bring healing and mend the broken spaces of
our world instead of destroying it. Despite anger and
frustration, the majority of young people are choosing
not to fight back, but to create alternative spaces
for themselves.

That is what young people are asking the Council
to do. We must focus on building - building
communities, building partnerships, building trust,
building dialogues and building resilience. And to build
young people's trust in institutions, we need to reframe
the debate so that they can be as part of the solution,
not the problem. We need to articulate the story of hope
and Africa's leadership for youth. I can find no better
way to end my briefing than citing the words of South
Africa's icon, Steve Biko, who wrote:

"The great powers of the world may have done
wonders in giving the world an industrial and
military look, but the great gift still has to come
from Africa - giving the world a more human face."

That face is young. African young people are
already doing their part in peace and development
because when young people promise, young people
deliver. Now we need the Council to also contribute and
do its part, and to let us co-lead.

