Mr. Al-Dosari (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation would like at the outset to commend the
strenuous efforts that were made so that we might have this
draft resolution in its present form today. Many concerns
raised by members of the Security Council have been dealt
with by the sponsors of the draft resolution, with the result
that the present text, which may be described as more
balanced than before, has emerged.

The draft resolution that we are discussing is one of
the international efforts designed to settle the Kosovo crisis
by peaceful means. It is not rational for the international
community to turn a blind eye to all the Violent actions and
violations that are daily committed in Kosovo resulting in
many innocent civilians falling victim to those acts. The
measures taken by the Belgrade authorities through signing
agreements with regional organizations - on 15 October
with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and
on 16 October with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe - are steps in the right direction.
We hope that these steps will be followed by others that
would give evidence of good intentions. The other steps
that we believe are necessary should be represented by an
immediate ceasefire and halting all the violations that are
being committed daily, as well as the adoption of
appropriate measures to punish war criminals by extraditing
them to the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia so that they can be tried with a view to their
receiving their just punishment.

At the same time, it is necessary that the two parties
should begin a constructive, unconditional dialogue
leading to agreement on all matters and issues that have
yet to be resolved. On the other hand, the question of
displaced persons and refugees is also very pressing. The
Belgrade authorities are duty bound to find the proper
solution for it, by creating a favourable and adequate
environment so that these people can return to their
homes.

The winter season is about to begin and its spells of
frost are fast approaching. There are thousands of
refugees without shelter. Statistics indicate that there are
250,000 refugees, of whom 50,000 had their homes
destroyed, as a result of the recent Violence. We believe
that with a strong and sincere will, it would be possible
for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, in cooperation
with the relevant international organizations and bodies,
to settle this question with the requisite speed.

In conclusion, my delegation hopes that the adoption
of the draft resolution before us will send a clear signal
to all the parties to the conflict to put down their arms
and be guided by the language of reason, logic and
dialogue. In this context, my delegation sponsored the
draft resolution and will vote in favour of it.

