Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Mali, which attaches great importance to
transparency in the work of the Council, would like to
thank you, Madam, for convening this open meeting to
consider the situation in Angola. 1 would also like to
welcome the presence at our discussions of His
Excellency Mr. J 0510 Bernardo de Miranda, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Angola, and thank him for his
statement. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Ibrahim Gambari, Special Adviser of the Secretary-
General for Special Assignments in Africa, for his very
useful update.

In referring to the situation in Angola, I would
like to stress the points that, in my delegation's view,
should be given great importance. The first concerns
the continuation of fighting and the deterioration of the
situation in Angola. We hold Mr. Savimbi and UNITA
responsible for the continuation of the conflict because
of their refusal to discharge their obligations under the
peace agreements, the Lusaka Protocol and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. UNITA persists in
following a logic of war by continuing to attack
innocent civilians and the economic facilities in
Angola. We firmly condemn these actions, and we urge
UNITA to put an end to them immediately.

Another question to which the Security Council
must continue to give great attention is the
humanitarian situation. We fully agree with the appeal
made to all the parties to facilitate the unhindered
provision of emergency assistance to the populations in
the areas of conflict. We have taken due note of the
intention of the Angolan Government to develop a
strategy to solve the problem of persons displaced by
the war.

The question of sanctions directed against UNITA
should continue to draw all our attention. Indeed, as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola quite rightly
recalled a moment ago, the sanctions against UNITA
are not an end in themselves, but a way of urging
UNITA to give up the military option, thus contributing
to reinforcing the peace process in Angola. My
delegation is of the view that the sanctions imposed on
UNITA are appropriate, because they help in a positive
way to reduce its military capacity. This is why we are
in favour of maintaining these sanctions.

We also welcome the positive work done by the
sanctions Committee created pursuant to resolution 864
(1993) and by the Monitoring Mechanism on
Sanctions. We also join in the request made to all
States to strictly implement the sanctions imposed on
UNITA, especially through full cooperation with the
Monitoring Mechanism. In the same vein, we
encourage the recent efforts by States of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) through its ad
hoc committee on the follow-up of the implementation
of the sanctions against UNITA. Mali will continue to
follow this important issue, even after we leave the
Security Council next month.

In spite of the continuation of the conflict
because of UNITA, my delegation continues to place
great hope on prospects for peace in Angola. With this
in View, we welcome the dedication of all parties to the
Lusaka Protocol, which remains the only viable basis
for a peaceful settlement to bring back lasting peace to
Angola.

To this end, we urge UNITA to begin, without
delay, discussions with the Angolan Government in
order to implement the relevant provisions of the
Lusaka Protocol and those of the various Security
Council resolutions and statements. Similarly, we
encourage the Angolan Government to continue
consultations with all the components of Angolan
society, particularly the civil society and religious
groups, to promote the peace process.

In this connection, the four-point peace plan
constitutes a sound basis. We also believe that the
efforts under way for the restoration of the
administration of the State, respect for the rule of law,
protection of human rights and improvement of the
social and economic situation should be continued and
encouraged by the United Nations and the donor
community.

We welcome the democratization process begun
by the Angolan Government, and we encourage the
continuation of consultations under way between the
United Nations and the Angolan Government for the
preparation of elections foreseen for the second half of
the year 2002. Similarly, we reiterate our full support
for the United Nations Office in Angola and for the
efforts of the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Gambari, who is preparing to go on
mission to Angola soon. We fully support the efforts
Ambassador Gambari has made, and we look forward
with interest to a new meeting within the Security
Council when he returns from Angola next month
during the Malian presidency of the Council.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that my
delegation fully supports the presidential statement that
we will adopt following this meeting.

