Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I,
too, would like to thank Ambassador Sardenberg of
Brazil for his report and for his leadership during our
recent visit to Haiti. The Security Council mission to
Haiti was a reaction to the deepening crisis in the
country, a product of a multitude of problems besetting
Haiti and its people over a long period of time.

The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) is the fifth United Nations mission to
Haiti since 1995, four of which were during Aristide's
time. All of them have been rated as prematurely
terminated and superficially successful. This time
around, MINUSTAH should be enabled to make a
difference by adequately stabilizing the country and
laying a foundation for a comprehensive peacebuilding
strategy that addresses the societal crisis in Haiti,
rooted in its history, society and culture.

The entry of MINUSTAH into Haiti was a
significant event, as it brought that country once again
to the centre of international attention. Not only was
MINUSTAH'S entry slow, but some of its resources
had to be diverted to other pressing humanitarian needs
in the country.

After a slow start with deployment and operating
under very difficult circumstances, MINUSTAH is
steadily stabilizing the country. The level of violence is
being contained to bring a modicum of stability in
which the Transitional Government can operate and
relative security to the civilian population. The major
continuing threats to security that need to be addressed
come from elements of the former armed forces and
various armed gangs with different political and
criminal agendas. MINUSTAH is working with a
deficient National Police which needs major reforms,
from recruitment and training to revamping its
operational capacity and professionalization of its work
ethic.

While MINUSTAH's tactical intelligence should
be improved for its stabilizing function, the
Transitional Government needs to show more
commitment to the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme. In a country where
there has been no classical peace agreement and where
there is a culture of owning firearms, the DDR
programme is particularly challenging. The buying
back of guns is not the correct approach; rather,
engaging former members of the military and the
armies of unemployed youth in short-term and long-
term productive social and economic projects may be
more realistic.

The principle of the rule of law has long been
compromised in Haiti, as evidenced by the failure to
bring powerful criminals to justice, the politicization of
the police and the intimidation of judges. Most
important of all, Haiti needs to be set on the path of
economic recovery. Messages of self-reliance and
empowerment are needed at this stage. The role of the
region and of the wider international community in
assisting Haiti would be enhanced by the commitment
of the people to own the process of their development.
The Government should finally be willing to listen to
the genuine concerns of Haitian nationals, including
those in the diaspora. Their opinions will go a long
way towards bringing about an atmosphere of trust and
understanding, which is so essential in the building of
their motherland.

The national dialogue that has begun is essential
for reconciliation and political accommodation. It
should be more inclusive and should continue after the
elections. The opposition must become part of the
mainstream political dialogue. It must also display a
convincing interest in the social and economic
advancement of the Haitian people. At the moment, the
opposition reflects a large number of fractured and
superficially united political parties. They have chosen
to be obstructive at a time when a sizeable part of the
population is willing to be part of the dialogue and to
participate in the coming elections.
The elections in Haiti will be an essential starting
point for a new political dispensation in the country.
They need to be well prepared and carried out within
the agreed time frame. The current political momentum
towards the elections should be maintained. As
important as security is now, during the elections and
after the elections, voters need to be motivated to see
promise in the future of their country.

Employment-generating projects should be
initiated as part of the stabilization effort and as a
foundation for the reconstruction effort in the post-
election period. What is required is coordinated
disbursement of the pledges already on paper under the
Interim Cooperation Framework. The donor
community should pay particular attention to this
important requirement for Haiti. The recent
international conference held in Cayenne offered great
promise. The pledges made should be disbursed to
finance some quick-win projects in this interim period
in order to sustain the political tempo towards the
elections and beyond them.

It should be stressed once again that poverty has
been the root cause of instability in Haiti. Conditions
should be put in place to create a political climate that
inspires the confidence of future investors in Haiti.
Public investment in essential sectors now would not
only respond to the most urgent needs of the
population, but also meet infrastructural requirements
for future investors. Road-building, electricity
generation and environmental restoration are areas that
require immediate attention.

In conclusion, in the current peacekeeping
mission, there are ample opportunities to sow the seeds
for a sustainable peacebuilding phase. The case for
establishing a Peacebuilding Commission to steer Haiti
through the next phase could not be stronger.

