Mr. Ngo Duc Thang (Viet Nam): At this crucial
stage in the consideration of the Iraqi issue, I would
like to reiterate our country's position that this crisis
can be resolved through political and peaceful means,
in conformity with the United Nations Charter,
international law and the prevailing aspiration of
peace-loving peoples all over the world. Such a
solution calls for the utmost effort to be made in order
to avert war and to maintain peace, security and
stability in the world.

We believe that the option of finding political and
diplomatic solutions to the question of Iraq has not
been fully exhausted. Therefore, the cooperation of all
concerned parties in the search for a peaceful
settlement should be encouraged, and all diplomatic
initiatives to this end should be given serious
consideration.

Viet Nam welcomes the results of the work of the
United Nations inspectors in Iraq. Last Friday's
briefing, at which quarterly reports were presented by
Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, showed that very
encouraging progress is being made in the inspection
process in Iraq, and that Iraq has demonstrated more
active cooperation. There has been real progress in the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Iraq has informed the inspectors about its
Al Samoud missiles, and it has begun to destroy them
within the prescribed time frame set by Mr. Blix.

This positive development shows that a peaceful
settlement is possible and that there is a real alternative
to war. Regarding Iraq's nuclear potential, Mr.
ElBaradei has also confirmed that great progress has
been made; and that, as accounts presented by Iraq are
plausible and verifiable and cooperation with the
inspections is good, the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) is confident about reaching final
conclusions soon.

Iraq has also announced the presentation of a
comprehensive report on outstanding issues in the field
of biological and chemical weapons. Given the current
situation and the ongoing progress, we share the View
that there is no need for a second resolution and that
the inspections should continue as long as they can
yield viable results.

We also believe that the inspections cannot go on
forever. With this in mind, the inspectors should be
asked by the Council to present, for the Council's
consideration, a list of criteria to determine Iraq's
cooperation, or a list of specified and prioritized tasks
that Iraq should accomplish within a reasonable time
frame. In this regard, we welcome all proposals to set
benchmarks for Iraq's cooperation, and we call on the
Security Council to give more serious consideration to
the proposals presented by France, Russia and
Germany in their memorandum to the Security Council
of 24 February 2003.

The Government of Viet Nam continues to
believe that there is still a chance for a peaceful
solution to the Iraqi crisis and therefore strongly
appeals to the Security Council and all parties involved
to do all they can to avert war. By working together
and acting together on the basis of the relevant United
Nations resolutions, we will strengthen the credibility
and relevance of the United Nations and that of the
Security Council in the fulfilment of its mandate of
maintaining international peace and security.

