Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I would like first to thank the Secretary-General and Rosemary DiCarlo for their briefings on the unfolding situation in north- western Syria. Let me begin by stating that there can be no military solution to the conflict in Syria. As with any conflict, in the end all sides must come to the table to negotiate a long-term, peaceful settlement for the benefit of all. Syria is no exception. South Africa is deeply concerned at the escalation of violence in north-western Syria and the further deterioration of the situation. It is essential for all parties to exercise the utmost restraint in order to prevent the further inflammation of tensions. We support the Secretary-General in his call for an immediate ceasefire and for the parties to step back from the edge of direct military confrontation. All parties must adhere to their obligations under international human rights and internationalhumanitarian law, particularly with regard to the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure. As we have stated in the Council previously, the increase in violence has a devastating knock-on effect on the humanitarian situation. We cannot expect innocent civilians in the region to endure any further hardship or threats to their safety. The Council must be united in calling for an immediate cessation of hostilities in Syria, for all sides to exercise maximum restraint so as to prevent a further escalation of hostilities, and for the parties to adhere to their international obligations under international humanitarian law, particularly with regard to the protection of civilians South Africa reiterates its position that the only way forward is an inclusive Syrian-led and Syrian-owned dialogue aimed at achieving a political solution that is reflective of the will of the Syrian people, based on the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015). The violence must stop and negotiations must begin. We hope that the ongoing discussions between Russia and Turkey will bear fruit.
