Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): Today the
Security Council is extending the authorization for the
multinational Stabilization Force (SFOR) and the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), including the International Police Task Force
(IPTF). In so doing, the Council once again reaffirms the
international community's commitment to help build a
lasting peace in the former Yugoslavia.

In the last two years, SFOR and UNMIBH have been
critical to the implementation of the long-term process
agreed by the parties in the Dayton/Paris accords. Today,
war is a receding memory, but the peace remains fragile.
SFOR and IPTF continue to provide the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina with the security and confidence they need
to move forward in the difficult tasks which still lie ahead.

My Government would like to state once again its
appreciation to the men and women who have served with
SFOR and UNMIBH and to the Governments which have
cooperated to make these operations successful. The United
States also expresses its appreciation to the High
Representative and his colleagues, as well as the
representatives of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. We also recognize the critical role
of the non-governmental organizations and private
individuals who are working to consolidate the peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and throughout the region.

Much work remains, however, and this will take time.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization has adopted a series
of benchmarks to measure progress in the overall
implementation of the Peace Agreement. Meeting the
benchmarks will permit progressive reductions in the size
and profile of the Force.

We reiterate that the primary responsibility for the
implementation of the Peace Agreement rests with the
parties themselves. Bosnia and Herzegovina must take
responsibility for its future and prepare to stand on its
own. We call on all the parties to the Peace Agreement to
redouble their efforts to implement the Agreement and
abandon patterns of procrastination, obstructionism and
minimal compliance with Dayton. Full cooperation with
the International Tribunal, the return of refugees and the
strengthening of joint institutions are key.

Despite problems, there are hopeful signs. This is
especially true since the election of moderate leadership
in the Republika Srpska. The political and economic
influence of indicted war criminals in the Republika
Srpska have been significantly reduced, and the State-run
media have been restructured. The local police are now
cooperating with IPTF restructuring and reform
programmes, matching the progress already achieved in
restructuring the Federation police forces. In Bosnia and
Herzegovina, police restructuring and training - together
with the issuance of new common licence plates - are
facilitating freedom of movement across the inter-entity
boundary line. There is a new Bosnian flag, and a new
common passport has been issued. A provisional currency
will begin to circulate very soon.

Since the war ended, over 400,000 refugees and
displaced persons have returned home, and 170,000 of
those returned in 1997 alone. We will continue to press
for accelerated returns of the remaining refugees and
displaced persons, particularly to areas where they are in
the ethnic minority. This process is slow, complex and
often dangerous, but the goal of minority returns can be
achieved.

We particularly welcome the creation within SFOR
of a multinational specialized unit, to be led by Italy,
which will enhance SFOR's ability to support the local
authorities in responding to civil disorder. This, in turn,
will assist in the return of refugees and displaced persons,
as well as in the installation of elected officials.

There have been many achievements in the past
year, particularly the successful holding of municipal
elections and the installation of democratically elected
local officials in all but one of the 136 municipalities. The
nationwide elections scheduled for September 1998
provide an opportunity for the people of Bosnia and

 

Herzegovina to exercise their democratic right to vote in
support of Bosnia's future and to reject the politics of the
past. With new and courageous leadership committed to the
ideals and principles enunciated in Dayton, Bosnia can look
forward to a future of peace and prosperity.

In voting in favour of this draft resolution, the United
States reaffirms its commitment to consolidating peace in
Bosnia and to the international community's efforts to help
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina build a secure and
democratic society.

