Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, Mr. Mahiga, for his briefing, and welcome
President Ahmed.

Somalia stands at a critical moment in its history.
One year ago, Al-Shabaab controlled and terrorized
large swaths of Somalia. Millions were at risk of
starvation, and the country's leaders focused more on
feuding among themselves than on working to improve
the condition of the Somali people. one year ago in
Nairobi, the Security Council delivered a blunt
message to the Transitional Federal Government (TFG)
that it risked losing international support if it did not
get its act together and resolve its differences.

Today, Somalia is in a different and better place,
but significant challenges lie ahead. The mandate of
the Transitional Federal Government comes to an end
in August. Any delay or back sliding in implementing
the transition is totally unacceptable. Somalia and the
wider region cannot afford to revert to the endless
cycles of violence and suffering that have plagued the
country and threatened the region for decades.

There are, encouragingly, signs of promise for the
country and its people. For the first time in a
generation, Somalia has a solid plan for creating a
functional State and the conditions for its
implementation continue to ripen. In the last few
months, the TFG, as well as other roadmap signatories
and the international community, have taken important
steps to implement the road map to end the transition
as defined by the Garoowe principles. A draft
constitution has been circulated to the road map
signatories. Elders have been selected to appoint
delegates to the Constituent Assembly and are meeting
now to do so. The security situation across the country
has also improved. Areas on the outskirts of
Mogadishu and the key cities of Beledweyne, Baidoa
and Jowhar in south-western Somalia have recently
been liberated from Al-Shabaab.
12-33979

The United States commends the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
National Security Forces for their significant military
achievements and security gains. The sacrifices made
by AMISOM. and Somali troops are testament to their
will and dedication to bring peace and stability to
Somalia. Reflecting the improved security situation,
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia has
returned to Mogadishu. And although the humanitarian
situation remains extremely fragile, thanks to the
actions of United Nations humanitarian agencies and
non-governmental organizations and the generosity of
the international community, the famine has
substantially abated.

The unanimous adoption of resolution 2036
(2012) on 22 February, followed by the London
Conference on Somalia, demonstrated the strong and
unified commitment of the international community to
Somalia's future. The United States welcomes the
upcoming second Istanbul Conference on Somalia,
which should push the political transition process
further towards completion.

While Somalis with international support have
made progress, we cannot afford to lose momentum.
Critical and difficult work remains, and the Somali
people will hold the TFG, road map signatories and
other stakeholders accountable for meeting the
transition timetable. As the London Conference
declared in February, the Kampala Accord deadline is
firm. There must be no extension of the TFG mandate
beyond 20 August. The Constituent Assembly should
convene to consider and adopt the interim constitution,
setting the stage for other important steps, including
the appointment of a new, smaller parliament and
indirect elections of a Speaker and President.
Informing Somalis about the draft constitution and the
road map implementation process is fundamental to
their ultimate success. But as the Secretary-General
observes in his report (8/2012/283), approval of the
interim constitution by the Constituent Assembly will
be the beginning, not the end, of the process.

Having noted some of the important progress
achieved since the Security Council visited the region,
let me now turn to the significant challenges ahead for
Somalia.

As we were tragically reminded only two weeks
ago by the suicide attack against a parliamentary
delegation in Dhuusamarreeb and last month by the
suicide bombing at the national theatre, Al-Shabaab
remains a major threat to the stability of Somalia. Its
shocking and ruthless attacks on innocent civilians and
its ongoing ban on 17 humanitarian organizations
demonstrate its total disregard for the Somali people
and its disregard for human life. The United States
condemns all Al-Shabaab terrorist attacks, which kill
Government officials and innocent civilians alike.

Because Al-Shabaab will continue to perpetrate
terrorism and exploit any opening to sow instability
and derail progress in Somalia, it is of paramount
importance to expand security in stabilized areas in
order to prevent Al-Shabaab from regaining a foothold.
It requires AMISOM. to be fully staffed so that it can
fulfil its mandate. The African Union and additional
troop contributors should quickly reach agreement on
AMISOM's concept of operations. Failure to do so will
not only reflect negatively on AMISOM. and the
African Union but, worse, undermine the security of
the Somali people.

Moreover, although Somali national security
forces will figure prominently in expanded AMISOM
operations, they are hampered by supply shortages and
gaps in logistical capacity. Since 2007, the United
States has contributed over $106 million to strengthen
the Somali security sector. We urge all Member States,
especially new donors, to help the Somali people take
the lead in providing for their own security and to
coordinate bilateral support through the Joint Security
Committee of the Transitional Federal Government,
co-chaired by the United Nations and the African
Union.

To ensure lasting stability in Somalia, it is
necessary but not sufficient to continue to pressure
Al-Shabaab and to strengthen national and
international security forces. Criminal activity that
finances terrorism, undermines domestic governance
and distorts the local economy must be addressed as
well. In this regard, the United States strongly supports
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia
and will continue working with international partners
and Somali leaders to end the scourge of piracy.
Similarly, kidnapping for ransom imperils Somalia's
progress and poses an increasing threat to all nations
and their citizens. We must work together to strengthen
law enforcement and other capacities to prevent
hostage-takings and ensure that hostage-takers cannot
obtain ransoms.
9

Finally, although the United Nations declared the
end of the famine in Somalia in February, the
humanitarian situation in southern and central Somalia
remains precarious. More than 2.5 million Somalis still
need emergency assistance. There are more than
980,000 Somali refugees, some of whom have lived in
exile for more than 20 years. We commend Kenya,
Ethiopia, Djibouti, Yemen and other countries in the
region for hosting Somali refugees.

Since 2011, the United States has committed
$1.1 billion to the humanitarian emergency in the Horn
of Africa, including more than $260 million expressly
for Somalia. The international community must do
more to provide immediate life-saving assistance; to
address the long-term needs of refugees, internally
displaced persons and others affected by drought and
conflict; and to build capacity in the region to mitigate
the impact of future shocks that we know will come.
Millions of lives are at stake.

I want to reiterate our strong support for
AMISOM. and our commitment to working with the
international community to help Somalia face these
challenges and realize a brighter future. International
support, however, cannot be taken for granted. During
the next four months, we have a unique opportunity to
ensure that Somalia concludes its transition on time,
but the onus remains on Somalia's leaders to seize this
moment and establish a strong foundation for peace
and stability. The people of Somalia, who have
suffered too long, deserve nothing less.

