Mr. Ybafiez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): The
unanimous adoption of resolution 2254 (2015) opens a
window of opportunity to address through dialogue the
crisis in Syria, one of the most painful conflicts that
we have seen in decades. The main victims of the crisis
are first and foremost the Syrians themselves. Today's
resolution comes too late for the more than 250,000
people who have died in the past five years. We should
not forget that in Syria the most fundamental norms
of international humanitarian law have been - and
continue to be - violated. At the same time, the war in
Syria is a challenge owing to the implications that it has
for the entire region. It triggered the escalation of the
terrorism perpetrated by Daesh, which has become the
main threat to the international community on a global
scale.

As a co-sponsor of the resolution, Spain is well
aware of the attacks in Paris, Beirut, the downing of
a Russian airliner over the Sinai and the attacks in
Ankara. A ceasefire in Syria will allow us to focus on
the political solution to that conflict, while continuing
the fight against terrorism. That is now our priority.

In the coming months, Spain will continue to
actively participate in the coalition against Daesh in
various areas, including the training of Iraqi security
forces. Today's resolution affirms, moreover, the
centrality of the United Nations, and in particular the
Security Council, which can no longer sit idly by in the
face ofa conflict ofthis magnitude. The Vienna process
has been key in bringing together countries with very
different, even antagonistic, views on the conflict
in Syria around the negotiating table. However, the
United Nations should mediate a long-term solution, as
is reflected in the responsibilities set out in resolution
2254 (2015) to the Secretary-General, the team of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and the Security Council itself.

Without the unity of the international community
we would not have come this far. However, the success
or failure of this process will depend mainly on the
Syrians themselves. The challenge is considerable.
After so many years of war, it will be very difficult to
heal the wounds; the temptation to embrace a military
solution will be present at each stage of the process.

Spain has always supported a dialogue without
preconditions in Syria, with the knowledge that the
future will inevitably go through a transition that will
lead to a new political system based on the Geneva
communique' (S/2012/522, annex). We fully support
Special Envoy de Mistura, who has all the qualities
necessary to successfully conduct this exercise.

The implementation of confidence-building
measures in the short term would be a clear sign
of hope. In that regard, we call for the immediate
cessation of indiscriminate attacks against the civilian
population, in particular the use of barrel bombs by the
Government of Syria.

In conclusion, yesterday marked five years since
Mohammed Bouazizi's protest in Tunis, which led to
the Arab Spring. Yesterday in this Chamber we also
adopted resolution 2253 (2015), in which we committed
to take concrete measures to sever the umbilical chord
of Daesh's financing. I trust that the Security Council
will swiftly take a position with the same firmness and
unity in favour of guaranteeing humanitarian assistance
to all Syrians through the most immediate channels and
without any obstacles. Spain is working with Jordan and
New Zealand to achieve the adoption of such a draft
resolution. We will submit for adoption together next
week, and I am sure that all Security Council members
will provide their full support. The involvement of all
the parties will be needed to implement that resolution.

In recent days we have had positive news on Libya
from Morocco. Step by step progress is being made
in Yemen. In Syria we have a long road ahead full of
obstacles, but at least we are taking the most important
step - an indispensable step, in fact - so that armed
clashes give way to diplomacy.

As a member of the Security Council, Spain will
spare no effort in translating the spirit of unity and
consensus into an effective commitment to peace,
security and stability in Syria and in the Middle East
as a whole.

