Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his comprehensive
briefing. Let me also thank Ms. Rajaa Altalli,
Co-Founder and Co-Director of the Center for Civil
Society and Democracy, for her input.

Poland has underlined many times that any
sustainable solution to the conflict in Syria requires
a genuine political transition negotiated by the Syrian
parties within the United Nations-led Geneva process.
We agree with the Special Envoy that the future of
Syria belongs to the Syrian people and them alone.
The work of the Constitutional Committee could be the
beginning of a meaningful process in that regard. We
urge all parties, including the authorities in Damascus,
to engage in good faith in the work ofthe Constitutional
Committee. In that context, let me also underline the
importance of civil society in the process of achieving
sustainable peace and justice in any country.

All parties to the conflict need to engage in
confidence-building measures. In that connection,
let me stress again that the Syrian war has brought
unspeakable suffering to the whole country. Thousands
of people remain in arbitrary detention. Moreover,
thousands remain missing and their relatives deprived of
any information on their fate, as our briefer mentioned.
We call for their release, particularly children, women
and the elderly. Progress in that area would help raise
confidence among the parties and greatly contribute to
the efforts to reach lasting peace in Syria. It is one of
the most important confidence-building measures.

The most vulnerable groups in Syria, including
people with disabilities, the elderly, women and
children, have to be under special protection. In that
regard, as discussed yesterday with the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (see S/PV.8694),
we condemn any attacks on medical facilities and
their personnel anywhere in Syria. International
humanitarian law is crystal clear. It requires all parties
to the conflict to strictly distinguish between civilians
and combatants and to take constant care to spare
civilians in the conduct of military operations.

I want to recall that we fully support the right
to a safe return of Syrian refugees who have fled
their homes. We believe that a durable solution
should guarantee the safe, sustainable, dignified and
voluntary return of Syrians to their country of origin
in accordance with international law and the principle
of non-refoulement. We fear that the conditions for the
voluntary repatriation of Syrian refugees, as defined by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, are not in place. In addition, we reiterate
that we will be ready to assist in the reconstruction
of Syria only when a comprehensive, genuine and
inclusive political transition, negotiated by the Syrian
parties to the conflict on the basis of resolution 2254
(2015) and the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), is firmly under way.

As this is probably the last time that I take the
floor on the subject of Syria in the Chamber during
Poland's term on the Security Council, I would like to
thank Mr. Pedersen for his tireless efforts and assure
him of my country's full support even once it has left
the Council. Allow me also to say that serving in the
Security Council has been an honour, privilege and
unique and enriching opportunity. I would like to thank
my fellow members of the Council for their support,
friendship and excellent cooperation. I would like to
thank the Security Council Affairs Division for its
invaluable assistance. Special thanks also go to the
interpreters, security staff and engineers. We all have
worked incredibly hard over the past two years. I also
thank my colleagues from the Polish Mission for their
support and excellent performance in the Security
Council and pay tribute to their commitment and
dedication. Finally, I wish every success and best of
luck to the incoming members of the Security Council.

