Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting today amid a situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories that can be
described as dangerous and volatile. The last few days
have witnessed and continue to witness a dangerous
Israeli military escalation against the civilian
Palestinian population in Gaza, the West Bank and
other areas of the Palestinian occupied territories.
These events have caused the killing of more than 20
people in the last few days alone as a result of the
relentless shelling and bombardment of Palestinian
towns and villages, as well as the continuation of
extrajudicial killings and the closure of any channels of
communication between the Israeli Government and
the Palestinian Authority and its President.

This situation is deteriorating by the day and is
creating a vicious circle of violence and counter-
violence, resulting in deaths and casualties on both
sides. It signals a humanitarian and political
catastrophe that calls for an effective and swift
response from the Security Council in order to
discharge its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

There is no doubt that the suicide attack that took
place in Tel Aviv this morning, which has resulted in
the deaths of a number of Israelis, reaffirms the need
for the Security Council to intervene immediately in
order to stop this cycle of violence between the two
parties.

The latest escalation in the Palestinian occupied
territories falls within a longstanding policy of
systematic and deliberate practices by Israel against the
Palestinian people. These practices include
strengthening the blockade, isolating Palestinian towns
and villages, restricting the movement of people and
commodities and closing crossing points, as well as
hastening the building and further expansion of the
Israeli settlements and acquiring more Palestinian
lands, and the acquisition of additional land through
the separation wall.

All of these practices have been intensified in the
wake of the results of the Palestinian legislative
elections. The Palestinian people have exercised their
right through a fair and democratic election that we all
called for. Therefore, we all have the duty to respect
those results instead of punishing the Palestinian
people, and not to stop the peace process or to cause
further deterioration of the humanitarian situation of
our brotherly Palestinian people.

The Israeli Government is attempting to exploit
the results of the Palestinian elections by intensifying
its violations against the Palestinian people and to
entrench its occupation of the Palestinian territories
under the pretext that there is no partner with which to
negotiate on the Palestinian side. That attempt requires
a firm stand on the part of the international community.

If the new Palestinian Government has its own
policies, which were accepted by the Palestinian
people, those policies cannot be changed and directed
towards the resumption of the peace process, complete
Israeli withdrawal from the occupied territories and the
establishment of a viable Palestinian State through
unilateral measures or unilateral Israeli withdrawals
that entrench the further occupation of Palestinian
territories. Nor can they be achieved through an
economic blockade of the Palestinian people or by
refusing to provide them with any assistance, or
attempting to break their will through relentless attacks
against them.

Change can come about only through dialogue,
persuasion and the achievement of respect for the
human rights of the Palestinian people, ensuring their
dignity and humanity, as well as the restoration of their
reserved rights, foremost among which is the right to
self-determination and the right to live in their
independent State, side by side with the State of Israel.

At a time when Arab leaders - most recently last
month in Khartoum - have reaffirmed their
commitment to the 2002 Arab peace initiative, which
called for the establishment of normal relations with
Israel in return for Israel's withdrawal from all
occupied Arab territories in Palestine, Syria and
Lebanon, Israel has, sadly, responded by adopting a
policy of unilateral measures, with the aim of forcing
an artificial settlement of the dispute through a
unilateral demarcation of Israel's borders that would
preserve for Israel large portions of Palestinian land in
the West Bank, East Jerusalem, the Jordan River Valley
and the large settlement blocs. Those actions would
deal a death blow to any chances of achieving a just
settlement of the question of Palestine and would
threaten the prospects for achieving peace between
Arab countries and Israel.

The delegation of Egypt once again reaffirms that
any settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict must
be reached through an agreement between the two
parties in a negotiating process. In that context, we call
upon the Israeli Government to enter into direct
negotiations on final-status issues with Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas, without any preconditions
other than the legal terms of reference of the peace
process. Those terms include the Oslo agreements, the
Sharm el-Sheikh accords and the road map. Along with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), General Assembly resolution 194 (III), other
relevant resolutions and the principle of land for peace,
they constitute the only way to achieve our long-
awaited objective.

In conclusion, there is no doubt that the latest
developments in the occupied Palestinian territories
have brought the peace process to the threshold of a
crucial and pivotal decision that will determine its
future and that of the region: either to return to the
negotiating table to achieve a just and comprehensive
peace or to slide into the abyss of violence and
suffering for all peoples of the region without
exception. It is incumbent upon the Security Council to
take immediate measures to put an end to this
miserable situation. In that context, we followed last
week's Security Council negotiations and consultations
to issue a presidential statement calling upon Israel to
put an end to its attacks against the Palestinian people
and to abide by its international obligations. Despite
the failure to date of those attempts, today's events in
Israel - which we condemn, as we condemn Israeli
actions in the occupied Palestinian territory - must
provide an incentive for the Security Council to
discharge its responsibilities and adopt a balanced
statement that breaks the vicious circle of violence and
counter-violence and leads to a resumption of final-
status negotiations with a view to establishing a
Palestinian State.

