Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): Mr. President, permit me
first of all to express my delegation's sincere
congratulations to you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. Under your
guidance which, as in the past, has been characterized by so
much grace, great skill and confidence, the business of the
Council is in very good hands indeed.

I should also like to express appreciation to
Ambassador Kovanda for the especially able manner in
which he guided the Council's work during the month of
April.

May I also, on behalf of my delegation, welcome to
our midst the Foreign Minister of Georgia, His Excellency
Dr. Alexander Chikvaidze.

The latest report of the Secretary-General concerning
the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, dated 1 May 1995
(S/1995/342), indicates, regrettably, that progress in the
peace process has continued to be difficult despite the
important efforts of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia (UNOMIG), the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) and others concerned to mediate peace in the
region. At the political level, the occasional outbursts of
violence, such as occurred in the Ghali region in mid-
March and early April, have critically undermined the
climate of confidence that is necessary for continuing
negotiations between the parties to the conflict. Moreover,
the political talks about the status of Abkhazia which takes
due account of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia have not made the desired progress. In the words
of the Secretary-General,

"The organized repatriation of refugees and displaced
persons to Abkhazia, remains at a standstill"
(S/1995/342, para. 13)

partly because of the objection of

"The Abkhaz side to the speedy return of refugees
and displaced persons." (ibid.)

Nigeria associates itself fully with the ongoing efforts
of the Secretary-General, with the assistance of the Russian
Federation and the support of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), aimed at
achieving a comprehensive political settlement of the
Georgian-Abkhaz conflict. In this connection, we
underline the need, as reflected in the current draft
resolution, for the parties to achieve substantive progress
in the negotiations under the auspices of the United
Nations and to refrain from any unilateral action that
could complicate or hinder an early and comprehensive
settlement.

My delegation believes that the issue of the return of
the refugees and displaced persons is crucial to the
settlement of the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict. The current
situation, in which both the Government of Georgia and
the Abkhaz authorities are unable to guarantee the safety
of the displaced persons and the protection of the
repatriated under the quadripartite agreement of 4 April
1994, is unfortunate and should be reversed. To this end,
it is essential not only that suitable political and security
conditions should be established to encourage the return
of the refugees, but also that, as is reiterated in paragraph
6 of the draft resolution before us, all parties should come
to a quick acceptance of the timetable proposed by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees for voluntary returns.

The cooperation between the United Nations, the
CIS and the OSCE in the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict
augurs well for peacemaking and conflict resolution in the
post-cold-war era and therefore deserves the support of
the international community, which it needs if the desired
goal is to be achieved. Against the background of
Nigeria's own participation in similar subregional United
Nations peace efforts in West Africa, my delegation
understands very well the vital necessity for additional
contributions to be elicited from as many States as
possible in order to support the peace process, for
otherwise that process could be unduly protracted and
difficult to resolve. We call also on the parties to
demonstrate increased flexibility and to negotiate in good
faith as well as to improve their overall cooperation with
UNOMIG and the CIS peace-keeping force.

Finally, my delegation will gladly vote in favour of
the current draft resolution, which extends UNOMIG's
mandate for an additional period of six months, in the
conviction that UNOMIG has a continuing, vital role to
play in the search for peace in Georgia.

 

