Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to begin by associating myself with the
comments to be made subsequently by the Ambassador
of Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union.

I would like to welcome and congratulate the
Chairpersons of the Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions
Committee, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. I thank them for their briefings. I would
also like to welcome Ambassador Baja's role, as well
as his contribution this morning.

Terrorism and the risk of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) falling into terrorist hands remain
ever-present threats - if you like, the ultimate
nightmare. The Security Council, rightly, continues to
put a sustained effort into that area. This morning's
joint briefing is therefore indeed very welcome and
demonstrates the range of ongoing work. Those
Committees, and the work of their experts, share
important common themes. It is worth ensuring that
our work forms a coherent whole-Council effort. For
instance, information submitted to each Committee
must form part of a greater whole. It should amount to
a single database of knowledge that States are sharing
with the Council. Equally, the Council's relationship
with States - through reporting and visits - must be
mutually reinforcing between Committees, and not
confusing to States or wasteful of scarce time and
resources.

There are some clear messages that come out of
the work of each of these Committees, and I think they
are worth emphasizing.

The first is that the fight against terrorism
requires an effort from every Member State. Terrorists
prey upon States in the developing world as much as in
the developed world. They move their money and they
move themselves. They try to acquire the deadly tools
of their trade. They identify weak links. The locations
of recent terrorist atrocities demonstrate that all too
well. Protecting States and individuals must be effected
nationally. A huge amount of progress has been made
in recent years, but we must not let up. The work of the
Council and the Committees provide real assistance.

The second is that the Council recognize that
many States will need help with this effort. It is a long-
term effort requiring changes in domestic legislation
and procedures. We may have be working on it for
some years since the establishment in 1999 of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) and the Counter-Terrorism Committee in 2001.
But we must strengthen the sense of urgency and effort
and ensure that the provisions of those resolutions are
implemented fully by all Member States. There is no
shortcut. Those of us with the ability to do so must
stand ready to help others. Committees are always keen
to hear from States that need assistance, to enable us to
facilitate its provision. The United Kingdom is also
providing bilateral assistance.

The third is that international, regional and
subregional bodies are good places for the
establishment of centres of expertise and advice. Many
international organizations have specialized knowledge
and are already helping States with this challenge. The
Council and its Committees have developed good
working relations with many of those organizations,
enabling the Council to draw on their expertise and
experience in the various aspects of the task in front of
us. All regional organizations should also be building
up their expertise, so that they too can help their
members.

The fourth is that the Committees can fulfil their
monitoring mandates properly only if they receive the
full cooperation of Member States. The required
reports from States form a crucial part of the Council's
information- gathering effort to enable us to monitor the
overall state of the international community's readiness
and ability to tackle terrorism and to help us identify
where we collectively have to do more. We need
information. Without it key parts of the international
architecture to defend against terrorism may never be
implemented. The willingness of Member States to
share information with the Committees is therefore an
earnest of their commitment to the full implementation
of the Security Council's resolutions.

Lastly, a word on the recent General Assembly
debate on freedom from fear. Today's meeting is
exactly about how United Nations Members can help to
put in place the architecture to help their people feel
more safe. The United Kingdom supports the
Secretary-General's proposals to put in place a
comprehensive United Nations strategy against
terrorism to run across the entire United Nations
family. In that context, we welcome the recent adoption
of the International Convention for the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and look for early progress
on the comprehensive convention.

In particular, however, we agree unconditionally
with the Secretary-General's statement that terrorism is
unjustified in any place, at any time and for any reason.
Terrorist acts undermine the causes they purport to
support. There is no plausible justification for acts of
terrorism. We find this to be a simple statement of fact
and unarguable. We hope very much to see heads of
State underline that at the September High-level
Meeting.

