Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2396
(2017), on foreign terrorist fighters. I should like to
particularly thank the United States for having taken
the initiative of submitting the resolution, which very
usefully complements and updates the framework
established three years ago by the adoption of resolution
2178 (2014).

Those same fighters who several years ago went
to Syria and Iraq are today leaving the conflict zone
either to return to their countries of origin or to move
to a third State. In the case of France, as I have already
mentioned, there are currently some 700 French
nationals or residents of France in Syria and Iraq. In
addition to those individuals are hundreds of children
who were taken to the conflict zone by their parents or
were born there. More than half of them are less than
5 years old. With regard to returnees, some 245 adults
have returned to French territory since 2013.

The diverse range of profiles, such as the notably
high number of women and children, the many degrees
of radicalization and the ongoing attraction of the
barbaric Da'esh ideology - which is still too easily
relayed through the Internet - are some of the major
challenges that we must confront. The resolution that
we have just adopted constitutes a new and major step
in our collective mobilization against terrorism. The
resolution effectively and importantly complements
the normative framework defined by the Security
Council for addressing the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters and strengthens the toolbox at our
collective disposal.

More specifically, the resolution calls on Member
States to undertake supplementary measures in many
areas with the support of the United Nations, such
as in information-sharing - with a particular need
to improve the use of INTERPOL tools - border
management, cooperation with the private sector to
prevent the use of the Internet by terrorists, the need to
bring the foreign terrorist fighters to justice - along
with the central issue of gathering evidence - and
measures for reintegration into society, with a particular
focus on children. The resolution - and this is a point
that France has particularly underscored on the basis
of its own experiences - emphasizes on the case of
children who should be taken care of in a targeted
way with appropriate psychological, sociological and
educational support.

In facing a threat of such magnitude, only close
international cooperation with the United Nations and
the relevant regional organizations and the involvement
of civil society will allow us to act effectively. The
Council can be assured of the ongoing commitment to
and total determination of France in this fight.

