The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Kuwait.

At the outset, I welcome the presence of Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and thank him for
participating in this important and historic meeting on
a crucial issue that has occupied the attention of the
international community for the past five decades,
during which we have witnessed ongoing violations of
international humanitarian law through the continued
Israeli occupation of occupied Arab territories. The
occupation has been condemned and denounced in
resolutions of the Security Council that call for it to be
brought to an end. I also thank the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, for his valuable briefing.

We are honoured by the participation of His
Excellency President Mahmoud Abbas of the sisterly
State ofPalestine in today's meeting, under my country's
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
His participation was a valuable opportunity to listen
directly to the protagonist of this just cause and to hear
what the international community must do to honour
its commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations in order to guarantee the
right of peoples to self-determination.

Prior to assuming its non-permanent membership
of the Security Council early this year, the State of
Kuwait pledged to make every possible effort to support
the Palestinian cause as the most important cause for
Arabs and Muslims everywhere and one of the pillars
of Kuwait's foreign policy. We remain firm in our
principled commitment to shouldering the concerns
and meeting the aspirations of the brotherly Palestinian
people to establish an independent State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, by implementing the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

Israel, as the occupying Power, continues to place
obstacles in the way of a process towards a lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. On the basis
of our duty and the common responsibility of Council
members to maintain international peace and security,
we must stress the implementation of the Council's
resolutions, which are binding on all Member States,
in accordance with Article 25 of the Charter of the
United Nations. How can we ignore the fact that the
occupation continues to flout the United Nations and
the relevant resolutions of international legitimacy?
The occupation perpetrates physical violation of
the provisions of international law that mediate
international relations today.

The peace process in the Middle East has witnessed
many milestones and international initiatives that
have resulted in the adoption of many United Nations
resolutions. However, failure to commit to these
resolutions has exacerbated the humanitarian crisis
confronting the defenceless Palestinian people and
increased tensions in the region. That has had an impact
on international security and stability, and we have
witnessed the emergence of other crises in the region
that affectus all, such as extremism and terrorism. These
cannot be tackled without addressing the root cause and
essence of the conflict - the Palestinian question.

We have all witnessed the repercussions of the
recent decision on Jerusalem, which is hindering our
efforts, jeopardizing the peace process and affecting
the balance of the negotiating process. Because we are
confident that the United States plays an important role
in the peace process, we therefore call on it to work
with the international community to compel Israel to
implement the resolutions of international legitimacy
and end its occupation of all Arab and Palestinian
territories, occupied since 4 June 1967, in accordance
with the resolutions of international legitimacy, the
principle of land for peace, the road map, the Arab
Peace Initiative adopted by all Arab countries in Beirut
summit of 2002, through a peaceful resolution that
establishes the State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

I do not exaggerate when I say that the political
will to ensure the full implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) will help achieve that goal, because that
historic resolution reaffirmed the most important legal
principles linked to the Palestinian question, that is, the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force.
Israel, the occupying Power, should strictly honour
its commitments and legal responsibilities under the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Times of War.

In addition to that, the resolution condemns
measures to change the demographic composition,
character and status of the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem. In
resolution 2334 (2016), the Council also condemns
Israeli settlement activity as an illegal, illegitimate and
a blatant violation of international law, recognizing
that it is a major obstacle to achieving the two-State
solution and a comprehensive and lasting peace.
Moreover, resolution 2334 (2016) also states that any
changes in the border lines of 4 June 1967 will not be
recognized by the Security Council, including changes
to the legal and historic status of Jerusalem as one of
the final-status issues.

Regrettably, more than a year has passed since
that historic resolution was adopted, and it still has
not been implemented. Worse yet, when the provisions
of the resolution were violated, we witnessed unusual
record levels of Israeli settlement activity in occupied
Palestinian territory - be it the construction of new
settlements or the expansion of existing ones - and a
blatant violation of resolution 2334 (2016), which led to
the forced displacement of the land-owning Palestinian
families. The State of Kuwait strongly condemns
Israel's illegal and illegitimate policies in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and its
ongoing violations of the inalienable rights of the our
Palestinian brethren people,

I cannot fail to address the humanitarian situation
in the Gaza Strip, which we are following with great
concern, given its dangerous consequences for the lives
of 2 million Palestinians there, restricting the delivery
of basic services, including health services. The
blockade is unjust and we condemn yet again Israel's
inhumane practices, which represent a grave violation
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
The blockade imposed on Gaza is an example of such a
violation. I reaffirm that the State of Kuwait will spare
no effort to stand by our Palestinian brethren people in
all the occupied territories.

The State of Kuwait supports the request of Palestine
to operationalize some international mechanisms, such
as the Quartet, by expanding its membership to include
Arab countries, adding more vitality to its work. We
also support all legal and peaceful steps taken by the
State of Palestine at the national and international levels
to strengthen its sovereignty over Al-Quds Al-Sharif
and the occupied Palestinian territory.

The Palestinian people expect the United Nations,
and the Security Council in particular, to honour their
commitment to maintaining international peace and
security. We reiterate our solidarity with and stand
by the Palestinian people in defending their just cause
and legitimate rights, including their historic and
unshakable right to Jerusalem, as guaranteed by the
relevant resolutions of international legitimacy. We
reaffirm that East Jerusalem is the capital of the State
of Palestine. We call on all countries to recognize the
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

In conclusion, we renew our call on all present to
participate in the Arria Formula meeting, to be held in
cooperation with a group of Security Council members,
to discuss the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) following more than one year of its adoption
and 50 years of the Israeli occupation of the occupied
Palestinian territory.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose 1.05 pm.
