Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I
welcome the presence in the Security Council of Mr.
Holkeri and to express Bulgaria's gratitude to him for
his work to date in an extremely important and delicate
mission and often in difficult circumstances. I also
assure him of Bulgaria's full support in his tasks.

As an associate country of the European Union,
Bulgaria supports the statement to be made shortly on
behalf of the Union by the Italian presidency. I should
like, however, to make a few comments in my national
capacity.

Bulgaria thanks the Secretary-General for his
report of 15 October, which contains an in-depth
analysis of the efforts of the international community
since 1 July 2003 to normalize life in the region. We
support the conclusions made in the report and thank
the Deputy Special Representative, Mr. Brayshaw, who
served as interim Special Representative before Mr.
Holkeri's appointment.

The main priority of the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) must remain the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999). There is a need to accelerate
and, in some cases, to enable the return of non-
Albanian refugees in the context of guaranteed security
in order to obtain the goal shared by the entire
international community: a multi-ethnic and tolerant
Kosovo. Bulgaria maintains its well-known position in
favour of UNMIK's policy of "standards before status".
A lasting solution to the problem of Kosovo can be
found only if that policy is implemented in full.

It seems to us that the European Union's
approach to Kosovo through its Stabilization and
Association Process Tracking Mechanism, which
allows the region to align its policies and legislation
with those of the Union so as to prevent Kosovo's
isolation from the broader context of South-East
European integration into European structures, is
extremely useful and should be further developed.

Bulgaria unreservedly supports the process of
UNMIK's transfer to the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government of non-reserved responsibilities listed
in chapter 5 of the Constitutional Framework. This
process is in conformity with the mandate and political
logic of resolution 1244 (1999) and will allow the
Provisional Institutions to develop their administrative
and management capacities for the well-being of the
people of Kosovo.

We support the efforts being made by UNMIK,
KFOR and other international organizations working in
Kosovo to establish the genuine rule of law and to
ensure a normal life for all the citizens of Kosovo,
irrespective of their ethnic origin. Bulgaria urges the
political leaders of Kosovo to focus their energies on
helping the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of UNMIK, Mr. Harri Holkeri, fully
to implement resolution 1244 (1999). We deem it
important that Kosovo politicians and the international
community give greater attention to problems relating
to the grey economy, organized crime and terrorism.

As to the socio-economic sector, the high rate of
unemployment, corruption, smuggling and the traffic in
illegal arms, drugs and human beings could imperil the
stability of institutions that are still rudimentary, as
well as inter-ethnic relations. In this respect, Bulgaria
wishes to stress its concern over acts of violence in
Kosovo that have claimed innocent Victims among
Kosovo minority groups and UNMIK personnel. We
believe that the acts of violence that have marked the
beginning of Mr. Holkeri's mission only heighten
ethnic tensions and pose a major obstacle to the
international community's efforts to normalize life in
Kosovo, since they prevent the return of refugees at the
pace that the entire international community should
like to see.

I feel compelled to mention the fact that my
country continues to be deeply interested in the enquiry
into the murder of the Bulgarian citizen Valentin
Krumov, a United Nations staff member who was
killed in Pristina in 1999. We hope that the perpetrators
will soon be brought to justice.

Bulgaria also wishes to stress that the rule of law
needs to be further enhanced. Minorities in Kosovo
should be further integrated into central and local
Government structures. Bulgaria welcomes the direct
dialogue, launched on 14 October in Vienna, between
Belgrade and Pristina. We thank the Special
Representative for his role in that process and agree
with the Secretary-General that the dialogue is one of
the most important benchmarks for the implementation
of the international community's "standards before
status" policy. This dialogue is a major step towards
normalization in Kosovo and the implementation of the
benchmarks of the stabilization and association
process. We hope that the dialogue, which was
launched in Vienna on 14 October, will be expanded in
the context of the groups of experts that are to continue
work in November. It is both highly desirable and
extremely important to improve and expand dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina at the local level -
through, of course, the very useful mediation provided
by UNMIK.

In conclusion, my delegation hopes that
Bulgaria's diplomatic liaison office in Pristina, which
was established at the beginning of October 2003, can
contribute to the efforts of the international community
to resolve the issue of Kosovo.

