Mrs. Citaku: It is an honour for me to address
the Council during a period of paramount importance
for the establishment of long-term prospects for peace
and prosperity not only in the Republic of Kosovo, but
also in the rest of the Balkans.

I wish to thank the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for their
efforts deployed in Kosovo during the period under
review. These efforts, in the context of broader
assistance from the International community, have
contributed to stabilizing our region after the dreadful
wars of the 1990s and to building democratic
institutions in Kosovo.

We continue to pledge our unreserved support to
all efforts to build peace and security in the Western
Balkans, and we are happy to report that these
continued efforts of the international community have
been brought to fruition. After the atrocities committed
by the regime of Slobodan Milosevic in Bosnia,
Croatia and Kosovo, the independence of the Republic
of Kosovo has brought lasting peace and stability and a
brought the new European integration agenda to the
forefront.

Today in the Balkans, all States are governed by
democratically elected Governments, yet we all face
similar transitional challenges and support is still
needed to help us overcome the last obstacles to
becoming full members of the European Union.

I am particularly pleased to address the Security
Council at a time when developments in the Republic
of Kosovo reflect the significant progress achieved in
building strong democratic institutions and sound
constitutional framework.

In September, the Constitutional Court of Kosovo
ruled that the President of the Republic could not
exercise the function of President of Kosovo while
maintaining the leadership of his political party.
President Sejdiu, in honouring the decision of the
Court, resigned. Following a vote of no-confidence,
Parliament was dissolved and extraordinary elections
are scheduled for 12 December. As on previous
occasions, the December elections will be fair and free,
and will reflect the will of Kosovo's citizens. The
Government has called for and welcomes international
observers for these elections. The recent political
developments in the Republic of Kosovo proved yet
again the political maturity of our established
democratic system. Throughout this period, the
Constitution and parliamentary rules and procedures
were strictly followed and observed.

Kosovo is a multi-ethnic society and its
Government remains fully committed to the greater
social, political and economic inclusion of minorities
in the mainstream of Kosovo society. In our most
recent address to the Council (see S/PV.6367), we
reported that all minorities, including Kosovar Serbs,
have taken an increased interest in participating in
democratic processes and local elections. We are in the
process of completing the entire decentralization plan
of President Ahtisaari, which guarantees unprecedented
legal protection and affirmative rights to minorities.

All minorities, including Kosovar Serbs, enjoy
direct and undisputed benefits by participating in the
democratic life of the State they live in. This is more
imperative in the view of the forthcoming parliamentary
elections. Therefore, we consider that this is the best
time for the international community to reaffirm its
commitment to the stability of Kosovo by calling on
Kosovar Serbs to participate in forthcoming elections
and on the Serbian Government not to obstruct their
participation in the elections.

New Serbian municipalities in Kosovo recorded
the participation of over 50 per cent of local Serbs in
the most recent local elections. Regrettably, the same
does not hold true for the North of Kosovo, where the
influence of Belgrade is still preventing the process of
integration into Kosovo's public and institutional life.
It is with great regret that I report that, over the past
three months, there have been more than five armed
attacks in the North of Kosovo against Kosovar Serbs
who had decided to participate in Kosovo's public and
political life. We have noted that these developments
still go unreported in Serbia.

Having said that, we are proud to report that
Kosovo Serbs and other minorities have now submitted
over 20 electoral lists for the upcoming elections, and
we are pleased that members of civil society, as well as
several parliamentary parties in Serbia, are asking for a
change of the Serbian Government policy to boycott
everything representing the Republic of Kosovo, even
after the International Court of Justice concluded that
Kosovo's declaration of independence did not violate
international law.

While local constitutional and political
developments have occupied the minds of local and
international actors, as well as the agenda of our State
institutions, other positive developments have been
recorded in regard to the process of the formal
recognition of Kosovo's independence. Seventy-one
countries have now recognized Kosovo, and over 100
Members of the United Nations are now recognizing
Kosovo's documents. However, we regret that the
Government of Serbia completely ignores and does not
recognize any document issued by the Republic of
Kosovo. Our license plates, customs stamps, passports,
school diplomas and bank statements are recognized by
the entire European Union (EU), and even by those
countries that have not yet formally recognized our
independence, but are not recognized by Serbia. This
policy not only hampers student exchanges, family
visits, normal trade and business relations, but also
prevents and delays the reconciliation process among
our peoples.

We are also glad to report positive progress in
terms of the return process. By the end of this year, we
expect a record 1,300 returnees, a process facilitated
greatly by our Government jointly with United Nations
agencies and donors. We are aware that more needs to
be done, and we are fully committed to successfully
completing this process. But while we continue to
maintain a welcoming policy for all Kosovo citizens
who want to return to their homes, we wish to remind
the Council that, if we are to achieve tangible progress,
we need the support of our partners in Belgrade. Again,
I would like to emphasize that the active participation
of the Serb minority in the upcoming elections will be
crucial for them, as it will ensure further integration,

which will translate into more opportunities, stronger
representation and increased living standards.

Religious freedoms and dialogue have been
further strengthened, and the best examples of this are
the successful organization of the enthronement of the
Serbian Patriarch in the territory of the Republic of
Kosovo, the opening of a new Catholic cathedral in
central Pristina, and the increased efforts to improve
communication among a11 communities and religions.

The Kosovo Police have done a great job in
securing Kosovo's religious sites following the
departure of the International Security Force in
Kosovo. While we regret the incidents that have
occurred in some locations, we will respectfully point
out that these isolated incidents have been mostly of a
non-ethnic nature.

The most important development that strengthened
our young country unfolded here in New York. After
the International Court of Justice issued an opinion on
the 1ega1ity of Kosovo's declaration of independence,
in September we regretfully witnessed another Serbian
attempt in the General Assembly to call for
negotiations on the status of Kosovo. Considering that
Kosovo's independence and borders cannot be subject
to any negotiation and that such a controversial
proposal would undermine the progress achieved so
far, the international community mobilized in an
unprecedented manner and called on Serbia to change
its policy. As a result, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 64/298, welcoming with respect the opinion
of the Court. It also welcomes the readiness of the EU
to facilitate a dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade.

I am confirming yet again that our Government
was very pleased with the outcome of that General
Assembly debate. The resolution gives us a platform to
start a technical dialogue with Serbia on issues of
importance for the well-being of communities and for
regional cooperation. The Government of the Republic
of Kosovo and the principal international sponsors of
the resolution have made it clear that the dialogue is
about the future and not the past. We will not return to
closed chapters of history. We are ready to talk about
missing persons from the war, cooperation against
crime and corruption, mutual recognition of documents
and phone networks, rail lines, airspace and every
other issue of mutual interest to and shared benefit for
our citizens, our societies and our countries. But let me
be clear. We will not talk - ever again - about
Kosovo's right to exist as a free nation after everything
that has happened in the past. The independence of
Kosovo is not and will not be an issue for discussion.

Hence, following a round of discussions with the
European Union and other partners, we are preparing
our teams and agenda for talks with the Republic of
Serbia, with the facilitation of the EU. We welcome the
readiness of the United States to contribute to this
process.

Let me conclude my remarks with the plea of
19-year-old Majlinda Kelmendi, who is the most
honoured sportswoman of Kosovo today. She has won
European and world championships in judo, one of the
few Olympic sports that recognize her right to compete
as a Kosovar. Unfortunately, even after more than
20 years, Kosovo's young athletes and artists remain
isolated from such international activities. It is of great
importance that Majlinda and other young Kosovars
have the same opportunities as their friends throughout
the world.

Enormous challenges remain for young
generations of Kosovars and Serbs in the years ahead
and many issues will have to be resolved through
dialogue, but I believe that I am not the only one who
acknowledges that after the Vienna process, the
Ahtisaari proposal, the International Court of Justice
opinion and the General Assembly resolution, we are
finally ready to move on.

