Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to
express our gratitude for your welcome initiative to
hold today's Security Council meeting on justice and
the rule of law and to take this opportunity to thank Mr.
Guehenno for his introductory briefing on the item
under consideration.

Concerning the particular situation in my country,
I would just like to say that a new era of peace and
reconciliation, national unity and the restoration of
State authority, reconstruction, economic recovery and
development has begun in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

As was recognized by our head of State, His
Excellency Major-General Joseph Kabila, in his
statement last week before the General Assembly at its
fifty-eighth session, "In the peace process now under
way, an area of critical importance and an imperative is
that of independent justice, whose equitable
administration would mark the end of impunity." This
shows that the national Transitional Government is
aware of the responsibility incumbent on it to establish
and maintain a fair, reliable, ethical and efficient
system of justice in accordance with the principles of
the Charter and international law.

The Government is not blind, however, to the
challenges that we face to make that dream a reality.
This involves difficulties that new democracies often
encounter in establishing new laws and infrastructure
to meet the needs of justice and compliance with the
rule of law in the face of rising crime, which often
occurs during periods of transition. In that respect, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has been affected
by specific problems, which have been worsened by
war. The problems that make law enforcement more
difficult include the lack of financial resources, the
lack of an adequate court system and the need for deep
change in behaviour and customs to be able to confront
ever-increasing broad and complex challenges. We
must add to this list the need to eradicate corruption
and anti-democratic features within the justice system
if we truly wish for one that enjoys the trust of the
entire community and benefits from the community's
support and respect for the rule of law. Law
enforcement agencies and public administrative offices
must also be accountable for their actions.

We should not lose sight of the importance of
striking a balance between the need for an efficient
system of justice and the protection of individual rights
and the need to tackle the economic causes of crime
and armed violence, including the illegal exploitation
of natural resources and the major role of the fight
against corruption.

Concerning the effects of war, in particular, it
should be recalled that some 4 million Congolese have
perished as a direct or indirect result of armed
violence. After the war, it would be a mistake to
believe that the Democratic Republic of the Congo can
achieve peace and stability without attempts to shed
light on the crimes that have been committed, to bring
the perpetrators to justice and to do right by the
victims.

To prevent such offences from going unpunished
and recurring elsewhere, or in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo itself in the future, my country has
decided to appeal to the international community for
the establishment of an international criminal court for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

With respect to the most serious crimes
committed after the entry into force of the Rome
Statute, the International Criminal Court must assume
its full responsibilities. The recent statement by the
Prosecutor of the Court on his intention to initiate an
inquiry in this respect should be encouraged.

It should be noted, however, that no State on its
own can effectively address the many challenges that
the restoration of a justice system and compliance with
the rule of law entail in societies undergoing
transitions, given the complexity of those challenges.
The question is rather one of the shared responsibility
of States and the international community. Here, the
role of the United Nations must come to the fore,
particularly through its machinery for cooperation,
which my delegation considers a critical factor to
ensure that the rule of law becomes a universal reality.

For many developing countries and transition
countries, in particular, technical assistance is crucial
for implementing the rule of law and strengthening the
system of justice. Such assistance can often benefit
recipient as well as donor countries.

The United Nations must take a pragmatic
approach by establishing, for example, a special trust
fund to meet the particular assistance needs of
developing countries and making clear that technical
assistance, training, exchange of information and
expertise in matters of justice and enforcement of the
rule of law, as well as financial assistance, will always
be needed to strengthen democratic institutions, the
effective implementation of the rule of law and
community involvement in crime prevention. Such
assistance will also be needed to establish programmes
that deal with the scope of the justice system as a
whole or specific aspects of criminal justice.

My Government would like to thank the
Secretary-General for the assistance that he has
provided to the independent electoral commission of
my country. We have also noted the Secretariat's
readiness to assist other institutions in our Republic in
support of democracy, including a human rights
observer mission and a truth and reconciliation
commission. That commission must investigate all
cases of human rights violations committed during the
war. This will also be an appropriate venue for
humility, contrition and forgiveness. I firmly believe
that the Congolese people will show forgiveness.

But there are cases, as with military officers
whose names are listed in the report of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights (S/2002/764), for
which no concession should be made. In particular, I
have in mind General Laurent Mihigo Nkunda, the
former commander-in-chief of the Seventh Military
Brigade, a former unit of the Rassemblement congolais
pour la democratie-Goma (RCD-Goma), who, sadly,
gained personal notoriety in the massacres that took
place in Kisangani in May 2002.

I encourage all international and national non-
governmental organizations, witnesses of the massacres
in Kisangani, the families of the victims of that city
and families of the soldiers of the former unit of the
RCD-Goma, who were summarily executed in 2002, to
prepare their cases to claim damages at the appropriate
time. The Congolese people and the neighbouring
countries are asked to provide their full cooperation so
that Mr. Laurent Mihigo Nkunda can be arrested and
immediately brought before the Congolese justice
system.

To sum up, in order to ensure lasting security - a
prerequisite for respect of the rule of law - my
country calls for the establishment of active
cooperation through exchanges of information,
experience and knowledge, and for the provision of
technical assistance in the area of justice and respect of
the rule of law.

We call also for the elaboration of measures that
will help to strike an appropriate balance between
suppression and prevention while at the same time
safeguarding human rights; and, finally, for the
establishment, with respect to the rule of law in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, of an international
criminal court that can prosecute and punish the
perpetrators of the many massacres and other massive
human rights violations committed on the territory of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo awaits
prompt and responsible action on the part of the
Security Council, which must not shirk its
responsibilities.

