Mr. Adada: I have my own statement for the
Security Council, but I would present, with your
permission, a very short update on the political process
that the two Special Envoys, Jan Eliasson and Salim
Ahmed Salim, have asked me to present to the Council.

(spoke in French)

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
providing me with this opportunity to brief the
Council. The 90-day report of the Secretary-General
offers comprehensive information on the reporting
period in question. Today, I will focus on the current
security, humanitarian and political situation in Darfur.

The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) was deployed in
accordance with resolution 1769 (2007), with a
mandate under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. The central expectation placed upon us by the
people of Darfur and the international community,
through the solemn decision of the Security Council, is
to provide protection for the civilians of Darfur. The
people of Darfur have suffered terribly from war
during the past five years, and the world has demanded
unequivocally that this suffering be brought to an end.
The African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) is the primary instrument chosen by
the Council for that task.

As I speak today, I must report frankly that there
is a long way to go before we can say that we have met
those expectations and fulfilled the promise made by
the Council. Our forces are serving under exceptionally
difficult conditions, facing daily dangers and
hardships. I am obliged to report that the obstacles they
need to surmount and the risks that they run have not
diminished over the past three months.

In spite of all our efforts, it remains the case that
three months into UNAMID's operations, the force
strength has not increased much from the strength of
the African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) as it was
at the end of December 2007. The force is at less than
40 per cent of its mandated level of 19,555 and it is
08-31307
very unlikely to achieve full operating capability
before 2009.

The key challenges are therefore to ensure that
the former AMIS units and incoming units from troop-
contributing countries are self-sustaining. Otherwise,
measures must be put in place to assist them on the
ground. The majority of the former AMIS bases that
are being retained by UNAMID require expanding and
refurbishing. Furthermore, the deteriorating conditions
of roads in Darfur and the approaching rainy season
will make the main supply routes impassable in many
areas. All these challenges will require exceptional
logistics and engineering operations which will dictate
the rate of deployment of new and expanded units.

In light of all these complications, the mission is
finalizing a list of Vital emergency measures needed to
reposition the deployment back on track. The
achievement of the mission's new deployment goals
and the application of these measures will once again
depend heavily on the timely and unhindered
cooperation of all the stakeholders.

Having said that, I am happy to inform the
Council that a number of deployments by troop-
contributing countries are scheduled over the next three
months, including the main body of the Chinese
engineering company, the Egyptian infantry battalion,
the Egyptian signals, engineering and transport
companies, the Bangladeshi multi-role logistics
company and the Nigerian level-II hospital. The
Ethiopian advance party has arrived in El Fasher, and
their deployment is expected to be completed in June.
All these deployments are dependent upon the arrival
of the contingent-owned equipment in Darfur.

During the next three months we expect the four
Nigerian battalions and the South African battalion to
rotate. The combination of the planned deployments
and the rotation will put UNAMID under considerable
pressure. Owing to the very long line of
communication from Port Sudan into Darfur, the
difficult road conditions and the lack of capacity
among local contractors, the risk of delays remains
high.

The Force Commander's priority is to have the
10 existing infantry battalions brought up to the United
Nations contingent-owned equipment and self-
sustaining standards. This is a considerable challenge
since, although troop-contributing countries can
generate the troops, many of them are unable to meet
08-31307

United Nations requirements. I should like to express
the mission's appreciation to the donors for their
initiative to increase the operational capability of
troop-contributors.

Since the transfer of authority, UNAMID is still
lacking five critical operational capabilities: attack
helicopters, surveillance aircraft, medium-lift support
helicopters, military engineers and logistical support.
An offer to meet part of the attack and medium-lift
helicopter requirement has been made by Ethiopia, and
an initial reconnaissance has been carried out by that
country.

I am happy to confirm that UNAMID police and
civilian components are gradually increasing their
impact on the ground in Darfur. Patrols are being
conducted for substantially longer periods over greater
areas of Darfur and now take place on a daily basis.
More protection is being provided to vulnerable groups
during firewood collection, enhancing security around
the camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
providing better protection, especially for the women
in the IDP camps.

In addition, police advisers have held several
public forums with the leadership of the IDP camps to
explain the UNAMID police mandate and duties, the
concept of community policing and Violence against
women. The introduction of the community policing
concept has culminated in the registration and training
of 287 IDP volunteers, 30 of whom are women.

The mission remains concerned with the security
situation on the ground and the lack of systematic or
sustained protection for vulnerable civilians in Darfur.
In this context, the recent Government attacks on
villages in the northern corridor of West Darfur left at
least 100 civilians dead and caused tens of thousands to
flee their homes. The attacks by the Sudanese Armed
Forces were in response to an earlier attack by the
Justice and Equality Movement at the beginning of the
year. These acts constitute grave violations of
international humanitarian law and need to be strongly
condemned. All the parties involved in the conflict
must respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law and implement their obligations
under all relevant Security Council resolutions and
existing ceasefire agreements.

While security is primary concern of the mission,
and the one that has the most direct impact on the lives
of civilians in Darfur, UNAMID continues to push for
3
a comprehensive political solution to the conflict. The
mission is fully committed to supporting the work of
the Special Envoys and will continue to encourage all
stakeholders to reach a negotiated solution.

Despite all these relentless efforts, I am afraid
that the prospects for the peace process in Darfur
remain very slim. The senior staff of UNAMID
continues to meet with the representatives of the
signatories and non-signatories to the Darfur Peace
Agreement (DPA). Unfortunately, it is commonly
understood today in Darfur that peace is not at all
attractive, either economically or politically.
Signatories of the DPA have not only lost most of their
political credibility and popular backing from the grass
roots in Darfur; they also have expressed their deep
frustration and disappointment about the lack of
financial, political and logistical support they receive
from the international community and the Government
of the Sudan. Non-signatories are, however, still being
armed and enjoy the logistical and financial support
which allows them to sustain the political backing in
Darfur. All local and international actors need to exert
serious efforts to reverse this dangerous trend.

Furthermore, the conflicts in Darfur and Chad are
now closely linked. In the current state of affairs, it is
difficult to consider a solution to one conflict without
taking the other into account. UNAMID will remain in
close contact with the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) and
with those African and international leaders who are
engaged in seeking a solution to the problems between
the Sudan and Chad.

Among the priorities of the mission, as the body
mandated by resolution 1769 (2007) to contribute to
the implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement, are
reviving the Joint Commission and restructuring the
Ceaseflre Commission so that it can have a meaningful
mechanism for monitoring and verifying violations of
the ceasefire agreement. In the absence of a widely
supported peace agreement, the Ceaseflre Commission
is a crucial tool for the implementation of the mission's
mandate.

The challenges facing UNAMID are formidable
in every respect. There are such high hopes in the
mission that the warm reception that Darfurians have
given it could very quickly degenerate into deep
frustration. It is disturbing to note that, although Darfur
is at the top of the international agenda, this attention
has not thus far been translated into action to provide
UNAMID with the means to accomplish its mission.

In resolution 1769 (2007), the Council gave the
mission an extraordinary mandate, corresponding to
the international community's level of concern at the
unacceptable human suffering in Darfur. Carrying out
that mandate on the ground requires tools that are equal
to the task. It would be a tragedy if the high hopes for
that mandate - particularly the responsibility to
protect millions of innocent civilians who continue to
live in fear ~ were to be dashed.

The Council has consistently stated that it
considers Darfur to be among the most important crises
today, and Council members have committed
themselves to ensuring that a force capable of
addressing the complexities of the conflict is deployed
in an effective and timely manner. Therefore, I appeal
to the Council to redouble its efforts to assist the
mission in overcoming the logistical and political
obstacles that it currently faces.

I would like to conclude by expressing my
gratitude for the good cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in bringing about the
progress made thus far by UNAMID. And, on behalf of
all my colleagues, I thank the Council for having given
me this opportunity to speak about the work of
UNAMID.

(spoke in English)

With the Council's permission, I shall now read
out the following brief statement by the Special
Envoys, which provides an update on the political
process.

"As members of the Council are aware, it
will be very difficult for UNAMID to implement
its mandate and protect the civilians of Darfur if
there is no peace to keep. According to Special
Envoys Eliasson and Salim, prospects for
comprehensive substantive talks in the near
future are dim. Their emphasis is now on
reducing the level of violence and preparing a
cessation of hostilities.

"The five movement groupings have made
little progress in unifying their positions and
agreeing on a negotiation team. The Government
of National Unity lacks a coherent Darfur
strategy. The security situation has deteriorated
dramatically. Relations between Chad and Sudan
08-31307
have been strained, and humanitarian access has
been threatened.

"In View of the dire security situation, the
Special Envoys have re-emphasized the primacy
of a political solution and have refocused the
work of the mediation on establishing a dialogue
between the parties on security-related matters.
On 17 and 18 March in Geneva, they held
consultations with regional and international
partners to discuss the way forward. There was
agreement among all participants that improving
the security situation in Darfur, as well as
normalizing the relationship between Sudan and
Chad, was essential in order to make progress on
the political track.

"Since the Geneva meeting, the Joint
Mediation Support Team has shuttled between the
movements and the Government to determine the
conditions under which the parties could engage
in a dialogue on security issues, including the
framework for a cessation of hostilities. To
highlight the urgency of the matter, the Special
Envoys were in Khartoum, Juba and Darfur over
the past two weeks, exploring with the parties the
possibility of convening such consultations. The
Government of Sudan has set up a technical team
to work with the mediation. The Envoys have
stressed the importance of involving both Minni
Minawi and the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement in these discussions.

"In meetings with the representatives of the
United Resistance Front, Abdul Wahid and Khalil
Ibrahim, the movements agreed with the Envoys
that improving the security situation is the first
priority. Concrete steps are now being taken to
move forward as soon as possible on establishing
a dialogue between the parties under African
Union and United Nations auspices. The Joint
Mediation Support Team is also continuing its
work to find common ground among Sudanese
civil society, political parties, traditional leaders
and the internally displaced population on the
various issues related to peace in Darfur,
including the census and the elections."

