Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over this

important meeting of the Security Council to consider
the report (S/2008/813) of the African Union-United
Nations panel led by Mr. Romano Prodi, who is present
among us. The panel has been charged to consider in-
depth the modalities of cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in the conduct of United
Nations-mandated peacekeeping operations. We
warmly congratulate Mr. Prodi on his work.

We also welcome the notable presence here of the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro.

The report before the Security Council today is in
line with Benin's untiring efforts during its
membership of the Council in 2004 and 2005 to focus
the attention of the international community on the
need to strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in order to promote
stability throughout the continent.

In this regard, I would like to recall that the first
building blocks of this structure were the presidential
statement on institutional relations with the African
Union (S/PRST/2004/44), adopted in Nairobi on
19 November 2004 by the Security Council, and
resolution 1625 (2005), adopted at the high-level
meeting of the Council held in this Chamber on
14 September 2005.

I must also refer to resolution 1631 (2005) and
resolution 1809 (2008), which was an initiative of the
Republic of South Africa, represented here today by its
Minister for Foreign Affairs. I recall that in
implementation of resolution 1631 (2005), Benin,
which then chaired the Security Council's Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa, held a seminar, on 15 December 2005, on the
very topic of cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union in the field of international
peace and security.

The ongoing commitment of Benin to this subject
is made evident by a happy coincidence: this debate is
taking place at a time when Benin is chair of the AU
Peace and Security Council. In this regard, I welcome
the participation in this debate of His Excellency
Ambassador Edouard Aho-Glele, Permanent
Representative of Benin to the AU in Addis Ababa,
through the explicit decision of that body of the Union.
Having said that, Benin largely shares the
assessments of the panel. These are part of a realistic
and promising approach that has enabled us to discard
the concept of subcontracting peacekeeping operations
to the African Union and adopt the principle of
subsidiarity, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter. Such an approach will take full advantage of
AU rapid response capacities and of their comparative
advantage in terms of knowledge of the realities on the
ground. This approach presupposes that cases that
exceed the capacities under development by the AU
can be rapidly taken on by the United Nations.

We fully adhere to the principle that a
peacekeeping operation initiated by the African Union
and that must extend beyond six months can be put
under United Nations command. From this perspective,
the financing of these operations from United Nations
assessed contributions for a period of six or more
months is fully justified.

We wish to underscore the importance of the
coordination and synergy that must be developed
between the United Nations and the African Union on
the one hand and Africa's regional economic
communities on the other hand. The African Peace and
Security Architecture is established on the basis of
such coordination and synergy.

Assistance aimed at strengthening these
communities, which are essential elements in the
region, should be fully taken into account in efforts
undertaken by the international community to
strengthen African peacekeeping capacities in the
context of implementing the Ten-Year Capacity-
Building Programme. This is part of the clear strategic
relationship to be drawn up between the United
Nations and the African Union, with strict respect for
the Security Council's primary responsibility for
international peace and security.

We fully support the proposal by the panel that a
special multi-donor trust fund to support the African
Peace and Security Architecture be set up. That
proposal accurately reflects the primary responsibility
of the international community. In our view, it would
be very useful to include the regional economic
communities on the board of this fund. This special
trust fund should devote particular attention to setting
up standing logistic capacity - through the acquisition
of a critical mass of equipment that can be mobilized
on a short-term basis - in order to validate the rapid
response capacity of the standby force and to avoid
privatization measures in the area of logistics. Of
course, this question should be studied in greater depth.

In addition, Benin fully supports the
strengthening of the African Union complementary
mechanisms for conflict prevention, which will
ultimately help it avoid having to resort to
peacekeeping operations. This is all the more important
in this period of crisis, in which the risk of social
conflicts degenerating into major political crises cannot
be dismissed.

My delegation would like to recall that resolution
1625 (2005) set forth a pragmatic approach that
advocated enhancing the monitoring of States where
the risks of conflict are clear, in order to contain crises
and ensure that they do not become entrenched and to
deal effectively with the underlying causes of the
conflicts.

Sufficient human and financial resources must be
mobilized to this end. The recent measures that were
adopted to strengthen the Department of Political
Affairs will, in our View, enable us to develop a
cohesive strategy for the use of early warning and
mediation mechanisms and peacebuilding and
development efforts. We hope that the follow-up to the
implementation of that resolution will once again lead,
this year, to a report by the Secretary-General, as was
the case in January 2008 (see S/2008/18), and take into
account the potential of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund. Emergency actions by
those bodies have allowed us to quickly address
situations of concern.

In conclusion, my delegation supports the draft
presidential statement that will be adopted at the end of
this debate. Benin hopes that the recommendations of
the panel will enjoy meticulous follow-up and that a
joint team tasked with studying the implementation of
these recommendations will be set up as soon as
possible.

