Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Ijoin
with others in commending you, Sir, on convening
today's open debate.

I thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for
his detailed briefing and, as we do every month, we
reiterate Uruguay's full support for his efforts.

As the days go by, with a few exceptions,
regrettably, the situation in the Middle East either
remains the same or worsens. It is clear that, above and
beyond its good intentions, the Council has not been
able to honour its commitment to restoring peace and
stability to the conflict-stricken region. Like most of
us, the people of that region of the world want only
to live in peace, far removed from the horrors of
war, violence, terrorism and human rights violations.
We recall the millions of faceless victims who have
endured wars and invasions - some of them conceived
from afar - the pillaging of their resources and
wealth, constant changes to their land based on foreign
interests, the actions of terrorist groups who insult the
very religion with which they claim to be affiliated, and
a slew of Governments and authoritarian regimes that
are clearly out of touch with the desires of their peoples.
All of this has created fertile ground for the fomenting
of extremism and radicalism, which themselves have
become both the result and the cause of new conflicts.
Despite all of this, we continue to be optimistic and to
hope that the peoples of the Middle East will soon be
on the road to progress and cooperation in a peaceful
environment. To achieve that, the continued support
of the Council and the entire international community
is essential.

With regard to the recently escalating situation
in Jerusalem, which has spread rapidly to other areas
and threatens to become a major new crisis, Uruguay
reiterates its firm condemnation of all the violent
incidents, which have left more than 10 victims. This
worrying situation creates distrust between the parties
concerned and affects all the efforts designed to enable
a resumption of bilateral Israeli-Palestinian peace
negotiations aimed at reaching a two-State solution.
The sacred sites of the city of Jerusalem, where three of
the world's major religions converge, should be places
of reflection and peace, not violence and terror. It is
therefore crucial to maintain unrestricted access for the
faithful to their temples and ensure that this is reflected
in concrete action. In that regard, we were pleased by
the Government of Israel's decision to act by removing
the metal detectors installed last week. However, the
critical situation in Gaza, to which the Council has not
given enough attention, is threatening to result in a new
humanitarian disaster very quickly. We should make
every effort to prevent this scenario from leading to
another war.

As it has done since 1947, Uruguay once again
reaffirms its unfailing support to the right of Israel and
Palestine to live in peace within secure and recognized
borders in an atmosphere of renewed cooperation,
free from any threats to peace or acts that violate it.
We also reiterate our support to a solution based on
two independent States in the belief that it is the only
option that will enable Israel and Palestine to coexist
in peace, and in that regard we once again urge for the
resumption of direct negotiations between the two as a
crucial path to that end. We welcome all international
initiatives aimed at advancing the peace process in
order to achieve a peaceful, just, negotiated and lasting
settlement that accords with international law in taking
into consideration the legitimate aspirations of Israelis
and Palestinians.

However, in order to achieve that goal, it is essential
to reverse the current trends on the ground, since
Palestine will otherwise find it extremely difficult
to consolidate its State. It is regrettable that, seven
months after the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016),
little progress has been made in its implementation,
while Israel's announcements of its expansion of
settlements in the occupied territories are increasing.
Similarly, the announcements of demolitions and
the forced transfer of vulnerable communities such
as Dakika, Khan Al-Ahmar and Susya only provoke
uncontrolled reactions.

The recent violent incidents and terrorist attacks,
and their encouragement and glorification through
subsidy payments to the families of those who commit
them or by naming schools, buildings and squares
after them, do nothing to advance the cause of peace
and put the possibility of reaching a two-State solution
in jeopardy. However, just as in the past we have
repeatedly emphasized that we cannot be silently
complicit in the face of terrorist attacks, we would
like to take this opportunity to appreciate the fact that
President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority
has condemned the 14 July shooting on the Mosque
esplanade. On a somewhat more personal and timely
note, I hope that we in the Council will soon see the
day when our colleagues Mr. Riyad Mansour and
Mr. Danny Danon can stop trading mutual accusations
and blaming each other and instead inform us of
developments in direct negotiations aimed at putting
an end to this dreadful conflict once and for all. Our
Colombian brothers have shown us that it is possible to
leave behind the pain of 50 years ofwar and to embrace
the commitment and risks ofa peace agreement.

Uruguay is shocked by the serious plight of
civilians in Yemen, where according to the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
humanitarian crisis is even more serious than in
Syria. It is regrettable that the situation there is still
not receiving the same degree of attention from the
Council as other regional crises are. Yemen is on the
verge of famine. It is suffering from a rapidly spreading
cholera epidemic and its hospitals, schools and markets
continue to be the target of indiscriminate attacks.
The prolonged stagnation of the peace process and the
widespread violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights committed by all the warring
parties have left millions of civilians drowning in chaos
and terrible suffering. Anyone perpetrating attacks or
providing logistical support and weapons in Yemen,
should cease hostilities immediately. Those responsible
for the revolting atrocities that have already been
committed should be brought to justice.

I would like to comment very briefly on the
conflict in Syria. Despite the fact that the Astana
ceasefire process has resulted in a considerable drop
in violence in some parts of the country, we are still
seeing sieges and famines, indiscriminate attacks on
civilians, the use of chemical weapons, terrorist attacks
and extremely serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, all while the Council's
frustrating inaction continues. We are concerned about
the fact that although the political process in Geneva
has made some progress, albeit modest, that has not
resulted in any improvements in humanitarian access
to the millions who are subsisting with no help at all in
besieged and hard-to-reach areas. We reiterate that this
horrific war can be ended only through a process of
political transition, led by Syrians and mediated by the
United Nations in accordance with the road map set out
in resolution 2254 (2015).

In conclusion, where the recent situation that has
arisen among some of the States of the Arab peninsula
is concerned, we hope that the tensions can be overcome
through dialogue and negotiations.

