Mr. Kodera (Japan) (spoke in Russian): At the
outset, I would like to convey my gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate.

(spoke in English)

I would like first to express Japan's appreciation
for the efforts that have been made to reform the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) since the inauguration of the new Executive
Director, Mr. Michael Smith. I would also like to
welcome the organizational plan, which has just been
adopted.

We support the extension of CTED's mandate
through the end of 2010. We do so because we believe
a medium- to long-term point of view is essential to the
success of the coordination of technical assistance. At
the same time, it is important that we give ourselves
sufficient opportunity to conduct reviews, through
which we can monitor the activities of CTED in order
to determine whether they are producing satisfactory
results, in addition to discussing the need for any
improvements in the working methods of the
Directorate.

The review of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, which was adopted by consensus in
September 2006, is scheduled to take place in
September this year. The work of the CTED is central
to the implementation of the Strategy. In this context,
we welcome the active participation of CTED in the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and its
working groups.

As chair of the G-8 this year, the Government of
Japan intends to see that, as one of its highest
priorities, the G-8 and its Counterterrorism Action
Group (CTAG) grapple with the question of how to
enhance cooperation with CTED. For instance, we
would like to promote substantive discussions at CTAG
meetings by strengthening information-sharing through
New York and other channels and to pave the way to
providing concrete capacity-building assistance in the
area of counter-terrorism. Also, we would like to
promote further utilization of CTAG in following up
CTED visits to Member States.

CTED has been engaged in visits to States and in
drafting the preliminary implementation assessment.
Securing sufficient assistance to meet the needs
identified through that process will contribute
considerably to the implementation of the Strategy by
Member States. I would also note that establishing a
record of such achievements will increase the
appreciation Member States feel to CTED for the work
it is doing.

The reform efforts launched by new Executive
Director are taking CTED in the right direction, but it
is essential that they produce tangible results. We
therefore hope that under Mr. Smith CTED will
continue the efforts, bearing in mind the urgency of the
task.

