Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French):
France fully associates itself with the statement made
by the Ambassador of Spain on behalf of the European
Union. I will therefore be brief, limiting myself to three
points.

First, France deeply deplores that it was
impossible to dispatch the fact-finding team due to the
objections of the Israeli authorities, who reconsidered
the agreement they had reached with the Secretary-
General two weeks earlier.

The team had been named by the Secretary-
General with the full support of the Security Council.
The Council had endorsed the initiative and established
its terms of reference in resolution 1405 (2002). The
authority of the Council and of the Secretary-General
should be respected. Israel's failure to cooperate in the
implementation of resolution 1405 (2002) is a serious
error, which France condemns. Security Council
resolutions are not optional.

Beyond the question of principles, as the
Secretary-General said, it is in everyone's interest to
determine once and for all what happened. It would
have been especially in the interest of Israel. The
testimonies and observations reported by international
humanitarian and human rights organizations and by
media are serious. The lack of an accurate and
objective report on the facts leaves everyone in doubt.
That is deeply regrettable. It is important that the
Security Council be able to react by expressing its
solidarity with the Secretary-General and with
Mr. Ahtisaari's team and by expressing the
disappointment and frustration of the international
community. It also greatly to be desired that the truth
be established and that the Council be informed by the
Secretary-General on the basis of available sources of
information.

Secondly, France welcomes the settling of the
situation in Ramallah and President Arafat's regaining
of his freedom of movement.

Yasser Arafat's personal security and freedom of
movement must now be fully ensured. France pays
tribute to the diplomatic efforts made to achieve that
positive result, particularly by the Americans and the
British. Now that a positive dynamic seems to have
taken hold with the announcement by the "quartet" that
it will work on an international conference, such a
conference must be reinforced particularly through the
prompt lifting of the siege on the Church of the
Nativity in Bethlehem, where the humanitarian
situation of the besieged, who are deprived of food, is
alarming. We must also arrive without delay at a total,
definitive withdrawal of the Israeli forces from the A
zones and must obtain assurances that there will be no
further incursions by the Israeli forces.
France welcomes the strengthening of all efforts,
particularly those of the "quartet", which met in
Washington, and those of the Arab world, which
courageously and resolutely committed itself to global
and lasting peace. The international community's
involvement with the parties must be strengthened.

Thirdly, France remains highly concerned at the
overall situation on the ground, which is still fragile
and dangerous at both the humanitarian and political
levels.

The humanitarian situation in the Palestinian
territories is catastrophic. The civilian population is
suffering to an intolerable degree. The international
community, which met at Oslo last week and is willing
to make a great financial commitment, must intensify
its efforts. The United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) must be assisted.

It is absolutely indispensable that the Israeli
authorities, on their side, take the measures necessary
for an immediate and lasting improvement of the
humanitarian and economic situation in the Palestinian
territories. There can be no meaningful progress
without a lifting of curfews, the sealing off of areas,
restrictions of movement and the compartmentalization
of the territories. There can be no progress without the
guarantee of freedom of movement and access to the
population for humanitarian agencies and medical
personnel and Israel's full respect for the provisions of
international law and humanitarian law as defined by
the Geneva Conventions.

The political situation is tense and precarious,
despite the intense efforts for restarting the negotiating
process.

With the help of the international community,
particularly the "quartet" and the leaders of the Arab
world, the parties must find again the way to a lasting
ceasefire and the restarting of a genuine political
process. That will require great efforts and political
will from the parties, as well as from the international
community.

Damage to the Palestinian Authority and the
ministries of education and of higher education and to
the preventative security infrastructure must be
assessed without delay. The Palestinians must be
helped to rebuild in order to lay the bases for a
democratic and viable state of law.

There is no other route possible except the
establishment of a ceasefire and the relaunching
without delay of political negotiations for a definitive
and just settlement. We know all its contours: Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397
(2002), the Madrid declaration of the "quartet", of 10
April, Colin Powell's speech in Louisville and the
proposals of the Beirut Summit. Only a comprehensive
process including the security, political, humanitarian
and economic issues can succeed.

The Palestinian Authority must shoulder its
responsibilities, especially with regard to security and
the fight against terrorism. The Israeli occupation must
end, giving place to the peaceful coexistence of two
independent States, Israel and Palestine, living within
secure and recognized borders. It is illusory to think
that such a settlement can be negotiated without Yasser
Arafat, the legitimate and elected representative of the
Palestinian people.

In moving towards peace, the international
community's involvement is decisive. Beyond the
perspective of a new international conference, the
international community's involvement must take the
shape of a credible presence on the ground. France
supports the Secretary-General's approach outlined in
his proposal for the deployment of a multinational
force. Considerations in this direction must continue.

The international community's efforts must
continue without respite. We must keep hope. There is
no solution through arms, brutal force or any form of
violence. The road of peace includes mutual
recognition and negotiation between partners who
recognize and respect each other. The Israelis and the
Palestinians know that very well.

