Mr. Nikolic' (Montenegro): We thank you for
organizing this open debate, Madam President, and
commend your leadership in preparing the text of the
resolution just adopted (resolution 2143 (2014)), which
we were happy to sponsor. We also thank today's
briefers for their valuable presentations.

Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I would like, however, to highlight some points of
particular importance to my country.

We were moved by the story of Mr. Alhaji Banah
Sawaneh, who was a former child solider in Sierra
Leone. His testimony is yet another reminder of the
scope of the challenge we face, even today.
Although the Security Council has made significant
progress in advancing the children and armed conflict
agenda, more action is needed to protect the rights of
children in situations of armed conflict and to ensure
that perpetrators of grave violations against children are
held to account. It is in that context that we welcome and
strongly support the campaign "Children, not soldiers",
which the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and the
Executive Director of UNICEF unveiled yesterday as a
new effort to end the recruitment and use of children in
Government forces in conflict by 2016.

Thousands of boys and girls around the world are
still being recruited into Government forces and armed
opposition groups to serve as combatants, cooks, porters
or messengers, or in other roles. Girls, and sometimes
boys, are also recruited for sexual purposes. Therefore,
we fully echo the words of the Special Representative
that the time has come for the world to unite and turn
the page, once and for all, on the recruitment and use of
children by security forces in conflict.

We expect that the campaign will make a significant
difference through its twofold contribution: first, to the
full implementation of action plans to end and prevent
recruitment and, secondly, to the release of children and
their reintegration into civilian life in order to ensure
that children released from armed forces or groups are
able to become productive members of their societies
and are no longer at risk of re-recruitment in future.

It is also essential that the Working Group of the
Security Council on Children and Armed Conflict
continue to best use the tools at its disposal in order
to provide appropriate responses to all types of grave
violations, including those committed by non-State
actors. In that regard, we would like to stress that
Member States need to allow access for the United
Nations to armed non-State actors for the purpose of
ending violations and concluding and implementing
action plans.

We share the concern about attacks and the
increasing use of schools for military purposes, as it can
have a devastating impact on children. It is worrisome
that schools can be converted into military targets
and that students, teachers and learning facilities can
indeed be made vulnerable to attacks and other forms
of violence by parties in conflict. We call on all parties
to armed conflict to refrain from actions that impede
children's access to education. We also have to ensure
that all measures are taken to protect students, teachers,
schools and universities from attack and military use.
With respect to United Nations peacekeeping and
political missions and the indispensable role they play,
Montenegro would like to advocate for a strong child
protection component to be incorporated in missions'
mandates. That would require peacekeepers, military
and security personnel to receive specialized child
protection predeployment training.

Montenegro is concerned about the use of explosive
weapons with wide-area effects in populated areas. We
would like to call on all parties to conflicts to refrain
from the use of such explosive weapons so as to ensure
that civilians, in particular children, are protected
against death, injury and psychological harm.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) has
a key role in fighting impunity. When crimes of
an international scale are committed and national
judiciaries are unwilling or unable to deal with them,
States parties to the Rome Statute should pay due
consideration to referring those situations to the ICC.
It is also vital that the Security Council, to the extent
possible, use the option to refer situations to the ICC.

In conclusion, let me point out that everyone - the
international community, regional and subregional
organizations and the entire United Nations
system - must contribute to our common and noble
objective so that no child ever experiences what
Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh went through. We owe that
to children.

