We thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and World Food Programme (WFP) Executive Director David Beasley for their comprehensive overview of the situation in Yemen. We also listened very carefully to Mr. Omer Badokhon. We take this opportunity to congratulate the WFP, represented here today by Director Beasley, on having been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. We will continue to support the work of the WFP, including on the Yemeni track, in providing humanitarian assistance on a non-discriminatory and unbiased basis. We are closely monitoring the situation in Yemen, which is in the sixth year of an acute internal political conflict, accompanied by an unprecedented humanitarian disaster that requires an immediate response on the part of the international community. Many years of conflict have destroyed Yemen's civilian infrastructure and health-care system. Its people are starving and are deprived of basic medicines and social protections; they need help. All of this is exacerbated by the coronavirus pandemic. In that regard, we highly commend the courageous work of United Nations humanitarian aid workers, and we deplore the fact that United Nations programmes aimed at providing basic assistance to the Yemeni people have had to scale back their activities because of insufficient funding. Russia will continue to assist the people of Yemen, including through United Nations entities. We call on donors, including those from the region, to increase financial support. We would recall that humanitarian assistance to Yemen coming from abroad must be distributed on a non-discriminatory basis among the entire population. It is clear from what we heard today that the humanitarian situation in Yemen can be improved only through a combination of political and diplomatic efforts to resolve the conflict. However, we note that efforts towards a political settlement have stalled and that military activities are escalating in various parts of the country. We note with regret that the parties still have not managed to sign a joint declaration and that the implementation of the relevant agreements, including the Stockholm Agreement and the Hodeidah Agreement, has not yielded the desired results. That threatens to intensify the violence, which would benefit only extremists and terrorists. We expect to see progress in the implementation of the Riyadh agreement, which would launch an intra-Yemeni national dialogue. We believe that there is still an opportunity to draw up arrangements, in particular with regard to confidence-building measures, a nationwide ceasefire and a relaunching of the intra-Yemeni negotiations. The exchange of prisoners and detainees under the auspices of the International Committee of the Red Cross is additional proof of this. The fact that such a large-scale humanitarian operation could be conducted by the Yemeni parties shows that they are able not only to reach compromise-based solutions to problems and differences but also to translate them into reality. Progress also can be achieved on the situation concerning the FSO SAFER tanker. We call on all relevant parties, including the United Nations Office for Project Services, to take into account one another's interests and to act constructively in order to devise solutions that are acceptable to all parties. We have repeatedly expressed our position, which remains consistent and unchanged, calling for a negotiated solution to the conflict in Yemen. In that regard, we reiterate our full support for Martin Griffiths's efforts to relaunch the political process, develop confidence-building measures and ensure a comprehensive ceasefire. The international community is united in its understanding that there can be no military solution to the conflict in Yemen. We call upon all parties to actively join in the mediation efforts made by Mr. Griffiths. We will continue to provide assistance to the United Nations mediation presence in Yemen, including through contacts with all political forces of the country and interested parties. We would like to recall once again the fact that resolution 598 (1987) tasked the Secretary-General with developing a security architecture in the region, in cooperation with the States of the region. We would draw the Council's attention once again to the Russian concept of collective security in the Persian Gulf region, which is aimed at breaking the deadlock in conflict situations and devising confidence- building measures. In October, we organized a Security Council meeting on this issue (see S/2020/1037), at which a call for de-escalation was made once again by both the region and the international community.
