Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We are delighted to have
Foreign Minister Holguin Cuellar here today.

I want to begin by congratulating the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia 7 Ej ercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) for reaching
another historic milestone in the peace process with the
successful laying down of individual arms by FARC-
EP on 27 June. We commend the strong commitment of
both sides and their efforts to overcome challenges in
the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
that resulted in this historic achievement.

The United Nations Mission in Colombia has played
an important role in support of the peace process. We
would like to thank the United Nations Mission in
Colombia and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Jean Arnault, for their excellent work. A

second political mission in Colombia will support the
parties in building trust and overcoming challenges for
the next stage of this historic process.

Sweden voted in favour of resolution 2366
(2017). We are proud to sponsor it and would like to
take this opportunity to express Sweden's continued
firm commitment to Colombia and to the United
Nations mission.
The political, economic and social reincorporation
of former combatants is now among the main challenges
moving forward. The violence against human rights
defenders and community leaders and the killings
of FARC-EP members and their families show the
urgent need for a second mission to also verify the
implementation of personal and collective security
guarantees, as requested by the parties. To this end,
the Mission must have sufficient presence locally and
regionally to fulfil its mandate.

A committed and sustained effort is now needed
from all parts of the State, as well as the United Nations
and the international community, in support of the
wider peace agreement, including comprehensive rural
reform, so that it can rapidly deliver tangible peace
dividends for all Colombians.

