Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I wish to thank our briefers
for their presentations and commend them for their
effective leadership in the ongoing multidimensional
effort to address the humanitarian situation in Syria.

According to the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/ 124), various factors have exacerbated
the humanitarian situation in Syria. The ongoing
conflict, administrative hurdles, inadequate funding
and the impact of the winter season have in various
ways made it more difficult to render assistance to
people in desperate need.

Despite these challenges, the United Nations
and its partners have succeeded in delivering food,
non-food items, water and medical supplies to fairly
large numbers of people using shipments from Turkey
and Jordan. We would like to express our appreciation
to the Governments of Turkey and Jordan for their
sustained support to the United Nations monitoring
mechanism.

Nigeria acknowledges the support of the Syrian
authorities, at the national and local levels, to the
humanitarian effort. However, we would like to appeal
for more expeditious approval of aid shipments in order
to help the United Nations and its partners consolidate
the successes they have achieved so far in dealing
with the humanitarian situation in Syria. Nigeria
strongly urges all parties to refrain from blocking
supplies to areas outside their control. They should
also cease restricting humanitarian access within the
areas they do control, since such restriction is clearly
an infringement of humanitarian law. All sides must
respect humanitarian principles and ensure the well-
being of civilians, especially women and children, in
areas under their control.

Nigeria acknowledges with profound appreciation
the tremendous sacrifices that have been made by Jordan,
Turkey, Lebanon and the other countries hosting Syrian
refugees. We pay tribute to the humanitarian workers
operating in challenging circumstances on the ground
in Syria. We urge donors to scale up their support for
the Syrian humanitarian effort. As various speakers
have emphasized this afternoon, the only sustainable
solution to the humanitarian crisis in Syria lies in a
peaceful resolution to the conflict. Unless and until that
is achieved, the difficult humanitarian situation in the
country will very likely persist. We therefore encourage
all parties to cooperate with Special Envoy de Mistura
and embrace a dialogue, with a view to reaching a
negotiated solution to the conflict.

