Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): The Netherlands has
noted with great concern that the most recent "six plus two"
meeting in Tashkent has not led to a resumption of the
inter-Afghan dialogue. It is disconcerting that, even as the
Tashkent talks were taking place, the Taliban were already
preparing for another major offensive.

In our view the Tashkent Declaration constitutes a
good basis for a solution to the conflict in Afghanistan and
may well be the best prospect for peace available. There is
no military solution to the Afghan conflict. We therefore
call upon the parties to lay down their arms and to resume
without delay the negotiating process under United Nations
auspices. The aim should be the creation of a multi-ethnic,
broad-based and representative government.

It is essential that the neighbouring countries, too,
commit themselves to the outcome of the Tashkent meeting.
All peace initiatives should be taken explicitly within the
framework of the "six plus two" process. Any foreign
military support to the Afghan factions is to be condemned.
It is of the utmost importance that the neighbouring
countries, including Pakistan, strictly observe the
commitment contained in the Tashkent Declaration not to
provide military support to either Afghan party and to
prevent the use of their territories for such purposes.

Another matter of great concern is the support within
Afghanistan for international terrorists such as Osama bin
Laden and international terrorist organizations. We call
upon the Afghan factions, especially the Taliban, to halt
their support for these terrorists immediately and to
cooperate with the efforts to bring them to justice.

The latest Taliban offensive has resulted in thousands
of victims, especially among the civilian population. There
are credible reports about serious human rights violations,
such as the use of child soldiers, arbitrary detention,
deportation and forced relocation of civilians, the forcible
separation of menfolk from their families, the murder of
innocent civilians and the burning of houses and crops.

The Netherlands condemns these acts in the strongest
possible terms. We call upon the warring factions to respect
human rights in general and to show special consideration
for the rights of ethnic minorities and women and girls,
as well as for those of civilians in armed conflict.

We welcome the start of the United Nations
investigation into the mass murders committed in 1997
and 1998 in Mazar-e-Sharif and northern Afghanistan. We
strongly insist that the Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in Afghanistan, Mr. Kamal Hossain,
should be enabled to investigate and monitor the overall
human rights situation in the country and report back to
the Security Council on this issue.

The resumed fighting has led to large numbers of
refugees and internally displaced persons. There are very
few facilities for these people. The situation in the
Panjsheer Valley, a remote and inaccessible area with
insufficient means of subsistence, is especially alarming.
The well-being of refugees and displaced persons is first
and foremost a responsibility of those who cause these
forced relocations. The parties should recognize their
responsibility and do everything they can to alleviate
human suffering.

We have welcomed the voluntary return of large
numbers of refugees to Afghanistan in the past few years.
We are seriously concerned, however, at the cases of
forced repatriation of Afghan refugees in recent months.
While we understand the burden refugees can put on the
available resources in a country of refuge, we appeal to
the Governments of countries with substantial numbers of
Afghan refugees to respect international refugee law.

The Netherlands would like to stress that the
resumption of the fighting in Afghanistan and the lack of
will to work towards a real process of reconciliation
seriously undermine the capability of the international
community to provide humanitarian assistance. The needs
of the Afghan population certainly justify continuation of
this assistance. We therefore strongly urge the warring
factions and the neighbouring countries to facilitate the
distribution of humanitarian aid.

The Netherlands is concerned at the production and
trade of narcotics and illicit drugs in both Taliban and
United Front areas.

I would like to conclude by expressing my
delegation's appreciation and continued support for the
untiring efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi, and the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan to reach a
peaceful solution to the conflict in Afghanistan. We
 

appeal to them to continue their efforts in order to bring an
early end to the fighting and to promote the negotiating
process in this country which has been ravaged by war for
far too long.

Finally, I would like to state that the Netherlands
concurs fully with the statement that will he delivered
later in this debate by the representative of Finland on
behalf of the European Union.

