Mr. Thiebaud (France) (interpretation from French): France has a dual interest in today's assessment
of the work of the multinational protection force in
Albania: as a member of the Security Council and as a
State participant in the force.

We should recall the circumstances in which the
force was established: Albania was in the grip of grave
internal disorder and widespread violence, which
threatened to plunge the country into chaos and which
seriously affected the security of the population and the

 

provision of supplies. The Albanian Government requested
United Nations help in overcoming the crisis and restoring
normal conditions for the functioning of the State and for
the life of the population.

We can be gratified today at the prompt reaction of
the United Nations and of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to that urgent appeal, and
we may draw encouraging lessons from it.

Eleven countries, under the leadership of Italy,
declared their readiness to send a total of up to 7,200 troops
to form a multinational protection force with the mission of
facilitating the prompt and safe delivery of humanitarian
assistance and of helping create the secure environment
needed for the missions of international organizations in
Albania, to provide humanitarian assistance and to help in
monitoring elections. By their actions, those European
countries demonstrated their solidarity with a country that
had appealed for assistance. On the ground they
encountered conditions that, by definition, were not easy,
and they thus agreed to take risks.

We believe that this operation is an example of crisis
management in Europe and of a prompt and effective
response - and European countries did indeed respond
promptly and effectively here. We wish also to commend
the force for having carried out its mandate with neutrality
and impartiality, as it cooperated with the Albanian
authorities - for that was certainly the spirit in which
States participants in the force conceived their mission. The
French delegation wishes finally to pay heartfelt tribute to
the way in which Italy assumed the leadership of the force,
enabling it completely to fulfil the task entrusted to it.

The Security Council too shouldered its responsibilities
by authorizing States participating in the multinational
protection force to conduct the necessary operations. It thus
demonstrated once more that it wishes to respond
favourably to States that voluntarily seek to contribute to
the settlement of a crisis - and to do so in a transparent
manner vis-a-vis the organ bearing responsibility for
international peace and security in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. This is not
the first or the last time the Council will have acted thus,
by placing initiatives taken by a group of States to help
overcome and resolve a crisis in the framework of respect
for the competence and principles of the United Nations.

Other international organizations too made a
substantial contribution in responding to Albania's request
for assistance, notably the OSCE, whose presence on the
ground made it possible to hold elections under
acceptable conditions. My delegation pays tribute to that
organization.

The international community's action in Albania
over the past four months was a successful example of
cooperation among States and regional and international
organizations in acting promptly and in an appropriate
manner to prevent a fresh crisis from worsening to the
point of threatening the stability, peace and security of a
whole region. Yet if all the benefits of the emergency
action that has just been completed are to be realized, the
stabilization of the country must be consolidated and a
contribution must be made to economic and social
recovery. That is the task now facing all States and
relevant international organizations.

