Mr. Ohin (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to commend you, Madam President, on convening
this debate on the prevention of conflict in Africa, a
continent always beset by recurring conflicts. I would
like to express my gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive briefing on the question under
consideration.

The persistence of conflicts in Africa is a major
obstacle to its socioeconomic development. While very
often it is relatively easy to identify the immediate
factors that trigger those conflicts, the deep causes
underlying them are more complex. Their complexity is
due to the fact that they originate from a combination of
multiple factors - political, social and economic - and
to the fact that those deep causes must be sought not
only in the legacy of colonialism, but also in ancient
struggles for vital areas carried out by emperors or
kings.

It is therefore useful to identify all those factors,
whose combined effects have had a negative impact on
the peace and stability of States, and to provide States
with the most appropriate solutions in order to halt
their potential tragic consequences for the legitimate
aspirations of a continent for lasting socioeconomic
development.

It goes without saying that following the redrawing
of the map of Africa, which saw the emergence of
new States created within the borders imposed by the
colonizer, several factors, both internal and external,
have contributed to the destabilization of State
institutions and still today are at the root of conflicts
on the continent. One could cite the contest for political
power and the poverty of populations, which are often
identified as primary causes of internal conflicts, as
well as border problems, which have been at the heart of
several inter-State armed conflicts since independence.

Since gaining independence, African States have
been confronted with the problem of the difficult
choice of representative leaders. Traditional institutions
that were familiar to local populations were largely
dismantled by the colonizer, and only the Western
model of Government, not readily adaptable to the
social realities of Africa, became widespread across the
continent. The internal conflicts that break out in Africa
are often rooted in that laborious apprenticeship in a
model of Government and external political concepts
for which Africans are not only unprepared, but which
also they do not adapt to sufficiently.

It must be noted, unfortunately, that that inadequacy,
that structural and functional maladaptation of the
State and of institutions bequeathed by colonialism
and mechanically slapped on in Africa, continues to
generate illegal struggles for power that in many cases
are transformed into ethnic or religious rivalries that
strengthen the feeling of belonging to a group, to the
detriment of the national identity.

Alongside political factors and those related to
non-respect for human rights, to the absence of social
justice or to the marginalization of some social groups,
there are also economic factors. Those factors are no less
important and to a very great extent have contributed
to weakening the African State and to favouring the
emergence of numerous conflicts.

This is a matter, inter alia, of bad management of
economic resources, the growing impoverishment of
populations, increasingly difficult access to basic social
services and a lack ofprospects for young people, whose
numbers are rapidly growing. Those situations, which
create a climate of social tensions and subsequently
lead to the weakening of State structures, in many cases
pave the way for the incursion of armed groups, often
ethnic-based, into political life. They seize power even
though they are not prepared for it.

Another conflict factor has to do with the borders
of most African countries, often drawn by the colonial
Powers in an arbitrary manner to suit their exclusive
interests. That artificial delimitation brought together
fundamentally different peoples and divided others
having the same cultural identity. To that one must
add the porous nature of borders, which facilitates the
uncontrolled circulation of weapons that fuel rebels and
other armed groups.

Furthermore, ethnic problems are also accompanied
by resource issues. A simple difference between
two communities on both sides of a border can lead
to tensions between States. When those areas have
important resources, their management can cause even
more serious misunderstandings.

Given those conflicts, which have seriously
hampered and, in the current state of affairs, continue
to compromise development in Africa, it is necessary,
in the framework of conflict prevention, to tackle them
at the roots of the evil through a comprehensive global
and regional approach. That strategy must include a
focus on promoting a democratic culture, on reducing
poverty through an equitable distribution of the
resources of the country and on swiftly implementing
border demarcation programmes.

With regard to the promotion of a democratic
culture - the contest for political power being in
Africa one of the major causes of many armed conflicts
since independence - the promotion and strengthening
of a democratic culture, guarantor of human rights,
could help to reduce the risk of conflict by providing
everybody with equal opportunities to participate in
the management of public affairs. The creation of the
United Nations Democracy Fund to assist countries
that are seeking to establish democracy or to strengthen
it is therefore a decisive advance along those lines.

In addition, African initiatives for democracy and
good governance, such as the African Peer Review
Mechanism and the African Charter on Democracy,
Elections and Governance, which are genuine tools
for promoting democracy on the continent, represent
major advances in the field. The full implementation
of the provisions of those instruments and awareness-
raising among the various national political actors
could contribute greatly to the entrenchment of general
democratic principles on our continent.
The overhaul of States' capacities for political
governance, and hence their ability to address political
and social vulnerabilities, will not promote lasting
peace if we do not, at the same time, seek to reduce
Africa's endemic poverty.

Situations of scarcity and poverty provide fertile
breeding grounds for conflicts. It is therefore urgent
to rethink the economic governance of African States
through a change in mindset, as it is well known that
the economic problems of Africa lie not so much in its
poverty but, rather, in the mismanagement of its many
riches.

In addition, the benefits of those resources should
be equitably shared, and that should not be limited to
resources that can be mined. Land and water should
be used in more efficient ways in order to provide
opportunities, such as fishing, farming, grazing and
agriculture, to all populations.

Borders are also a major issue in Africa. While
States subscribe to the principle of the inviolability
of the borders inherited from colonization, which is a
principle adopted by the African Union, the demarcation
of those boundaries has, for several decades now, led
to structural conflicts on the continent. It is therefore
important to remedy that situation by promoting peace,
peaceful coexistence between divided communities
and security in border regions and their economic
development. In that regard, we urge the international
community to further support the African Union's
border programme, which is aimed at completing the
demarcation of borders across the continent in order to
reduce the risk of inter-State conflict over resources.

Moreover, my country believes that it is essential
to encourage and promote projects on the shared
management of transborder natural resources, on the
involvement of local populations on both sides of the
border in border projects and, ultimately, on regional
integration, which will help reduce tensions along
borders.

Togo believes that civil society organizations, while
not substitutes for the State, have a key role to play in
the culture of peace. Efforts should therefore be made
to strengthen the capacity of civil society organizations
through an approach that includes participatory
development, where institutional and policy changes
respond to the deep and legitimate desires of the
populations concerned.

Let me conclude by emphasizing the need for
Africa to find locally generated structural solutions to
address the deep causes of conflict. We believe that,
if many proposed approaches have been doomed to
failure or have at best had mixed results, it is because
they were, for the most part, imposed from the outside
on the affected populations, actors or victims of those
conflicts. It is also important that the Council use
conflict prevention mechanisms as much as possible, in
particular as provided by the Charter in Articles 40 and
41. Employing such mechanisms will have the advantage
of promoting early-warning systems and strengthening
the role of the Security Council in conflict prevention,
which is by far less expensive than peacekeeping.

