The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the decision taken by the Secretary-
General to mount a military operation by the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) to relieve its surrounded
peacekeepers and military observers at Kailahun.
lt expresses its satisfaction at the successful
outcome of the operation, with the minimum of
casualties among United Nations personnel. The
Security Council expresses its admiration for the
professionalism, determination and robustness
displayed by all UNAMSIL forces involved in
this difficult and dangerous operation, and for the
leadership and skill of the Force Commander,
General Jetley, under whose personal command it
was carried out.

"The Security Council believes that the
hostile stance taken by the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF) towards UNAMSIL personnel at
Kailahun had become intolerable. It fully concurs
with the Secretary-General's assessment in this
regard. It is firmly of the view that, after over two
months' denial of freedom of movement by the
RUF, the exhaustion of intensive diplomatic and
political efforts and the recent decision by the
RUF to impede the resupply to Kailahun, the
Force Commander, under these circumstances,
had no choice but to take resolute action to
restore the security and freedom of movement of
UNAMSIL personnel, as authorized under the
mandate of UNAMSIL.

"The Security Council pays tribute to the
forces of the Indian contingent of UNAMSIL,
who took the lead in the execution of the
the

operation. The Council expresses its profound
condolences to the family of the Indian sergeant,
Krishan Kumar, who gave his life in the cause of
peace. It also expresses its sympathies to those
who were wounded. The Security Council
commends equally the critical role played by the
Nigerian and Ghanian contingents who provided
essential flank and rear support, without which
the operation would not have been possible, as
well as the contribution of the force as a whole.
The Council also expresses its appreciation to the
United Kingdom for the valuable logistical
support provided. The cooperation, coherence and
sense of common purpose displayed by all
concerned should be considered an example of
the very best in United Nations multilateral
peacekeeping.

"The Council believes that there is now a
firm foundation on which UNAMSIL can build as
it continues to implement its mandate and work
towards a lasting peaceful settlement to the
conflict in Sierra Leone. While noting these
positive developments, the Council recognizes
that there is still much to be done, and expresses
its full support to UNAMSIL in its efforts to
implement its mandate."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2000/24.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 2.45 p.m.
