First, allow me to welcome you, Sir, and thank you for presiding over this meeting. I thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and African Union (AU) High Representative for Mali and the Sahel Pierre Buyoya for their briefings. I would also like to convey my sincere appreciation to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), which continues to do its best to implement its mandate. I would also like pay tribute to all the personnel who have paid the ultimate sacrifice in this noble endeavour, including the two peacekeepers who lost their lives in the quest for peace in Mali. I would like to share three points. First, we are encouraged by the progress achieved thus far. As mentioned by the AU High Representative, the inclusive national dialogue has raised many hopes. We also welcome the holding of the second-round legislative elections, which saw a threefold increase in women elected to the National Assembly, which is welcome news. The redeployment of the reconstituted army to Gao, Kidal, Menaka and Timbuktu is also politically significant, as it marks the return of State presence in the north. All of this is happening against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease pandemic, which poses a significant challenge. We view it as crucial to continue supporting all Malian stakeholders in accelerating the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Moving forward, all efforts should be focused on achieving further progress, including: the holding of the constitutional referendum; the transfer of competencies to local authorities; the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration catch-up phase; and implementation of pilot projects for the Northern Development Zone. Secondly, we remain concerned by the volatile security situation. We condemn all attacks targeting MINUSMA and international forces in Mali. We reiterate once again that any attack on United Nations peacekeeping personnel is unacceptable and its perpetrators must be brought to justice. We are also concerned at the ongoing clashes between militias, as well as the intercommunal violence, which have resulted in many casualties. Despite these issues, MINUSMA has performed relatively well and embarked ona crucial adaptation plan. We support that plan and efforts to generate the required capabilities. We have indicated our initial pledge for MINUSMA's adaptation plan and will further explore possibilities of future support. And, as I have stated on many occasions, including in the Security Council Chamber, we are proud that our peacekeepers, including women personnel, have been contributing to MINUSMA. Currently, we have more than 1,600 peacekeepers deployed in various missions in Africa. In this regard, I would like to stress the importance of the provision of adequate resources for MINUSMA. As the Force Commander reiterated during the meeting earlier this month (see S/2020/514), MINUSMA must have the means to properly execute its mandate. We therefore call on all countries to fulfil their outstanding contributions, which will be crucial for improving peacekeeping performance. In line with the appeal of the Secretary-General, we also call on all countries to ensure the reliability and predictability of the overall budget for United Nations peacekeeping and to avoid cutting the existing budget, which was already quite insufficient for the proper undertaking of peacekeeping missions. On MINUSMA, we note the assessment of the Secretary-General regarding MINUSMA support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, and affirm that we must continue to consider the options presented for enhanced international support. Like other speakers, we also support the extension of MINUSMA's mandate. Thirdly, lasting peace and stability in Mali can be achieved only through a comprehensive approach. That includes providing basic services, reducing community violence, dismantling militias and creating opportunities for young people. It is also important to alleviate humanitarian suffering, address displacement and combat impunity and human rights violations. In conclusion, we concur with the Secretary-General that the full implementation of the Peace Agreement remains the viable path to stability in Mali. MINUSMA's presence is crucial, and its mandate remains relevant. We need to continue supporting Malian stakeholders and MINUSMA in advancing the peace process despite this difficult time. We must work together towards long-term peace, stability and prosperity in the country. Indonesia will continue to support and contribute in that regard.
