Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I am honoured to make
this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries:
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own
country, Norway.

We thank Senegal for initiating this important
debate. Asymmetrical threats, including those posed
by terrorism and organized crime, are a reality of
contemporary conflicts. The perpetrators of such
violence are spoilers ofpeace. Of the 11 countries most
affected by terrorism, 7 currently host United Nations
peace operations. The Nordic countries fully subscribe
to the recommendations of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (HIPPO) in its report (see S/2015/446) that United Nations missions are not suited
to conduct counter-terrorism operations. However,
where asymmetrical threats are present, United Nations
missions must adapt to deal with those challenges.
Allow me to make five brief points.

First, all missions must be provided with the
necessary capabilities to fulfil their mandate and ensure
the safety of United Nations personnel. The HIPPO
report calls for a comprehensive quality reform in
United Nations operations, including through adequate
medical supplies and support. The Nordic countries are
pleased that the United Nations has initiated important
improvements in that spirit, but much more needs to
be done.

Some innovative developments indicate that we are
heading in the right direction. In the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the Nordic countries, together with other partners,
have pioneered the use of intelligence through the All
Sources Information Fusion Unit (ASIFU). ASIFU helps
the Mission to better monitor potential perpetrators
of asymmetrical Violence, thereby strengthening its
ability to prevent and respond to attacks. Based on
that experience, the Nordic countries recommend that
the United Nations further develop its technological
and analytical tools to better understand, prevent and
respond to radicalization and asymmetrical Violence.

Secondly, even in challenging security
environments, United Nations missions must continue
to reach out to local communities. Where necessary,
United Nations missions must be ready to act decisively
and without hesitation to protect civilians.

Thirdly, the United Nations should deepen its
partnership with regional organizations, the African
Union (AU) in particular. The AU has gained rich
experience from dealing with asymmetrical conflict
environments, such as in Somalia. We believe that a
deepened partnership and exchange of best practices
would benefit all parties, including in planning and
conducting operations.

Fourthly, we must ensure that all United Nations
personnel operating in complex security environments
have the adequate training and equipment to carry out
their tasks. We must invest in leadership at all levels.
Where necessary, the United Nations should facilitate
and provide assistance to capacity-building and training
towards that end.

My fifth and final point is that we must address
the root causes of conflict and invest more in
prevention, often taking the regional perspective into
account. Priority should be given to stopping illicit
financial flows and the recruitment of foreign terrorist
fighters, as well as to improving development policies,
strengthening fragile States, involving women and
offering young people education and job opportunities.

Together with all relevant stakeholders, within and
outside the United Nations family, we must be willing to
engage for the long haul in order to prepare the ground
for genuine political solutions and to sustain peace.

