Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would first like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for March and to wish you
every success. I would also like to commend Equatorial
Guinea for its conduct of the presidency in February.

We are grateful to Mr. Miroslav Lajcak,
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Slovakia, for his detailed annual
briefing on the work of the Organization and the issues
on its agenda. His country's chairmanship of the OSCE
comes at a difficult time, when the foundations of the
multilateral system and international law itself are
being severely tested. Lately we have been hearing a
great deal about the so-called rules-based order instead.

We are committed to constructive cooperation with
the Slovak chairmanship of the OSCE. For our part,
we believe that the OSCE should strive to fulfil the
functions for which it was established, that is, as a forum
for equal dialogue and collective decision-making on
security questions. The focus should be on issues such as
combating terrorism, drug trafficking and cyberthreats,
harmonizing integration processes, supporting
traditional values, protecting the rights of national
minorities and countering neo-Nazism. We hope to see
constructive cooperation continue between the OSCE
and the United Nations in those areas, and much has
already been done in that regard. It is also important to
implement the confidence-building measures developed
within the OSCE to reduce the risks of conflict in the
area of information and communication technology
by preventing the militarization of the information
space, interference in the internal affairs of States and
violations of their digital sovereignty.

With regard to efforts to introduce into the OSCE's
agenda topics such as security-sector reform and
governance that do not fall under its remit, we believe
that efforts on that front should be conducted within the
United Nations on the basis of resolution 2151 (2014),
which applies to countries that have been completely
ruined by conflict and are in the post-conflict
reconstruction phase. There are no such countries in
the OSCE area.

Mr. Lajcak has invaluable experience as President
of the General Assembly and knows the Organization
well. He knows that international organizations today
cannot act in isolation. It is in that context that we see
the cooperation between the Organization and regional
and subregional organizations on the basis of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and the 2006
decision of the OSCE Permanent Council.

The cooperation between the United Nations and
the OSCE on the ground should help to stabilize the
OSCE space. That is not possible without resolving
the question of Kosovo on the basis of resolution
1244 (1999), seeking compromises on the conflicts in
Transnistria and Nagorno Karabakh and establishing
a non-politicized dialogue between Georgia, Abkhazia
and South Ossetia in the framework of the Geneva
talks on security in the South Caucasus. We hope that
the implementation of the OSCE Ministerial Council's
declaration on the Mediterranean in Milan will lead
to greater stability in the region and in the countries
of Europe.

We will continue to participate in the structured
dialogue on security threats, which is itself a
confidence-building measure and may open up
prospects for improving the situation in the Euro-
Atlantic area unless, of course, that format is
politicized. Listening to some of today's speakers
without an understanding of what the OSCE does, one
might get the impression that Vienna considers nothing
but the situations in Ukraine and the post-Soviet space
generally. That is a well-known misunderstanding that
our Western partners seem to be trying to embed in
the public consciousness. We should not forget that the
OSCE, with its 57 member States, deals with security
issues in general, working to promote stability, peace
and democracy among a population of 1 billion people.
In that context, among other things, it discusses issues
of arms control, the fight against terrorism, human
trafficking, democratization, freedom of the media
and the situation of national minorities. There are quite
enough problems in those areas to the west of Vienna,
and we urge members not to forget that.

Unfortunately, in speaking about OSCE activities,
we cannot ignore the internal Ukrainian crisis. On
12 February, the Security Council met to discuss the issue
on the occasion of the fourth anniversary of the signing
of the package of measures for the implementation
of the Minsk agreements (see S/PV.8461). We are
grateful to Ambassador Apakan, Head of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, for his frank
assessments of the situation on the ground and in
particular for his affirmation of the lack of evidence of
a Russian military presence in Donbas.

In adopting resolution 2202 (2015), which endorsed
the package of measures as the basis for the Ukrainian
settlement, all the members of the Security Council
affirmed that the key to the country's stabilization
was the comprehensive implementation of the Minsk
agreements. They reiterated it in June 2018, when they
adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/20l8/12) in
support of the agreements, and reiterated it again on
12 February. Today we have already heard words in
support of the Minsk agreements and will undoubtedly
hear them again. And yet things are right back where
they started. We have to admit that without Kyiv's
implementation of the Minsk agreements in good faith,
no genuine settlement can be achieved. Meanwhile,
Kyiv is openly sabotaging the Minsk agreements and
pointing fingers at Russia, as its Western partners are
also doing and as we have heard more than once today.
Kyiv's sabotage is possible only because its Western
sponsors cover for it.

A settlement is impossible without the consent of
the people in these regions. Here at the United Nations
we call that inclusivity, and that principle applies
equally to the OSCE. In Syria, Yemen, Libya and
Afghanistan - everywhere, in fact - we call on the
opposing sides to sit down at the negotiating table and
reach a compromise. But for some reason that does not
apply to Donbas and its citizens.

For our part, we have a direct interest in a speedy
end to the conflict in Ukraine. We urge the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine to intensify
its monitoring activities in Donbas. What is needed is
not fragmented information but rather a comprehensive
look at the military situation of the armed forces in
Ukraine. We need a clear determination as to which
side is exacerbating the situation and the shelling, and
on the consequences for the civilian population and the
destruction of civilian infrastructure. We will insist
that the Monitoring Mission produce detailed thematic
reports on this issue. However, we should point out
that the OSCE's mandate is not limited to Donbas but
applies to the entire territory of Ukraine. In particular,
the Monitoring Mission should be following the
situation throughout Ukraine regarding human rights
and national minorities, including on the linguistic,
religious and education fronts, and ensuring that they
are observed, with special attention to issues such
as the expansion of neo-Nazism, the falsification of
history and the persecution ofjournalists, which have
been flourishing unchecked in Ukraine.

We are outraged by the declaration and the letter
from Pavlo Klimkin, Ukraine's Foreign Minister,
sent to the Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights (ODIHR) in January, concerning
Ukraine's refusal to admit observers from Russia
into Ukraine for its presidential elections even under
the auspices of ODIHR. It is an unprecedented and
discriminatory ban and a gross violation of the OSCE'S
founding commitments, specifically paragraph 8 of
the 1990 Document of the Copenhagen Meeting of the
Conference on the Human Dimension of the Conference
on Security and Cooperation in Europe.

Russia considers the OSCE an important
mechanism for building an equal and indivisible
system of European security, and we have an interest
in strengthening its role and authority. We would like
to wish Slovakia effectiveness and every success in its
work at the helm of the OSCE in the interests of all of
our countries' cooperation and security. For our part,
we are willing to have an open and inclusive dialogue
on every aspect of its agenda.

