Mr. Gambari: I wish to thank our visitor,
Mr. Miranda, Foreign Minister of the Republic of
Angola. I would also like to thank members of the
Council and other delegations for their important
statements and for the confidence which they place in
the efforts of the Secretary-General, in close
consultation with the Government of Angola, civil
society and other stakeholders in the country, to help
promote peace and national reconciliation there.

I wish to assure all that we in the Secretariat will
not relent in those efforts aimed at helping to find ways
and means to stop the war in Angola, which has gone
on for far too long. In our view, the end of the fighting
throughout Angola is the best way to end the
difficulties surrounding the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to those in need in Angola. It is also the best
way to end the suffering, at last, of the people of
Angola as a consequence of the war.

May I recall that, about two years ago, the four
pillars of United Nations policy towards Angola were
not universally accepted or, indeed, very popular. Two
years later, those pillars of our policy have been
received and today endorsed by the Council for their
continued relevance. I believe they need restating.

First, there can be no military solution to the
conflict in Angola and UNITA, above all, needs to
realize and accept that fact.

Secondly, UNITA is primarily responsible for
continuing the conflict and thereby for inflicting
enormous suffering on the innocent civilian population
of Angola. Therefore, the Security Council has the
responsibility of tightening its own sanctions against
UNITA in order to make the armed wing of UNITA
abandon violence and embrace the political process.

Thirdly, the efforts of civil society to promote a
peaceful political settlement of the conflict in Angola
need the full support of the international community.

Fourthly, we need to support the efforts of the
Angolan Government in the provision of humanitarian
assistance for those in need in Angola and in
capacity-building on human rights.
I have one other point. The delegation of
Singapore drew attention to the state of disrepair of the
airfield in Kuito in Bie province, which will retard the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in need. I
am glad to inform members that our Office in Luanda
informed me today that we received a special message
on behalf of the Government of Angola at the highest
level confirming that urgent action has commenced to
repair the airfield and that the Government will
increase efforts to transport relief materials from
Huambo to Kuito, in close collaboration with the
United Nations agencies.

Finally, I have taken careful note of the
expression of support for the mission to Angola that I
will be undertaking on behalf of the Secretary-General.
I look forward very much to the visit and hope that,
with the usual cooperation of the Government of
Angola, civil society and other stakeholders there, the
consultations in the country will be positive and
contribute, in however modest a way, to finding lasting
peace in the conflict in Angola. As usual, I will be
delighted to make a report to the Council upon my
return. That is, of course, after I have briefed the boss,
the Secretary-General, who has sent me.

