Ms. Brandt: I offer special thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, for her determined efforts and those of
her Office to keep children in armed conflict safe;
to the United States for organizing this open debate;
to Luxembourg for chairing the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict; and to the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations for our productive
partnership on child protection.

It is indeed a terrible irony that in the twenty-fifth
year of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, a
time when we should be celebrating global progress in
children's welfare, we are witnessing so many atrocities
against children. Efforts to keep children safe in armed
conflicts are continuing, so there is some progress to
report. But challenges and setbacks have taken a tragic
toll on children.

Since our last open debate on the subject (see S/PV.7129), children in Iraq, Syria, South Sudan,
Gaza and the Central African Republic have suffered
indescribably; they have been recruited, used,
orphaned and killed. They have witnessed massacres
that no child should ever see, they have endured pain
from which they should have been protected, and they
have been brutalized. We have seen that too often,
their schools, which should be safe havens, are not,
as playgrounds become battlegrounds. Governments
and non-State armed groups continue to use schools
to store weapons, detain prisoners and house soldiers.
Teachers and students are targeted. I am, of course,
thinking especially of the more than 200 Nigerian
schoolgirls abducted and still missing, and Ijoin the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
emphasizing that we must bring them home. We must
redouble our efforts to protect all children and schools
from targeted attacks.

So UNICEF appreciates all the more the initiative
by the Global Coalition to Protect Education from
Attack and its partners to advocate for schools as safe
and protected spaces, including through the new Lucens
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from
Military Use during Armed Conflict, which outline
actions Governments can take to end military use of
schools. UNICEF therefore calls on all Member States
to support and implement the Lucens Guidelines so that
schools can remain places of learning and hope where
children can build strong foundations for their futures
and those of their families.

I should like to say a few words on the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign, launched six months ago by Special
Representative Zerrougui with UNICEF. We have seen
some encouraging results since that time. For example,
Myanmar's armed forces recently released 91 children,

and of course, we hope that that will be followed by
the release of all other children identified through the
ongoing age verification and reporting process. The
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
implementing its action plan and has released hundreds
of children, and UNICEF will continue to support the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's efforts to make its
army child-free. As the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General mentioned this morning, the armed
forces of Chad have achieved their action plan and have
been subsequently delisted, as noted in the annexes of
the Secretary-General's report (S/2014/339).

While we note such achievements, we also remain
focused on the challenges and especially the recruitment
of children by non-State armed groups. In the Central
African Republic, the Sudan and South Sudan, among
others, children continue to be mobilized, manning
checkpoints, loading weapons, carrying guns and
worse. In some places, however, a number of non-State
armed groups are taking bold steps to end that heinous
practice. In the Philippines, the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front convened a meeting with 30 of its commanders at
which the group recommitted to protecting children. In
Myanmar, the country task force has begun discussions
with the Karen National Union, the Karenni National
Progressive Party and the Kachin Independence
Organization and hopes to engage other listed parties
soon.

But we need to see more - more negotiations to
release children held by these groups, more efforts to
changes attitudes about the role of children in conflict
and more rehabilitation centres to help mend their
hearts and their minds, so that they can continue their
journeys towards better, more prosperous futures.

Thankfully, some children have begun that journey.
Nanette, who was recruited by the Se'le'ka rebels in the
Central African Republic, said this to us:

"I was released from Seleka at the start of this
year to a transit centre. I was disturbed when I
arrived, very nervous and worried about my future.
I cried and lived folded in on myself. But, with the
support of the team, I have learnt to move on and
build a life. I now live with my big sister and have
begun a vocational training programme".

Fortunately, Nanette is now healing, standing tall
and reclaiming her future. Let us give more children
like her that blessed opportunity.

