Mr. Inderfurth (United States): To our regret, the
situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, has not improved. The

 

talks are stalled. The Abkhaz are apparently as intransigent
as ever. A quarter of a million refugees are still deprived of
the comfort of their homes. The threat to the unarmed
observers of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG) has grown.

Today's resolution addresses these issues. The Security
Council has spoken to reaffirm the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Georgia. We have called for the
Secretary-General, and the Russian Federation as facilitator,
to intensify their efforts to achieve a comprehensive
political settlement of the conflict. Of course, neither the
Secretary-General nor the Russian Federation can achieve
this goal without the full cooperation and participation of
the parties. The parties bear the true burden of making
peace.

The resolution reflects the fact that the parties have
not displayed equal amounts of flexibility. The Abkhaz
leadership acts as if an independent Abkhazia were a
possibility. It is not. President Shevardnadze, on the other
hand, has made a public offer of broad autonomy for
Abkhazia. In his recent letter to the Security Council
President, he reiterated this offer and noted that this broad
autonomy could include a parliament and a supreme court,
as well as such attributes of statehood as a flag, an emblem
and an anthem. We understand that the Abkhaz leader
Ardzinba is currently in Moscow and will meet next week
with the Secretary-General's Special Envoy. We appeal to
him to listen carefully to Ambassador Brunner and to
engage in a meaningful and flexible way with the Georgian
side.

In the meantime, UNOMIG personnel, as well as
others in the Gali region, are facing a grave threat from
landmines. This threat is evidence that some elements in the
region want only to perpetuate violence and conflict. The
resolution adopted today condemns these actions and calls
upon the parties to take all measures to prevent mine
laying. The United States supports the Secretariat's
approach to this threat, as outlined in the Secretary-
General's report, and we encourage the implementation of
these measures as soon as possible. We also think that the
these measures should not be considered exhaustive and
that the Secretariat should continue to look at other modes
of reacting to the landmine threat.

The resolution refers to the conclusions of the
Budapest summit of the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE). CSCE participating States

"expressed their deep concern over 'ethnic

cleansing', the massive expulsion of people,

predominantly Georgian, from their living areas and
the deaths of large numbers of innocent civilians".

( S/l 994/1435, annex, part II)
These horrors must not be repeated.

The United States firmly supports the proposal for
the programme for the protection and promotion of
human rights in Abkhazia, to be carried out by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in
cooperation with the OSCE. Today's resolution calls on
the Secretary-General to report to the Council by
15 August on possible arrangements for opening the
office in Sukhumi. Agreement to this centre from both
sides represents a first step in breaking down the barriers
of mistrust and hatred that have arisen between them. The
United States delegation expects that the Secretary-
General and other members of the Council will seriously
consider financing the office through voluntary
contributions rather than adding the financial and
administrative burden of funding the office to UNOMIG' s
responsibilities. We expect to be able to make a
substantial voluntary contribution to the office and ask
other Member States to do likewise.

The United States shares the Secretary-General's
observation, as expressed in his report of 1 July 1996,
that he, as executor of the international community's will,

"cannot continue to request resources for
peacemaking and peace-keeping in situations where
there is little prospect of making progress".
(5/1996/507, para. 56)

As he further noted,

"it is only the parties that can establish peace, and
they must do it through dialogue and mutual
accommodation". (Ibid.)

The time for that is now. The parties must demonstrate
the necessary will to cooperate. If they do not, and if the
status quo continues for another six months, they must
face the possibility that the international community will
take an even closer look at whether UNOMIG belongs in
Georgia.

The United States again urges all parties to the
conflict in Georgia to cooperate fully with UNOMIG,
cease destructive acts such as mine laying, and make a

 

concerted effort towards resolving peacefully their
differences. Only in this way can UNOMIG successfully
carry out its responsibilities.

Finally, may I express my delegation's great
appreciation for the dedicated service of the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy, Mr. Brunner, the Deputy Special
Envoy, Mr. Bota, and all the personnel of UNOMIG.

