Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): I
commend your leadership, Mr. President, in setting
aside today to discuss an issue of enormous important
not only to every country represented around the table,
but to all the members of the United Nations. I think
the briefing we heard from our Legal Counsel, Hans
Corell, lays out the challenges before us, as well as the
opportunities. I think we should all pause and review
our own priorities in dealing with this very difficult but
crucial and important issue. My country has certainly
been the Victim of terrorism, including quite recently at
some of our embassies in Africa. We have all been
awakened by the shocking news of a sudden terrorist
attack on our citizens or a hijacking. I think that taking
some time out of our busy schedule to look at how we

S/PV.4242

 

can move forward on this problem is a crucial priority.
We commend the Russian presidency for doing so.

As resolution 1269 (1999) makes clear, the
suppression of acts of terrorism is essential if
international peace and security are to be maintained,
which is one of the priorities of the Security Council's
mission. The suppression of terrorism is crucial to our
own mandate to maintain international peace and
security.

Mr. Corell has provided us with a crystal-clear
analysis of the roles of the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Secretariat, as well as of
their respective responsibilities and of the need for
continued action by all concerned to cope with the
scourge of terrorism. Whether it be the very real threat
from groups that provide safe-haven and comfort to
those who attack embassies, or other groups that
harbour individuals who attack civilian aviation, we
must all stand ready to cooperate and make use of the
opportunities provided by the United Nations to
eliminate the threat of terrorism.

The tools we have to combat terrorism must have
the strong support of all members of this body. Our
primary tool against terrorism is that of sanctions. We
have imposed sanctions against those who have carried
out acts of terror and against those who provide haven
to terrorists. We must recommit ourselves to supporting
such measures and ensuring that Member States follow
through on the commitments imposed on them by the
Security Council. In addition to this, we have various
conventions against terrorism. Those States that have
not ratified the existing conventions should consider
doing so urgently. Those States that are parties to the
conventions must seek to cooperate to give them full
force and effect.

Unrelated issues must not be allowed to prevent
progress on key conventions. For instance, the work on
the draft conventions currently before the Ad Hoc
Committee must be carried forward, and not be taken
as an opportunity to attempt to resolve issues more
properly considered in the First Committee as a kind of
quid pro quo for agreement on the all-important
convention on nuclear terrorism.

No one can justify terrorism. We must all make
the fight against terrorism a priority. We welcome the
opportunity for us all to be reminded of what has been
accomplished, of how our accomplishments must be
given effect, and of what remains to be done. Let us all
cooperate to eliminate the scourge of terrorism.

