Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I have the honour today to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.

First, I want to thank France for taking the initiative
to convene this important debate. I also thank Foreign
Minister Fabius and Secretary-General Ban for their
remarks earlier today.

The situation in Syria and Iraq today is a human
catastrophe with devastating consequences far beyond
the Middle East. Violent extremism and religious
intolerance are a source of untold suffering. No
community escapes that Vicious cycle. The majority
communities, as well as the minorities, have seen
friends and family killed, immense suffering and
destruction of homes, communities and infrastructure.

Efforts must be intensified to stop that mayhem.
The war in Syria is now in its fifth year. We urge the
Security Council to push for a political solution that
can put an end to the conflict. Ethnic and religious
minorities are often especially vulnerable and prone to
becoming Victims of various human rights violations
and abuses, for example, targeted mass killings,
extrajudicial executions, enforced disappearances,
torture, sexual Violence and enslavement - crimes
that affect, not least, women and children. Other forms
of humiliation include vandalizing places of worship
and cemeteries as well as land-grabbing with complete
disregard for our common universal heritage. The
Nordic countries demand that those responsible for
those atrocities - many of which amount to crimes
against humanity - be prosecuted.

Recent events in Iraq demonstrate how persons
from different religious and ethnic groups have been
forcibly expelled from their homes, such as the Yazidis
and Christians on the plain of Niniveh in Iraq. Those
are, sadly, not unique examples of communities forcibly
expelled from their ancient habitats. The hundreds of
Assyrians kidnapped in Syria and whose fate remains
unknown provide another example of the brutality of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Nobody
who does not fit ISIL's worldview is spared, whether
they be Christian, Muslim, Yazidi or from other
communities.

Aside from the immediate suffering of the
affected, the risks of ethno-religious cleansing are
evident. A region that was once home to a mosaic of
communities 4 Christian, Jewish, Mandean, Muslim,
Yazidi and Zoroastrian - risks being reduced to a
political entity of paralyzing uniformity. The ethnic
and religious diversity of the Middle East needs to be
preserved. In the absence of a political solution, we
need to address the humanitarian situation and show
solidarity with Syria's neighbours. Lebanon, Jordan
and Turkey have shouldered a huge burden. Nordic
countries have contributed substantially to the World
Bank Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Lebanon and a
similar fund for Jordan.

We all must take responsibility for those who flee
persecution, atrocities and conflict in search of a safe
haven. Since the civil war in Lebanon broke out in
1975, the Nordic countries have received thousands of
migrants and refugees from the Middle East. My own
country, Sweden, has offered a new home to more than
70,000 Syrians since the outbreak of that conflict. The
conflicts in Iraq and Syria need political solutions and
highlight the need of inclusive governance. The Nordic
countries provide strong support for United Nations
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura in his efforts.
Policies must be inclusive and offer political space
for all - majority as well as minority populations.
Reconciliation efforts are key.

The increasing threat of radicalization in parts of
the region makes the need for a solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict all the more pressing. As the facts
on the ground are rapidly changing, we urgently need
to send a clear and convincing message to younger
generations that there is an alternative to violence and
the status quo. We stress the importance of restarting
peace negotiations in order to achieve a comprehensive
peace agreement based on a two-State solution.

As the tragic events during the past few years
have shown, no part of the world, including the Nordic
countries, is free of the ailments of sectarian and
gender-based violence. We are all confronted with the
challenges of Islamophobia, anti-Semitism and other
forms of xenophobia. The strongest countermeasure
against polarization is inclusive participation. We
welcome the intention of the Secretary-General to
convene an advisory panel on today's important topic.

