Mr. Menkerios: Since the Security Council was
in the Sudan recently, I will focus only on the
developments that have taken place since the Council's
visit.

First, with respect to the security situation,
President Mbeki spoke at length about the events in
Abyei, which up until this agreement remained just as
it was, with some exchanges around the Kiir River
between the parties. Hopefully today's agreement will
bring that to an end, but to date the situation remains
very tense indeed.

President Mbeki also talked about the security
situation in Southern Kordofan, where fighting is
ongoing. There is hope, however, since, as was
explained, the two parties have agreed that possibly it
could come to a stop within a very short time. We are
hoping that this cessation of hostilities will be followed
by a ceasefire once a political agreement and a security
arrangement for the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement (SPLM) members in Southern Kordofan,
and by implication in Blue Nile State as well, have
been reached.

In the meantime, also in the South, some sporadic
fighting continues in the northern part, particularly in
Unity State and Jonglei State in Southern Sudan. Much
of that is going to slow down a little bit, because now
the rains have come and people's capacity to move is
limited. However, these types of confrontations
continue to occur around Abyei, the situation remains
tense in Southern Kordofan, with a lot of territory
having changed hands. In the northern part of the
3
South itself, armed groups have created a very difficult
humanitarian situation.

Because there is active fighting, it has not been
easy to obtain humanitarian access across active firing
lines. However, we have agreed today with Mr. Mutrif
Siddiq, State Minister at the Ministry of Humanitarian
Affairs of the Sudan, that we will have access to most
of those areas where very, very critical humanitarian
situations exist. In some of those areas, some of our
own staff are also trapped on either side, and, because
they are around the firing zone, we have not been able
to access them easily. Much of our supplies, including
humanitarian supplies, generally come through Port
Sudan; they come to the North and then, from the
North, move towards the South; hopefully they will
arrive on 9 July. That will not be tremendously
hampered, but we are making plans on how that may
have to shift to a later date.

Up to now, they have agreed in principle. I have
been here about a week trying to assist the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel (AUHIP) to
secure this agreement on Abyei and to work towards a
ceasefire also, but I will be leaving either tonight or
early tomorrow morning. We will try to implement
what the officials, particularly in the area of
humanitarian access, have agreed to here.

Next are preparations for the possible mission in
the South, which we talked about when the Security
Council mission was here. This is going well. Much of
the assets that we envisage might be required for that
mission. We are in the process of passing over to the
South from the North.

The other issue is Abyei. Now that there is an
agreement, the two parties have agreed on Ethiopian
troops, which are trusted by both sides. The role played
by Prime Minister Meles Zenawi in assisting the Panel
and the parties in the provision of troops is highly
appreciated, and hopefully once the Council responds
positively to the request by the parties that President
Mbeki has just transmitted, upon instruction of the
Council we will be ready to assist in the quick
deployment of those Ethiopian troops to Abyei, so that
the South can withdraw in a very short time and those
who have been displaced from Abyei can return home.
The rainy season is coming very soon, and the sooner
the Council gives instructions, the sooner we will move
to get the Ethiopian troops in place, so that this can be
done quickly, before the rains fill the rivers and it
becomes impossible for any form of transport to travel
in that area.

There is a possibility of border monitoring. The
two parties have discussed this and have accepted in
principle the need for a third party in border
monitoring. There has a been a suggestion by the
AUHIP that, if there is going to be a border-monitoring
mission, such a mission be a United Nations mission
and that it be integrated. Abyei and the border mission
to be established would be integrated under one
leadership so that there would not be
compartmentalized missions, with, for example, one
for Abyei, one for the border and one for the South, so
as to avoid multiplicity. In principle there has not been
any negation or any opposition to that, although as yet
there is no firm agreement on this issue from the
parties.

We felt, however, that although we will use some
of our assets in support of a possible Abyei mission, as
described, there is also a possibility that those support
units will support a possible border mission that would
later be integrated with that of Abyei. We are thus in
the process of liquidating all other UNMIS presence in
northern Sudan. Because of the tensions that still exist
and the need for constant monitoring, we have
informed the Government of the Sudan that until the
last day, until 9 July, UNMIS will be fully operational
and that the process of liquidation, if it is to take
place - unless other agreements would change that -
would have to start after 9 July and provide adequate
time for liquidation.

There will also be a need, post-UNMIS, to
continue to assist the AU Panel at the political level.
There are many other partners who are participating or
continuing to assist - the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the African Union and individual
countries - and it has been proposed that the
Secretary-General appoint his Special Envoy to
continue to provide his good offices in support of the
AUHIP.

Let me stop here, and I will be ready to answer
any questions Council members may have.

