Ms. Johnson (Norway): Norway remains firmly
committed to peace and development in Africa. The
Norwegian Government therefore welcomes the initiative
to hold this open meeting of the Security Council. It gives
us an opportunity to discuss the vital situation in Africa
and to take stock of developments that have taken place
since the Secretary-General last year issued his very
substantive report on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa.

It is difficult to describe the situation on the African
continent as a whole without generalizing too much. Still,
it would be fair to say that the situation is characterized
by two major trends. On the one hand, we see old
conflicts re-erupting and new ones breaking out in more
than a dozen African countries. In this respect, the
situation has deteriorated. At the same time, however, we
are also witnessing a continued democratization process,
with the transfer of power from military to civilian rule,
free and fair elections and continued economic and
political liberalization. In the economic field,
macroeconomic development in many countries is
proceeding in the right direction, and we have noted that
during the 1990s annual economic growth has actually
increased in many countries.

 

We must consolidate and carry forward the gains
made so far. We must break the vicious cycles of violent
conflict and underdevelopment which are still evident in far
too many African countries. We fully concur with the
Secretary-General that the mobilization of political will is
a key factor if we are to achieve this - political will on
the part of both the international community and the
African nations themselves. In this respect, the discussion
on conflict resolution and peacekeeping at the most recent
Organization of African Unity (OAU) summit in Algiers
was very important. The representative of Nigeria reminded
us during the general debate here at the United Nations that
the OAU members agreed at the summit to uphold codes of
decency, ethics and minimum standards of decorum among
African Governments and their leadership. And, as
President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa put it, the
maintenance of democracy requires that

"in every democratic country the ordinary people
should feel that they actually do enjoy the right to
determine their destiny". (A/54/PV.4)

We welcome these forceful demonstrations of regional
leadership in conflict management, and we look forward to
continuing our fruitful cooperation with our African
partners to increase capacity for peacekeeping and
confidence-building. One example of this cooperation is the
Training for Peace programme, which is financed by
Norway. Since 1995 more than 300 civilian police officers
and military officers have participated in courses held in 11
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
countries. In addition, several seminars have been arranged
in South Africa with close to 300 participants from the
whole of the SADC region.

Initiatives to stop the unlawful use and excessive
accumulation of small arms are crucial in a discussion of
peace and stability in Africa. In some countries, support is
needed to restructure the national security sector and to
train personnel. Efforts to collect and destroy small arms
after conflicts also merit our support. The moratorium on
small arms for several West African countries was very
encouraging in this respect. We join the Secretary-General
in urging all African countries to participate in the United
Nations Register of Conventional Arms.
Landmines constitute another serious obstacle to post-
conflict reconstruction. We urge all countries Members of
the United Nations to sign and ratify the Ottawa
Convention. Likewise, we emphasize the need for adequate
resources for mine-clearing activities. Norway has already
stated its intention to contribute $120 million over five
years to this task.

Let me quote from the Norwegian Prime Minister's
address to the General Assembly on 20 September this
year:

"Norway remains firmly committed to peace and
development in Africa. We will work with our
African partners for conflict management and
development cooperation. We will work with the
United Nations, the Organization of African Unity,
subregional bodies such as the Southern African
Development Community, the Economic Community
of West African States and others, to achieve our
common aims". (A/54/PV.5)

"Common aims" means developing norms, rules and
institutions for dealing with conflicts of interest without
resorting to weapons. It is essential to strengthen systems
of governance that are participatory, transparent and
accountable in countries subject to conflict. Internal war
typically evolves from wide or growing disparities in
political participation and the distribution of economic
assets. Building formats of governance that promote
tolerance, negotiation and compromise may therefore be
the best tool we have for preventing a resurgence of
violence in fragile societies that are in transition from
civil strife to peace. This should be part and parcel of
every post-conflict and development effort.

There can be no development without peace, and no
peace without development. In this sense, poverty
reduction represents the most urgent challenge in Africa.
It is crucial in terms of economic development, political
stability and regional and global security. It is also in
itself a realization of some of the most fundamental
human rights in the social and economic area, and they
are as important as the political and civil ones. If we are
to succeed in this endeavour, we believe that the
following factors must be emphasized. First, the
international trend of reduced disbursements of
development assistance must be reversed. Secondly, more
resources must be channelled to the social sectors,
specifically to education and health. And thirdly, the
focus should be on the poorer segments of the
population - on poverty eradication in the right sense of
the word.
Norway has been well above the United Nations
target for official development assistance for the past two
decades. About 50 per cent of our assistance is targeted

 

for Africa. We intend to increase our development
assistance further, to up to l per cent of our gross national
product. Special emphasis will be put on increased
cooperation with our African partners, poverty alleviation,
improved delivery of social services and debt reduction.

The United Nations will continue to play a central
role in all the challenges I have touched upon here. The
challenges facing Africa are part of a larger picture of
global challenges that require global solutions. in the
modern world there is no alternative to strengthening
multilateralism. The United Nations is the only truly
global forum where overarching common visions can be
achieved. It is unique and indispensable. Let us therefore
support the United Nations, make it more efficient and
consolidate it is us the focal point of our efforts to
improve our common future.

Again. Norway remains firmly committed to peace
and development on the continent of Africa. This past
year we have seen how efforts to build peace and a better
life for women, children and men in many parts of the
continent have been frustrated by fighting and unrest. But
this must not make us falter in our efforts to build a
strong and sustainable peace and a society that gives
people a chance to live a decent life. With political will,
economic resources and strong partnerships we have the
necessary tools. it is up to us to use them. Together, we
can make a difference.

