Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): We thank Mr. Stephen
O'Brien and Ms. Elizabeth Hoff for their briefings.
All too often, the briefings continue to depict a brutal
and terrifying reality arising from our inability to end
the sufferings of Syrians in eastern Aleppo. It pains
us to listen to Mr. O'Brien's horrifying account of the
miserable plight of the innocent. Just five days ago,
a resumption of the intense blitz on the besieged city
pulverized the brief lull in the aerial bombardment and
the relative calm in Aleppo, and scores of innocent
persons were killed yet again.

We are told that there can be no compromise in
the fight against terrorism. The deliberate bombings
of hospitals make it seem, however, that nothing was
meant to be spared. The fact that all the hospitals in
Aleppo are in ruins is utterly abhorrent. We are appalled
that civilians, especially women and children, had to
be treated in field hospitals set up in homes near the
front lines just to avoid being targeted. The temporary
and makeshift hospitals can never be adequate, and the
desparate situation is only made worse by the acute
shortages and lack of medical supplies and equipment,
as well as by the lack of a medical-evacuation exercise
since the middle of this year.

The resumptions of air strikes and the bombardment
ofAleppo last week meant that any hope for the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to civilians has diminished.
We are concerned by what was reported by Mr. O'Brien
earlier that the last remaining food rations are now
being handed out, and that there will be nothing left
to distribute next week without a resupply. We fear
that without a resupply, his next report will contain
accounts of mass deaths owing to starvation, something
that we could have helped to avoid. It is regrettable
that no humanitarian access has been granted to the
United Nations in the past four weeks despite the
relative calm in Aleppo. As winter approaches, we
call on all conflicting parties to allow the delivery of
humanitarian aid through a coordinated approach with
the United Nations. It is an exercise that the United
Nations has repeatedly pronounced its readiness to
undertake immediately.

Hostilities in Aleppo aside, my delegation is also
concerned at the military escalations in Idlib and
Homs. While Malaysia shares the notion of eliminating
terrorism and its threat, such a fight must not be at the
expense of innocent civilians. The senseless collective
punishment must be stopped. Several schools have
reportedly been targeted by air strikes in Idlib, more
just yesterday. The targeting of schools only serves
to indicate that the war is about inflicting maximum
sufferings on the vulnerable. Children, some of
whom were leaving their school compounds, were
killed. Those incidents must be investigated, with the
perpetrators being held to account.

Before I conclude, we join other Council members
in calling for actions on the United Nations plan for
eastern Aleppo and Syria as a whole. We have an
obligation to reverse the depressing developments
for the sake of innocent Syrians. We have before us a
proposal by the humanitarian penholders for a Council
response to the situation in Syria, and we must make
this fourth attempt count for something. We urge those
who could make the difference to listen to the voice of
their conscience and to halt the atrocities.
We pay our tributes to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and all humanitarian actors
on the ground for their tireless and brave efforts in
alleviating the sufferings of the men, women and
children of Syria. Our thoughts and condolences also
go to the family of Mr. Husein Muhsen, a humanitarian
staff member of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees inthe Near East, who
was killed in an air strike while assisting Palestinian
refugees in Khan Eshieh refugee camp just a week
ago. The tenacity of our comrades in Syria must at the
very least be rewarded with a signal that the Council
cares. It has a duty to uphold, and it needs to respond
to the deteriorating situation in Syria. It must stop the
senseless killing and destruction.

