Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I have
placed my statement in a black file as an expression of
condolence and mourning for the Palestinian children
who were martyred by the bullets of Israeli soldiers in
the West Bank, in Al-Quds Al-Sharif and in the Gaza
Strip. This is the least that I, as an Arab citizen, could
do.

First of all, I should like, Sir, on behalf of my
delegation, to extend to you my congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to wish you every success. I
should like also to express my appreciation to you for
your speedy response to the request made by the
United Nations Arab Group, the Islamic Group and the
Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement to
convene this urgent and important meeting, in order to
allow the Council to assume its responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, as set
forth in the Charter of the United Nations.

The leader of the extremist Likud party, Ariel
Sharon, whose hands are still stained with the blood of
the martyrs of the Sabra and Shatila massacre, has
desecrated the courtyard of Al-Haram Al-Sharif. That
desecration was a blatant provocation and an attack on
the feelings and emotions of Muslims, and it had the
predictable results of triggering an uprising by the
Palestinian people against this deliberate act of
aggression.

The day before yesterday, an Israeli Government
official declared that the Government did not approve
of Sharon's conduct and believed that the visit had
been a mistake. That official also said that the
Palestinian reaction was an orchestrated scenario. We
would like at this juncture to ask if it is reasonable to
allege that the Palestinians wanted and planned a
situation in which not dozens but hundreds of
Palestinian children would die at the hands of the
Israeli army - not the Israeli police - as a reprisal for
throwing stones - stones thrown yesterday by children
who have become men today.

Israeli bullets pierced the bodies of Palestinians,
blowing them to bits. One can only imagine the
physical suffering endured by those people, who were
also attacked by tanks, armoured vehicles and snipers.
Victims - men, women and children - fell before the
Israeli army, which was armed to the teeth. Most of
those present have seen the picture published on
Sunday by The New York Times, a picture of a father
and son, terror apparent on their faces. Seconds after
the picture was taken, the son was killed and the father
wounded trying to protect him.

The latest episode in this bloody chain of events,
as reported in Arab newspapers, concerns a father who
was helping to identify the bodies of murdered
Palestinians. He was shocked to discover that one of
the bodies was that of his son. He had been killed in an
extremely savage manner. The newspaper reported that
"A rocket pierced Sami's thin, dark body
and destroyed his chest and abdomen. He also
had seven bullets in his torso. Sami was
transferred to the hospital without an identity
card. The news spread that an unidentified martyr
was in the hospital, and the official Palestinian
television station broadcast Sami's picture.
However, his father and his sick mother, who was
in the same hospital, did not know that their son
had died in another part of that hospital."

In the face of these tragic events, we cannot but
ask the survivors of the Holocaust if, following the
ordeal they suffered, an Israeli generation exists that
wants to retaliate - in a merciless, savage and barbaric
manner - against people who were not responsible for
their ordeal. What crime have the Palestinians
committed that they should pay the price of mistakes
made by others? Their nation was occupied, their lands
confiscated, their citizens slaughtered in retaliation for
a crime perpetrated by others. Where is the 1949
Geneva Convention? Where are Security Council
resolutions 242 (1968) and 338 (1973), among the
other resolutions adopted in accordance with
international law concerning the rights of the
Palestinian people? Israel rode roughshod over them,
just as it disregarded the agreements concluded
following the Oslo talks and the Madrid Conference.
Israel wants only one peace: that which fulfils its
desire - the desire not to withdraw from the occupied
territories, let alone to give up the confiscated land on
which it has built its settlements.

Is it possible on that basis for just peace talks - I
stress the qualification, "just" - to have any chance of
success? The Palestinians, supported by the Arabs, are
advocates of peace. Provocation always comes from
the Israeli side. The Israeli side must be fully
convinced, on the basis of its experience, that
surrendering is not in the vocabulary of the
Palestinians or the Arabs. It has eloquent testimony of
this fact in the stone-throwing children of the past who
are the stone-throwing men of today. If Israel leans
towards a comprehensive peace based on justice, with a
provocation-free credibility, the Palestinians, supported
by the Arabs, will be the first to go along with it.

