We appreciate the opportunity to participate in today's open debate and to be able to express our solidarity with a region of the world that we know needs multilateral support to finally achieve a sustainable peace that has been desired for so long. This year, with the multidimensional crisis triggered by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we have witnessed the urgency for this land to achieve a solution involving two autonomous, sovereign and independent States living in peace within recognized borders, with the decisions and agreements of the United Nations serving as the basis for a direct agreement between the parties. We also believe that this process should be in line with prevention and sustainable peace promoted by the United Nations and focused on people, addressing the needs of the most vulnerable and, particularly in the contexts of global, regional and local crises, of those who have been disproportionately affected, such as women and girls, through strengthening the protection and promotion of human rights, in a manner that is sensitive to gender and to conflict. In this regard, we recognize the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) as key and emphasize that it is one of the United Nations agencies with the greatest support from the General Assembly for its operational activities, which we understand as a recognition of the Agency's crucial work in the field and its associated impact on international peace and security issues in a geopolitically convulsive, complex and volatile region. UNRWA plays a key role in health care, education and infrastructure, for the protection of 5.6 million Palestinian refugees. In particular, at present, UNRWA provides vital assistance in the multilateral response to the humanitarian crisis in Gaza, despite the fact that the Agency's financial precariousness has worsened and been amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic. We therefore reiterate our country's support for the work of UNRWA, as we have done in the Fourth Committee, and we hope that its financial sustainability will become a reality through support from the Member States. In today's debate, we highlight the role of civil society, youth and women in the Middle East and underline the importance of their integration for cooperation, capacity-building and support networks at local, regional and international levels. We reiterate our commitment to international law and the multilateral proposals designed to achieve sustainable peace. Further, as called for by the Secretary-General himself, we support and welcome initiatives that strengthen the work done on behalf of the two-State solution on the understanding that it is our duty as the international community to create the networks that will assist the parties in reaching that objective.
