Mr. Mantovani (Italy): Let me first join my
colleagues in welcoming the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Iraq, His Excellency Hoshyar Zebari.
I would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ambassador Qazi, and the
Permanent Representative of the United States,
Ambassador Khalilzad, for their informative and very
interesting briefings today.

Italy believes that a stable, peaceful and
prosperous Iraq is a key element of global and regional
stability and, at the same time, a moral responsibility
for the international community. For that reason, Italy
has always been at the forefront in assisting Iraq in its
efforts towards peace, stability and prosperity.

Since 2003, Italy has contributed over
€270 million to international efforts in the civilian
area, and last January it signed a bilateral agreement
providing soft loans for up to €400 million. Italy also
cancelled €2.4 billion of Iraqi debt and, with the Iraqi
Government, is co-chairing the International
Reconstruction Facility Fund for Iraq.

Accordingly, the Italian Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Massimo D'Alema,
took part in the launch of the International Compact
and in the Expanded Ministerial Conference of
Neighbouring Countries of Iraq, which took place in
Sharm el-Sheikh on 3 and 4 May 2007. We stand ready
to continue to make our contribution.

We believe that the momentum created by those
meetings should not be wasted. We are therefore
convinced that the reforms outlined by the
International Compact with Iraq and the follow-ups of

the Extended Ministerial Conference - namely, the
creation of the working groups outlined at the Baghdad
Conference of 10 March 2007 - should be

implemented without delay and without subordinating
them to the creation of new implementing tools.

We are also convinced that, although
international support is critical to the success of Iraqi
stabilization, the key lies ultimately in the hands of the
Iraqi Government and people.

We share the view expressed by Mr. Zebari in his
recent letter to the President of the Council that efforts
to restore security are to be supported by political
initiatives to enhance national reconciliation and
promote unity among the Iraqi people. As a matter of
fact, the success of any security plan will be possible
only if it is adequately supported by national
reconciliation, as well as by measures that have an
immediate socio-economic impact.

Concrete measures actually needed in this regard
include a review of the de-Baathification law; the
provision of economic means through, for instance,
adequate pensions, to the members of the former Iraqi
army and security forces and, when possible, the
reinsertion into the new armed forces of those not
implicated in crimes of the past regime; the disbanding
of militias; the creation of a national police force; and,
more generally, a policy that offers all components of
society the advantages of the new democratic Iraq, thus
enlarging the base of support for the newly formed
institutions.

In this framework, we also believe that the
process of constitutional revision is of great
importance and could provide an opportunity for
expanding political dialogue. We are also encouraged
by the evaluation contained in the most recent report of
the Secretary-General that

"if some of the amendments currently being
discussed are ultimately agreed to, they could go
some way towards establishing the basis for the
national Government to play a necessary
coordinating role within the decentralized federal
system envisaged by Iraq's Constitution".
(S/2007/330, para. 25)

We continue to be concerned about the situation
of the internally displaced persons in Iraq and the Iraqi
refugees in neighbouring countries. Against that
backdrop, we welcomed the April Geneva conference,
which constituted an important event for fostering
international coordination in tackling this issue.

Italy has always been a strong supporter of the
role of the United Nations in Iraq. We commend the
outstanding work done by the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq and by Ambassador Qazi,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. Last
March, during the Council's debate on the situation in
Iraq (see S/PV.5639), Italy stated that we believed that
the United Nations presence in Iraq was of
fundamental importance and that we hoped that the
conditions in Iraq would allow for its growth. We are
therefore pleased that the Secretary-General has
expressed his willingness to consider an expanded role
and presence in Iraq where and when possible.

We think that an expanded role for the United
Nations in Iraq could make an important contribution
in many areas. We share the Secretary-General's
opinion that solutions must be found through sustained
national dialogue, the patient search for compromise
and within the framework of the constitution. In that
connection, we also believe that, with the consent of all
interested parties, the United Nations could play an
essential role.

Allow me to end my remarks by saying that Italy
firmly condemns today's heinous attack on the holy
shrines of Imam Ali Al-Hadi and Al-Hassan Al-Askari
in Samarra. We extend our most heartfelt condolences
to the Iraqi people and Government and to the families
of the victims. We urge Iraqis to respond to that tragic
event by enhancing the ongoing national dialogue and
reconciliation.

