Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Mr.
President, we are most pleased to see you presiding
over the Council for this most significant briefing. May
I here thank the High Representative and his staff for
their work, commitment and endless efforts as well as
for the most recent report which, I am sure, we all
appreciate. May I also thank you, Mr. President, and
others responsible for the opportunity to speak on
behalf of Bosnia and Herzegovina before the Council.
This opportunity is not only fair, but is also critical for
our development toward self-sustainability.

Unfortunately, this also puts me in a difficult
position, as a representative of my country and of all
the people in my Government, of either having
sometimes to defensively respond to Ambassador
Petritsch's critical observations or having to accept
such as true through my silence. I do not believe,
though, that it would be constructive for me to address
such specific issues in this manner, except to add my
agreement to Ambassador Petritsch's perspective-
that is, the cautiously optimistic view of the regional
situation as a whole. Instead, we would prefer to point
out several ofthe following.

First, it is appropriate that through my presence
here and my opportunity to speak the representatives of
the international community are accountable to the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as to this
Council and other such forums. This is part of taking
ownership of our future.

Secondly, from Ambassador Petritsch's comments
one may be left with the damagingly false impression
that all that goes wrong in Bosnia is due to the
Bosnians and that all that happens right is due to the
representatives of the international community. It is my
diplomatic duty, as representative of the current
Government in Bosnia and Herzegovina, to say that
this is not true. It is also my personal duty, though, to
say that this is only half true. Many of the difficulties
that we deal with in Bosnia and Herzegovina are of our
own doing- that is, the leadership in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Some of the difficulties have also been
made more complicated by many missteps and
misunderstandings by the international community in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The establishment of a single
travel document for Bosnian citizens is an example of
correcting a misdeed in which the international
community initially played a crucial role- that is,
made a mistake. I think sometimes we are all in need of
a reality check. I also must recall here that the ethnic
stratification of our political institutions is not the
choice of most Bosnians, but is the result of what
happened during the negotiation of the Dayton Peace
Accords. This is something we were told at the time we
must accept.

Thirdly, while I would personally prefer to see
the scheduled elections bring about many of the
changes in leadership that Ambassador Petritsch, and I
am sure others, would prefer, I must caution that the
democratic success of elections cannot be judged by
the outcome, but rather by the process. The results may
not be fully satisfactory, but in fact the elections must
be judged by the conditions under which they are held.
Here I must recall that we have had at least half a
dozen elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
were certified by the OSCE as just, fair and
democratic. Regardless of the outcome, I, and/or my
successor, will be obliged to fully respect such results
and follow the instructions of such new or old
leadership and such new or old Government. That is
democracy.

Fourthly, Bosnia and Herzegovina remains
prepared to establish diplomatic relations with the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia without condition. We
look forward to the Government in Belgrade
cooperating with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, to concluding with it the
discussion on succession, and to that Government
becoming a Member of the United Nations and other
relevant international forums.

Fifthly, let me welcome Ambassador Petritsch's
decision on the victims of Srebrenica. I congratulate
and personally thank him. This decision promotes those
options consistent with the views of the Srebrenica
report and I believe with this Council's moral
responsibility.

Finally, I would not wish to create any impression
that my comments are meant to convey any significant
disagreement with the specifics of Ambassador
Petritsch's report. To the contrary, I must,
unfortunately, agree with too many of the negative, as
well as the positive, assessments. Rather, these are
qualitative nuances, and if I did not take this
opportunity to repeat and re-emphasize the
accountability of the High Representative and others in
promoting the Peace Agreement and normalcy in my
country, I am not sure what other task my Mission, I
myself and all diplomats here from Bosnia and
Herzegovina would have.

Let me remind everyone that there are many of us
who continue to struggle for Bosnia's place as a normal
State, a member of the Euro-Atlantic family, free of
ethnic prejudices and divisions. We were there in
Dayton and before, and many are still here. We
sometimes feel swallowed up by the generalizations. In
Dayton we did not want an ethnically stratified
Government that would promote ethnic polarization.
We did not want four passports. We did not want so
much of what is bad and criticized here today. But we
were told that we must accept the lesser of two evils: a
bad peace over ajust war. As someone who signed that
bad peace as Foreign Minister, I must reiterate that I
believe that we made the correct decision, and we,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a sovereign State and
Member of the United Nations, invited the
international community, including through the
establishment of the Office of the High Representative,
to help turn our situation into a good peace. No one
conquered Bosnia and Herzegovina. No army had to
fight its way in.

Clearly, this is an indication of the understanding
and commitment that most Bosnians and their leaders
have to this transition to a normal, stable peace. We
need the assistance and, unfortunately, too often the
leadership provided by the international community.
However, do not underestimate either our will or our
comprehension of the situation, and do not generalize
or unnecessarily browbeat. To repeat the words of the
representative of the Netherlands: Give the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina some credit. I would also like
to give credit to the members ofthe Security Council. I
listened carefully to their comments and found they
were well versed in the situation and had done their
work on behalf of Bosnia very well. I thank them.

Finally, on behalf of President Izetbegovic', let me
thank the representative of Malaysia for his most kind
words. I am sure the President will very much
appreciate them.

