Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno
for what has been another very useful briefing today.

As Mr. Gue'henno just said, the period under
review has covered some very significant achievements
and developments in Kosovo, not least among them the
November elections and the establishment of the
Kosovo Assembly. Moreover, I think that, as others
have said, the Council would be remiss if it did not
make its thanks clear to Mr. Hans Haekkerup for all he
did to bring about those achievements. I would endorse
what Ambassador Mahbubani has said about our
sadness that he is not with us today to share this
occasion, but I am sure congratulations will soon be in
order for his successor.

I am very pleased, Mr. President, that you were
able to announce that the Secretary-General's letter
concerning Michael Steiner has arrived. Had you not
been able to do so, I would have been constrained in
my statement to nudge a little, given the importance of
making an early appointment, but it is very good to
hear that the Secretary-General has nominated Michael.
He and I go back a long way together, both here and in
our respective postings in Bonn.

The main challenges for the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in 2002 will be to get the new institutions up and
running. This will include electing a President and
establishing a Government, making progress on the
Common Document and taking continued tough action
against organized crime and extremism. I would like to
cover briefly these three main points this morning.

With regard to the new institutions, it is vital that

the elected members of the Kosovo Assembly put aside
their differences and work together for the sake of
Kosovo's future. This means electing a President as
soon as possible. I would like to say here that building
coalitions involves compromise. Those who wish to
lead must reach out to others, including the Serb
community in Kosovo. The current stalemate within
the Assembly cannot continue indefinitely.

We also welcome UNMIK's efforts, to which
Under-Secretary-General Gue'henno has referred, to
prepare to hand over functions to the self-governing
institutions. We are encouraged to see minority
communities taking up jobs in the Assembly's
secretariat and in the new civil service. I would like to
emphasize once again that it is important that all of
Kosovo's people play a full role in shaping the new
institutions if they are to fulfil their mission for the
future.

In this context, we have noted the reference in
paragraph 30 of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2002/62) to the need to strengthen the UNMIK
Close Protection Unit to guarantee a minimum level of
freedom of movement to Kosovo Serb Assembly
members. We would welcome more details of this
requirement in due course.

As for the Common Document, this is, as
Mr. Guehenno has said, a very significant development.
In the Common Document, UNMIK and the Belgrade
authorities made clear commitments to address key
issues of concern, including refugee returns, missing
persons, security and prisoners. We welcome the
efforts that have already been made by UNMIK and
Belgrade aimed at progress on these issues. These
include, on UNMIK's part, the establishment of the
Office of Returns and Communities and, on Belgrade's
part, granting UNMIK access to Serbian police post-
mortem data and evidence. But it is vital that this
process of concrete achievement is built on, and it is
vital that it is built on fast. The expectations of all the
interested parties, including this Council, are, I am
sure, very high, and we look to both sides to deliver
results.

We also welcome the meeting of the High-
ranking Working Group, which has allowed for some
very constructive dialogue on these issues. It is good to
hear that a meeting of the Group took place today.
Here, again, I want to say that the involvement of
Kosovo's elected representatives in the High-ranking
Working Group will be crucial if a new relationship
with Belgrade is to be established. I hope very much
that arrangements can soon be put in place that will
allow those elected representatives to take part.

Finally, Mr. President, the emphasis on organized
crime and extremism will come as no surprise to you
from British lips. They remain key internal threats to
Kosovo. It is very important that Kosovo's elected
representatives should speak out against violence and
extremism. Ethnically motivated extremism, whether in
Mitrovica or Pristina, is totally unacceptable. This kind
of thing is the biggest brake there is on Kosovo's
development as a democratic society. In addition to the
input from the elected representatives, combating these
challenges must remain a top priority for UNMIK and
KFOR, building on existing progress.

We welcome the action taken by UNMIK to
strengthen the structures of law and order, including
through the establishment of new specialized units. It
goes without saying that we strongly condemn the
murder of Mr. Hajdaraj in Pec on 17 January. Those
responsible for his death must be brought to justice.

