Mr. Cohen (United States of America): The
United States strongly supports the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and is
pleased to have voted for this mandate renewal. We note
that it will be difficult for the Council and MINUSCA to
assist the Government of the Central African Republic
in making peace with armed groups, re-establishing
Government control over its entire territory and laying
the groundwork for peace and prosperity for all the
citizens of the Central African Republic unless there
is total unity, transparency and coordination among
key actors, including the African Union (AU) and
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS).

We are deeply concerned about the violence in
Bangui, Bambari and Alindao, and believe that the
fighting and the actions against civilians demonstrate
the importance of ensuring that the Central African
authorities coordinate with MINUSCA before
redeploying security forces, as authorized in this
mandate. We are concerned about the possibility the
Central African military might be moving to zones that
were not previously agreed on with the United Nations.
We will continue to urge for the establishment of a
national inspection protocol for all weapon donations
to the Government of the Central African Republic.
We commend all the donors providing that assistance,
and we want to reaffirm our commitment to achieving
the highest possible standards of transparency in
coordinating with the Government and other partners
on military assistance, training and donations. In some
cases, the distinction between activities that represent
official Government assistance and those that represent
private commercial activities, unrelated to donor
coordination, has been unclear.

Assisting the Government of the Central African
Republic is not a competition. In helping one of the
world's poorest countries emerge from more than a
decade of conflict to pursue peace and development,
there can be no room for jealousy. We must coordinate
closely to ensure that our combined assistance and
related activities help to achieve the Security Council's
objectives in support of the Central African Republic's
territorial integrity.

As is authorized in this mandate, we urge for more
rapid progress on the African Union Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
and we encourage all Member States to embrace
transparency and full cooperation with the Government
of the Central African Republic, the AU, ECCAS and
MINUSCA in support of a political resolution to the
Violence.

Finally, we note that resolution 2448 (2018) contains
references to the International Criminal Court (ICC), and
in that connection we want to refer to the United States

policy on the ICC, as announced by the White House on
10 September. In particular, the United States reiterates
its continuing and long-standing principled objection
to any assertion of ICC jurisdiction over nationals of
States that are not parties to the Rome Statute, including
the United States and Israel, without a Security Council
referral or the consent of such a State. We also want
to reiterate our serious and fundamental concerns
about the ICC Prosecutor's proposed investigation of
United States personnel in the context of the conflict in
Afghanistan. As today's resolution recalls, the Central
African Republic is a State party to the Rome Statute
and has consented to the ICC's exercise ofjurisdiction
in its territory. The United States remains a leader in the
fight to end impunity and continues to support justice
and accountability for international crimes, including
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. We
respect the decision of the nations that have chosen to
join the ICC, and in turn we expect that our decision
not to join and not to place our citizens under the ICC's
jurisdiction will also be respected.

