Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): The delegation of
Botswana welcomes the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina concluded and initialled
yesterday by the Presidents of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. It is indeed a historic agreement
that promises to bring to an end three and half years of a
brutal conflict, three and half years of one of the most
devastating wars in the history of modern Europe, a war
which is estimated to have claimed close to a quarter of a
million innocent lives.
It is our ardent hope that after almost four years of a
painful and tortuous war the peoples of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina are now ready to resolve their
differences amicably and to live with each other as good
neighbours. It is also our hope that the initialling and
consequent signature of the Agreement will be not an end
in themselves, but the beginning of a process that will bring
about peace and stability in that war-ravaged country.

In fact, all the peoples of former Yugoslavia are
yearning for peace. It is clear, however, that peace will only
come if they can learn to tolerate one another and adopt
live-and-let-live attitudes towards one another. It is time
they realized that the right to existence of one ethnic group
is not a negation of the right of other groups to existence,
nor should it necessarily present a threat to such existence.
It is only with that realization that coexistence in that area
and mutual trust will return to former Yugoslavia.

As early as 25 September 1991 the Security Council
adopted resolution 713 (1991), which imposed a general
and complete embargo on all deliveries of weapons and
military equipment to Yugoslavia. The idea was to restrict
the flow of arms to the conflicting parties and minimize
the possibility of a wider conflagration in the Balkans.
We therefore find it a bit ironic that the Agreement
allows for the lifting of the arms embargo before there is
certainty of durable peace. We are a little worried that the
amassing of weapons by the parties may lead to the
reigniting of the conflict. None the less, we appreciate
that the situation on the ground has changed, and there is
no cause for alarm, at least for now. My delegation
therefore has no problem supporting the draft resolution
on the lifting of the arms embargo.

My delegation will also vote in favour of the draft
resolution on the suspension of sanctions imposed on the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The sanctions were
imposed to pressure the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
to accept political dialogue as opposed to the logic of
war, and now that this objective has been realized we feel
it is indeed time the sanctions were suspended and,
finally, lifted.

We recognize that much remains to be done to
secure peace in the Balkans. The resolve of the parties to
remain committed to a peaceful settlement of their
differences is the only way forward. They need our
continuous encouragement and persuasion. Our support
for the suspension of the sanctions until such time as the
Peace Agreement is implemented should be understood in
this context. It is our hope that the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will do everything in its
power to ensure that the implementation of the Peace
Agreement progresses without let or hindrance, which
would in turn open the way for the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to take its rightful place in the family of
nations.

Although we welcome the Peace Agreement, we still
face imponderables. We do not as yet have a full
appreciation of what the Agreement really entails, nor do
we know what the parties themselves believe they have
achieved. This could have a bearing on the
implementation of the Agreement. We also believe that at
an appropriate time in the near future the Security
Council will have to hold substantive discussions on the
role of the United Nations in the implementation of the
General Framework Agreement, including the
authorization of a multinational force, its mandate,
composition and command-and-control structure and the

 

nature of the relationship that would be established between
the United Nations and the Force Commander for purposes
of coordination and information flow. In other words, there
are several questions in our minds that still beg for answers,
and we hope the answers will not be long in coming.
Indeed, there is a particular, nagging question to which we
desperately seek an answer: are those who have been
indicted for the commission of acts of genocide now
beyond the reach of the arm of the law? Have they been
saved by the Dayton agreements?

In conclusion, let me congratulate the parties on a
fruitful and worthwhile three weeks of negotiations in
Dayton, Ohio. They have given their people a promise of
peace and, hopefully, a future free of war and human
suffering. We can only request them fully to honour the
commitments they have made and translate into concrete
action what they have agreed on paper.

I should like also to pay a well-deserved tribute to the
mediators for their determination and perseverance, even
when the negotiations appeared to falter. The Government
of the United States deserves a pat on the back for a job
well done. It worked very hard to reconcile what appeared
irreconcilable, which says a lot about its diplomatic skills.

And lastly, a special word of deep appreciation to the
men and women of the United Nations Peace Forces, under
the able leadership of our Secretary-General. They did a
wonderful job in very trying circumstances, and in the
process many of them lost their precious lives. They
definitely deserved better.

