Ms. Mindaoudou (spoke in French): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
brief the Council today on the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in cote d'Ivoire (8/2015/320),
dated 7 May 2015, and to provide an update on major
recent developments in the country, including those
relating to the preparations for the presidential elections
in October.

Four months from now, the people of Cote d'Ivoire
will go to the polls to choose their next president in an
environment very different from that of 2010. Much has
been accomplished since the election of October 2010.
The country's stability is gradually improving. The
economy is growing and the people have been able to
get on with their lives in a peaceful environment. While
political disagreements remain, a national consensus
on constructive dialogue continues to strengthen.
However, some fringe radicals among the opposition
are increasingly advocating for public demonstrations.

Political dialogue between the Government and
the opposition is progressing. During the talks on
29 January, concrete measures were taken to fund, on
an exceptional basis, the opposition political parties
that do not hold seats in the National Assembly.
Political dialogue between the Government and the
political opposition resumed on 26 May after a break
of four months. Sixteen opposition political parties
participated and discussions focused on important
topics, including, in particular, the need to foster a calm
political environment, creating conditions to support a
credible electoral process, the return of exiles and the
release of prisoners. The Government and the opposition
political parties also decided to hold monthly meetings
until the elections. It should be mentioned here that
progress achieved in the political dialogue has helped
to improve the security situation and foster stability in
cote d'Ivoire.

The efforts by the Government and the opposition
parties to maintain constructive dialogue are to be
welcomed. It is important that this dialogue continues
in order to create and sustain an environment
conducive to holding a free and fair election. However,
certain political stakeholders are still tempted to use
inflammatory rhetoric. They must continue to be
encouraged to act responsibly and comply fully with
the law throughout the electoral period.

Political posturing ahead of the upcoming
presidential election has resulted in the reconfiguration
of the political scene. For instance, the Front populaire
ivoirien and the Parti democratique de Cote d'Ivoire
are experiencing a period of instability. Nonetheless,
divergent viewpoints and political positions are mostly
being expressed peacefully. I hope that that peaceful
expression will continue because it is something that
should mark any political process.

In the exercise of my good offices mandate, I
have attempted to persuade the Government and the
political parties towards dialogue. I have also used my
mandate to encourage people to support the efforts by
the authorities to foster peace and stability throughout
the country. To that end, initiatives to promote social
cohesion and reconciliation, as well as peacebuilding
initiatives in the various regions that have been
supported by the United Nations Operation in cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the United Nations country
team, have been instrumental.
For Cote d'Ivoire, the October presidential election
is an important milestone in terms of consolidating the
achievements of recent years. In preparations for that
election, the electoral code was an amended and adopted
on 2 April. Voter registration in over 2,000 centres was
launched on 1 June, and should be finalized by 30 June.
The final voter list should be ready by 31 August. As
Head of the United Nations system in Cote d'Ivoire, I
have ensured enhanced coordination with international
partners and the Independent Electoral Commission as
part of United Nations support to the Government in
terms of the electoral process.

The process to provide reparations to victims of
the 2010-2011 post-election crisis has been launched.
The Government has also started to implement some
of the key recommendations set out in the final
document of the Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, even though that report was not
published. On 24 March, the Government announced
the establishment of the National Commission for the
Reconciliation and Compensation of Victims, which
aims to register all unlisted victims of the successive
crises in Cote d'Ivoire since 1990. The Commmision's
executive body, the National Programme for Social
Cohesion, will implement the reparations process. It
will be important for it to ensure that the compensation
of victims is an inclusive process.

With regard to the fight against impunity,
perceptions of one-sided justice remain a topic of
discussion among Ivoirians, even though investigations
into serious crimes committed during the 2010-2011
post-election crisis are currently being undertaken
by the Special Investigation and Examination Cell. I
encourage the Government of Cote d'Ivoire to continue
and complete its investigations so as to bring to justice
all those who have been recognized as being guilty of
human rights violations and abuses, regardless of their
political affiliation, as that will greatly contribute to
healing past wounds and fostering reconciliation.

The first mechanism to enhance gender parity in
all State institutions, the National Council for Women,
has been launched. This development is a very timely
one during this electoral year, as the Council could
play a key role in encouraging greater participation
by women at all levels of decision-making, including
in politics. I also commend the work carried out by
the committee of national experts on conflict-related
sexual violence, which, with the Forces re'publicaines
de Cote d'Ivoire (FRCI), has continued its activities
to raise awareness of human rights and international
humanitarian law. However, I remain concerned about
frequent reports of gender-based violence and harmful
traditional practices, such as female genital mutilation.
I hope that those issues will be concretely addressed in
the implementation of the national strategy on gender-
based violence.

As for security, the Government has made headway
in addressing outstanding grievances by FRCI elements
following their protests in November 2014. It has
constructed barracks and paid salaries retroactively.
As for reforms, the National Assembly adopted the
law on the organization of the national defence and the
Ivoirian armed forces on 9 March. This is an important
step towards the professionalization of the FRCI and
building public trust in national defence institutions.
UNOCI will continue to support the Government in its
implementation of the necessary reforms. I commend
the Government's continued efforts to improve the
gender balance in the Gendamerie, with the inclusion
of female trainees.

With the presidential elections approaching,
however, the lack of equipment among Ivoirian law
enforcement and security institutions responsible for
maintaining public order is a matter of some concern,
as calls into question their operational capability to
control crowds in a democratically appropriate manner.

The Government of Cote d'Ivoire has set 30 June
as the deadline for completing the process to disarm
64,000 former combatants. Both the Government and
UNOCI have intensified awareness-raising activities,
and the number of former combatants enrolled in
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) process has increased significantly in recent
months. Support will be needed beyond the closure of
the DDR programme in June, as a significant number
of former combatants will still be in the process of
reintegration, which is expected to continue until
January 2016. UNOCI will continue to provide
technical and programmatic support to the Authority
on Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration in
order to formulate a viable road map for pro-post June
2015 activities.

The security situation has remained stable with an
overall downward trend in criminal activities. No major
incidents have been reported since my last briefing to
the Council (see S/PV.7358). Having said that, armed
robberies and banditry continue to pose a security

challenge for the country. Demonstrations and strikes
have also been organized by university lecturers,
schoolteachers and public health workers, as well as
by students, during the reporting period. Negotiations
between the trade unions and the Government led to a
cessation of strikes.

During the quadripartite meeting on
10 March - between the Governments of Cote
d'Ivoire and Liberia, UNOCI and the United Nations
Mission in Liberia both Governments acknowledged
improvements in the security situation on the border.
Bilateral cooperation has been strengthened with the
resumption of quadripartite and tripartite meetings.
Now that Liberia has been declared Ebola-free, borders
have been reopened, which has promoted cross-border
activities.

 

Concerning the UNOCI force and police, pursuant
to resolution 2162 (2014), UNOCI will reduce its military
strength to 5,430 troops and its police component to
1,500 personnel. The operational capability of the force
has been enhanced by the 650-strong quick response
force, which is now fully operational and which will
enable us to assist UNMIL in the implementation of its
mandate and to respond to any emergency situations in
Liberia. As a result, with the aid of our aviation assets,
we are now able to deploy 100 troops anywhere within
Cote d'Ivoire within 12 hours.

I would like to take this opportunity to convey
my appreciation to the members of the Council for the
support they have lent us in finalizing the establishment
of the quick response force as required pursuant to the
mandate. The more mobile, agile and flexible posture,
which today characterizes the force, has already
demonstrated in its effectiveness and enabled us to
respond in a timely way to threats against civilians like
those seen in recent months in the western border areas.

On the eve of the renewal of the UNOCI mandate,
I am confident and optimistic about the future of Cote
d'Ivoire. However, we must remain vigilant. In a few
months, Cote d'Ivoire will organize the very first
elections following those of 2010. They will be decisive
for the country. The renewal of the UNOCI mandate
at this crucial juncture will be important to again
demonstrate the desire of the international community
to consolidate the achievements and assist the country
in turning a page after the 2010 post-election crisis. The
creation of a peaceful and enabling environment in the
lead-up to, during and after the presidential elections
will also require advancing the level of political dialogue
in the areas of the disarmament process, security sector
reform, justice, reparations for victims and the return
of refugees. In that regard, the combined support of
the Security Council, Member States, international
and regional partners, the United Nations and its team
in Cote d'Ivoire remain essential to ensure that Cote
d'Ivoire can move forward towards the finalization of
all of those key processes.

I would once again like to thank the Council for
its invaluable support and its very useful guidelines for
implementing the UNOCI mandate.

