Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We are pleased to see you presiding over
today's meeting, Madam. On behalf of Argentina, I
thank the Netherlands for having convened this open
debate on a topic that is of particular interest to us,
in view of our regular participation as a troop- and
police-contributing country, which began exactly 60
years ago. We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Director of the non-governmental
organization Groupe de recherche, d'etude et de
formation femme-action for their important briefings
to the Council.

Argentina agrees with the concept note for this
debate (S/2018/184, annex) with regard to the need for
all parties concerned to renew their commitment to
peacekeeping operations as an essential political tool of
the Organization for the maintenance of international
peace and security. We stress the importance of having
a clear joint strategy on the challenges, expectations,
resources and requirements for missions' effective
performance in fulfilling their mandates.

We believe that the recent substantive session of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
was a positive step in that direction. One of the issues
discussed in that session was the security of missions,
particularly as it relates to the report submitted by
Lieutenant General dos Santos Cruz. In addition to
supporting the general framework of that report, we
understand that the main change that has contributed
to an increase in peacekeeping deaths is that the most
recent missions have been established in unstable,
complex and high-risk situations where there is no
peace to maintain. That is why in recent years the main
challenge to peacekeeping operations has been to adapt
to those operational circumstances and the mandates
assigned to them.

The incorporation of mandates on the protection
of civilians into peacekeeping operations has been
one of the most important developments regarding
peacekeeping missions that we have seen this century.
We reiterate that the issue should not be considered
from a strictly military perspective, but should rather be
part of a broader political and humanitarian approach
centred on building a safe, protected environment. We
believe that it is crucial that all Member States continue
moving towards a clear and common understanding
of the modalities and implications of such activities,
particularly in cases where it is necessary to use force
to provide security to civilians who are threatened
by physical violence, in accordance with missions'
mandates and the rules of engagement.

Argentina reiterates its commitment to the
Organization's zero-tolerance policy for cases of
sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as its support
for the measures adopted by the Secretary-General in
that regard. Along with more than 80 countries, we
have joined the Voluntary Compact on Preventing and
Addressing Sexual Exploitation and Abuse. We also
support the Canadian-led Elsie Initiative on Women in
Peace Operations, in the understanding that increasing
the number of female Blue Helmets would make
missions more effective.

In line with the Secretary-General's holistic take
on the pillars of peace and security, development and
human rights, which is also reflected in his recent report
on peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2018/43), we
believe that peacekeeping operations, as part of the
United Nations system, can assist host countries in their
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development while simultaneously attending to the
needs of populations and working towards longer-
term goals for resolving conflicts. We also stress that
missions should include enablers who would assist host
countries in the area of infrastructure, especially when
that could help to protect civilians. The experience of
the Argentinian hospital in Haiti demonstrated that it
was possible to expand its work into the community
and thereby generate empathy without undermining
its effectiveness.

Argentina underlines the need for missions that
are more effective and flexible, with clear mandates
and parameters both for their personnel and for host
countries, with planning done sufficiently in advance
and based on priorities established from the beginning
in consultation with troop- and police-contributing
countries, with better specific capabilities and specially
trained personnel and, crucially, with the necessary
financial resources for carrying out their mandated
tasks satisfactorily. However, we are witnessing
a growing tendency in the Organization to expect
better performances from peacekeeping operations
doing larger numbers of jobs in increasingly risky
and complex operational environments, while at the
same time attempts are being made to freeze or reduce
their general level of funding. If Member States truly
want to improve the effectiveness and performance of
the peacekeeping system, we should analyse ways to
generate ideas and alternatives to do that. The system
has its advantages and is broadly supported by the
international community.

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the
personnel of the United Nations who have lost their lives
in carrying out their peacekeeping duties. Reflecting
on their sacrifice should encourage us to consider
the best ways to renew our collective commitment to
peacekeeping operations.
