Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to express its deep condolences for
the recent terrible loss of the two French soldiers in

 
Bosnia and Herzegovina. My delegation would also like to
express its appreciation to the French delegation for its
endeavours in initiating the draft resolution now before us
expressing the Council's concern regarding the recent
developments in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Indonesian delegation is deeply concerned by the
continuing fighting in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in violation of the agreements of 23 and
31 December 1994 on a cease-fire and the complete
cessation of hostilities, reflecting an overall deterioration in
the situation in that country. The cessation of hostilities is
indispensable if political dialogue is to have any prospect
of success. Indonesia not only urges the parties to adhere to
the current agreements, but would also like to encourage
them to work towards their possible extension.

In particular, my delegation would like to express its
grave concern about the recent attacks on personnel of the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), and urges
all parties to refrain from any similar action. Only a few
days ago, the President of the Security Council issued a
statement denouncing such acts, specifically, the deliberate
targeting and shooting to death of a French soldier by an
unidentified sniper in Sarajevo, continuing the recent killing
of United Nations soldiers in similar circumstances. In fact,
soon after the adoption of the Presidential statement, we
learned of a repetition of this cowardly act which took the
life of another French soldier.

With the resolution before us today, the Council re-
emphasizes its strong condemnation of the intentional
targeting of UNPROFOR. The international community
cannot accept any attacks of this nature on members of
United Nations peace-keeping forces, and the status of
United Nations personnel must be respected in all
circumstances by all parties.

In this context, we underline the call on the Secretary-
General to submit a proposal on measures to prevent future
attacks. My delegation attaches great urgency to addressing
this matter without delay, and we should like to re-
emphasize the responsibility of the parties concerned to
provide for the security and safety of all United Nations
personnel.

Also, we emphasize the importance of the principle of
the unacceptability of any attempt to resolve the conflict by
military means, which principle is reflected in the draft
resolution, and the draft resolution's emphasis on reaching
a peaceful settlement. In this regard, we urge all parties not
only to comply fully with the cease-fire and cessation-of-

 
hostilities agreements, but also to show the political will
necessary for the attainment of these objectives on the
basis of acceptance of the Contact Group peace plan,
which has been accepted by the Government of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

My delegation still believes that a political settlement
through negotiations is indeed imperative in order to re-
establish comprehensive and permanent peace and
security in that country and in the region as a whole.

