I thank the Secretary-General for his report on the threats to international peace and security posed by Da'esh (S/2020/774), as well as Under-Secretary- General Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx for their presentations. Thanks to the efforts of the Global Coalition against Da'esh, of which Belgium is an active member, the Syrian and Iraqi territories were freed from the control of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) terrorist group. However, the latter maintains its presence in the region, and other small groups driven by the same ideology continue to spread in other parts of the world, notably in the Sahel, West Africa and the Lake Chad region, thereby attempting to exploit a damaged security situation. The impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic on the threat posed by ISIL is multifaceted but not yet clear. Although the measures taken by Member States to fight against the pandemic may have complicated the activities of the terrorist group, we still see an increase in its activities in Iraq and Syria, especially in the most fragile regions. In the coming months, it will be important to remain vigilant and to continue to assess the situation in order to prevent any resurgence of this organization in the region. Furthermore, during the pandemic, the group's offensive propaganda efforts, mainly on online platforms, have benefited from a fragile, confined audience, particularly among the most vulnerable groups in our societies who feel marginalized and downgraded. Preventing and fighting against such hate speech must remain a long-term priority, as they exacerbate radicalization leading to violent extremism and terrorism. As you stated, the threat posed by Da'esh and its followers is constantly evolving, and therefore requires that all Member States remain vigilant and adapt in a quick, flexible way. In this context, on 16 June, the Council of the European Union updated its conclusions on European Union (EU) external action on preventing and countering terrorism and violent extremism, which form the basis of the EU's action in this domain. Those new conclusions will allow the EU to continue its action while adapting to the evolution of the Islamic threat and to the emergence of new ones, including the rise of far-right terrorism. Belgium condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. My country is convinced that the fight against terrorism can succeed only if it fully complies with human rights law and international humanitarian law, which must constitute a leading principle in all four pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. For this reason, together with its European partners, Belgium ensures that measures taken to fight terrorism do not negatively impact human rights and humanitarian activities on the ground, including in the Syrian camps. The foreign terrorist fighters issue constitutes a major challenge for ourcommon security. Therefore, my country favourably welcomes the developments to prevent travel for terrorist purposes, and underlines the importance of bringing terrorists to justice, while continuing to fight against the root causes of radicalization leading to extremism and terrorism. At the same time, developing specific rehabilitation and reintegration programmes for men and women suspected of having committed terrorism-related crimes is crucial. It is also essential to differentiate the status of children from those of men and women, and to primarily consider them as victims of terrorism. Belgium considers that a successful fight against violent extremism and terrorism requires a comprehensive approach. This comprehensive approach is reflected at the military level with a contribution of four Belgian F-16s in support of the Coalition's operations from October onwards for a period of one year, as well as at the stabilization level with a contribution of €4 million in 2020 in the territories freed from Da'esh. We also promote an inclusive, whole-of-society approach. Youth, women, the private sector, civil society and human rights defenders and victims of terrorism all contribute to the development of efficient, relevant and sustainable policies. Their voices must be heard and integrated into our counter-terrorism strategies. Finally, despite the fragmentation of our efforts caused by the current pandemic, it is essential that our coordination and cooperation in countering terrorism be reinforced, on the international and regional, but also national, levels. In this framework, Belgium wishes to underline its appreciation of the flexibility of all United Nations entities, which managed to continue to successfully fulfil their mandates under the difficult circumstances of the past months. Together with all our partners, Belgium will remain fully committed to eradicating the threat posed by Da'esh.
