Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank Ms. DiCarlo, Ms. Mohammed and Mr. Dieye for briefing us on the evolving terrorist threat in Africa, as well as on continuing United Nations and African Union (AU) efforts to counter that threat. By working together as a part of a coalition, the United States and its allies deliver crushing blows to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) in the Middle East. Yet ISIS has shown a dangerous ability to adapt by establishing ISIS branches around the world. It usually does that by co-opting existing insurgencies and filling the spaces that Governments either cannot reach or to which they turn a blind eye. While the phenomenon is not unique to Africa, parts of the continent are especially vulnerable to this growing threat. The Sahel and the Horn of Africa are experiencing frequent attacks. We have seen that with the Al-Qaida-affiliated group known as Jama'a Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin, which aims to carve out its own territory in Mali and expand its sphere of influence in the Sahel. Last month, Somalia-based Al-Shabaab attacked an airfield in Kenya, killing three Americans. Such terrorist groups prey upon innocent civilians, kidnap foreigners and work to undercut legitimate Governments or moderate voices, all while trying to destroy basic human freedoms. In order to tackle this threat in a comprehensive fashion and eliminate the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, it is imperative that we work together. This starts with leadership, sound governance, the rule of law and respect for human rights. As a study from the United Nations Development Programme on violent extremism in Africa found, State violence andabuses by police and military were often the catalyst for radicalization to violence. That is true in Africa and other parts of the world. We must ensure that any measures that we take to counter terrorism fully comply with our obligations under international law to respect human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of law. Counter- terrorism efforts, including on the Internet, fuel radicalization to violence when they do not respect basic human decency. That means that counter- terrorism can never justify the arbitrary incarceration of dissidents, journalists or members of religious and ethnic minority groups. Effective counter-terrorism must be firmly rooted in full and complete respect for human rights. They are mutually reinforcing, and respect for fundamental freedoms is the essential part of a successful counter-terrorism effort. Collective security does not override individual rights. The United States is working to build the capacity of its African partners to prevent, detect, deter, disrupt and prosecute terrorists across the continent. The bottom line here is that terrorism can be beaten. This is a fight that Governments and citizens can win. We are working closely with our partners, like the Niger, to train the military and police on how to transfer physical and digital forensic evidence from the battlefield to civilian law-enforcement authorities, thereby enabling the prosecution of terrorists. We are working throughout Africa to strengthen criminal justice systems, empower women and girls at risk of violent extremism, facilitate civilian security and community cohesion, and cut financial flows to terrorists, most of whom come from outside Africa. We are also working with our multilateral partners to address the evolving threat of terrorism globally, but especially in Africa. We are pleased that the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate has prioritized the region. In the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities, we successfully listed ISIS in the Greater Sahara, ISIS West Africa and ISIS Libya last month. We thank the many countries that co-sponsored those listings, and we encourage other Member States to join us in identifying, sanctioning and targeting every ISIS affiliate around the world. However, Governments alone cannot prevent and counter violent extremism. Civil society organizations often have crucial knowledge of, and engagement with, local communities to confront the challenges of recruitment and radicalization to violence. Together we can build communities resilient to terrorist narratives. We need to broaden our efforts to include leaders in the religious, education and youth development sectors who can help contest the destructive vision that terrorists are trying to advance. In doing so, we must reject those who seek to bring violent extremist ideology into schools or social systems. For example, the United States recently partnered with the Mauritian Government to help officials identify risk factors of terrorism, speak out against terrorism and reach vulnerable youth and offer them relevant, positive and appealing alternatives. A comprehensive approach to countering terrorism has proven more effective over the long term, primarily because it draws from a variety of disciplines and promotes whole-of- government and whole-of-society efforts. That is why the United States continues to support the United Nations Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, as well as United Nations efforts to help Member States develop national and regional plans of action to prevent violent extremism. We encourage our African partners to continue working together to counter that growing threat. I look forward to hearing from our partners today and to continuing our discussions to advance our shared counter-terrorism objectives in the region and around the world.
