Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
convening ofthis meeting on the situation in Aleppo and
the briefings provided by Mr. Feltman and Mr. O'Brien.

My delegation has been closely following
developments in Aleppo and is concerned that the
situation on the ground may threaten the progress made
since the the cessation of hostilities began. However,
we believe that the political forum in Geneva should
be maintained and strengthened. There is no doubt that
the cessation of hostilities has had a positive impact
on the peace negotiations. The scenario in Syria has
changed in recent months, especially in late February
when various opposition groups joined the peace
process, while other groups continued to coordinate
their military operations with the Al-Nusra Front, as
we have seen in Aleppo and other Syrian cities.

The negotiations among the parties in Geneva, as
part of the peace process led by the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, should
be resumed as soon as possible and without conditions.
We reiterate our support for Mr. De Mistura in pushing
for a comprehensive peace process that will prioritize
negotiations as the only way to end the vicious war that
has afflicted that country over the past five years. To
that end, we urge the Syrian opposition to display a
constructive attitude and commit to working to combat
Al-Nusra and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS). We emphasize that such terrorist groups are not
covered under resolution 2268 (2016) and must be fought
and overthrown in accordance with international law.

Regarding the peace negotiations, we believe that
the decision of the opposition's Riyadh platform does
not contribute to the definitive settlement for Syria
that we all desire. We therefore hope that the countries
concerned can exercise their influence to persuade the
opposition to join the political negotiations, rejecting
the extremist violence of ISIS and Al-Nusra, which
represent a threat to international peace and security,
and to return to the negotiating table as soon as possible.
We hope that all the ethnic factions and minorities,
such as the Kurds, who are an important factor to
bringing about peace in Syria, will be represented. We
must ensure that every sector of civil society in Syria,
including women, participates in the peace talks.

We recognize that the progress that has been made
would not have been possible without the participation
of the International Syria Support Group and its task

force in helping to monitor the cessation of hostilities
and ensure humanitarian access. We believe that
the humanitarian response should be guided by a
neutral, balanced approach so as to ensure that it is
not politicized. In that regard, Member States should
work to ensure that the humanitarian response reaches
every sector of society. We condemn the indiscriminate
attacks on hospitals and medical facilities and on
civilians in those facilities. We would like to recall
that such facilities are protected under international
humanitarian law and therefore should not be military
targets, as provided for in resolution 2286 (2016), which
the Council adopted unanimously yesterday.

We must continue to urge for a lasting peace
settlement. We hope the peace process in Syria will be
supported by the people of Syria themselves, without
foreign interference, where the common interest should
be in attaining a country free of terrorists and focused
on its future. Lastly, any solution to the armed conflict
should be political and peaceful, signaling peace
for the people of Syria with respect for the country's
independence and territorial integrity.

