The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Rwanda.

Allow me to start by thanking my colleagues,
members of the Security Council, for their continued
support for the Rwandan presidency and for their
full cooperation. which enabled us to carry out the
programme of this busy and unpredictable month of
July. Indeed, tomorrow, we have another emergency
meeting on Gaza.

I would also like to congratulate Sir Mark Lyall
Grant, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, on his assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of August. I
am particularly pleased that the United Kingdom
presidency is proposing to organize an open debate on
the prevention of conflict in line with the briefing that
Rwanda organized in April 2013 on the prevention of
conflicts in Africa by addressing their root causes (see S/PV.6946). I also appreciate the fact that Ambassador
Lyall Grant and his team will continue to hold wrap-up
sessions in the format ofa public briefing.

As members know, the main topic of the month of
July was the thematic debate on peacekeeping, as this
very month Rwanda celebrates its tenth anniversary of
participating in peacekeeping operations. Members will
recall that two days ago, on Monday 28 July, Rwanda
convened an open debate on regional partnership and
its evolution, during which resolution 2167 (2014) was
unanimously adopted (see S/PV.7228). In that resolution
the Council expressed its determination to take effective
steps to further enhance the relationship between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, in particular the African Union, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. It further stressed the need to enhance
the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of
financing regional organizations when they undertake
peacekeeping under a Security Council mandate.

Furthermore, Rwanda firmly believes that
peacekeeping, multidimensional and robust as it
may be, cannot alone resolve conflicts. Indeed, the
maintenance of international peace and security
requires concrete, coordinated and sustained action,
from the stage of conflict prevention to that of post-
conflict peacebuilding.

It is in that context that on Tuesday, 15 July, the
Security Council held a briefing on post-conflict
peacebuilding (see S/PV.7217). That meeting was
followed by an informal interactive dialogue among
members of the Security Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) Chairs Group and countries on the
PBC agenda and with the Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacebuilding Support. The meeting was frank,
direct and fruitful, as it was an opportunity to further
discuss how to strengthen the PBC advisory function to
the Security Council and on how to address the recurring
relapse into conflict. Nonetheless, Rwanda regretted
that while all PBC configurations were represented
at an ambassadorial level, most Council members
were represented at a lower level, not to mention that
among the six countries on the PBC agenda - all of
which are African ~ only Sierra Leone, represented
by its Permanent Representative, attended the informal
interactive dialogue.

During the month of July, the Security Council also
considered a number of country-specific situations. It
is important to know that although African conflicts
continue to be present in our work, they were not the
majority of situations considered in the programme
of work for the month. However, that was due not to
the reduction of conflicts in Africa, which is always
dominated by crises in South Sudan and the Central
African Republic, but to the worsening situations in
other parts of the world, particularly in the Middle East
and Ukraine.

In Syria, following the violation of resolution 2139
(2014) by all sides, the Council unanimously adopted
this month another humanitarian resolution, resolution
2165 (2014), by which it authorized United Nations
humanitarian agencies to use routes across conflict
lines and four additional border crossings in order to
ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches people in
need throughout Syria through the most direct routes.

On Ukraine, the Security Council held an
emergency meeting on Friday 18 July (see S/PV.7219)
following the shooting down of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-l7 in eastern Ukraine, which resulted in
the tragic loss of 298 lives. The Council also adopted a
press statement (SC/11480) followed by resolution 2166
(2014), calling for a full, thorough, independent and
unhindered international investigation.

In the Middle East, the Council was yet again
confronted with the resumption of hostilities related
to Gaza. Given the magnitude of the conflict, which
has taken more than 1,300 lives so far, mostly
civilians - women and children - the Council
adopted for the first time since 2009 a Council product
on the Palestinian question, in this case a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2014/13) calling for an immediate
and unconditional ceasefire. Unfortunately, that
presidential statement was not implemented on the
ground, and tomorrow morning the Council will
again convene an emergency meeting to consider the
humanitarian consequences of the conflict.

It is worth noting that those three situations - in
Syria, Ukraine and Gaza/Israel - brought to light in
a single month the division among Council members,
especially when the interests of the permanent
members were involved. To be fair, the Council should
be commended for overcoming its divisions and
adopting critical decisions, such as resolution 2165
(2014) on Syria, resolution 2166 (2014) on Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17 and the presidential statement
on Gaza. But, nonetheless, it is clear that in July 2014,
as in previous months, Council members were once
again unable or unwilling to use their influence to find
a sustainable political solution to all those crises.

In that regard, Rwanda believes that as far as the
work of the Security Council is concerned, initial
consultations among the permanent members alone or
between penholders and countries of the region on a
particular situation are important to clear the ground and
facilitate a smooth decision by the Council. However,
we also believe - as reminded by the 2014 FIFA World
Cup, which ended this month - that team spirit, more
than individuals, is the best chance for success. We
therefore recall that the Council comprises 15 members
and that all of them should be given enough time to
consult and contribute to its work and to its decisions.

In conclusion, I would like to thank Member States
for participating in this wrap-up meeting and in other
public meetings convened by the Council this month,
sometimes on short notice. I wish particularly to
commend the United Nations Members who actively
participated in and contributed to the two open debates
organized this month. However, I would encourage
African Members of the Organization to participate
more in the Council's open debates, particularly those
related to issues concerning Africa, such as the open
debate on regional partnerships held on Monday (see S/PV.7228). Indeed, Rwanda believes that the Security
Council needs, more than ever, the contribution of the
wider United Nations membership and their various
experiences, which will help the Council to effectively
carry out its mandate of maintaining international
peace and security.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

Before adjourning the meeting - which was
scheduled to be the Council's last meeting for the
month of July, before the situation in the Middle
East decided otherwise - I would like to express the
sincere appreciation of the delegation of Rwanda to the
members of the Council, especially my colleagues the
Permanent Representatives and their respective staff,
and to the Council's secretariat for all the support they
have given to us. Indeed, it has been a busy month
and one in which we rallied to consensus on several
important issues within our purview. We could not
have done it alone and without the hard work, support
and positive contributions of every delegation, the
Secretary-General and the representatives of the
Secretariat, as well as our very precious interpreters,
translators, meeting services and sound engineers.

As we end our second and last presidency of
Rwanda's current term in the Security Council, I know
I speak on behalf of the Council in wishing Sir Mark
Lyall Grant and the delegation of the United Kingdom
good luck in the month of August.

The meeting rose at 5.10pm.
