The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Zaire, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lnkabn
Khabouji N 'zaji (Zaire) took a seat at the Council
table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/l997/l97, which contains the
text of a letter dated 5 March 1997 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting a copy of the statement by the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zaire.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the deteriorating situation in the Great
Lakes region, in particular in eastern Zaire. It
underlines the urgent need for a comprehensive and
coordinated response by the international community
in support of the efforts of the joint United
Nations/Organization of African Unity Special
Representative for the Great Lakes region to prevent
any further escalation of the crisis there.

"The Security Council reiterates, in that respect,
its full support for the five-point peace plan for
eastern Zaire contained in its resolution 1097 (1997)
of 18 February 1997 and welcomes the endorsement
of that plan by the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) at its 65th ordinary session of the Council of
Ministers held in Tripoli from 24 to 28 February
1997.

"The Security Council welcomes the
declaration of the Government of Zaire of 5 March
1997 (S/1997/ 197, annex) regarding its acceptance
of the United Nations peace plan endorsed by the
Security Council in its resolution 1097 (1997).

"The Security Council calls upon the Alliance
of Democratic Forces for the Liberation of
Congo/Zaire to declare publicly their acceptance of
resolution 1097 (1997) in all its provisions, in
particular an immediate cessation of hostilities, and
calls on all parties to implement its provisions
without delay.

"The Security Council is concerned about the
effect which the continued fighting is having on the
refugees and inhabitants of the region and calls upon
all parties to allow access by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and humanitarian
agencies to refugees and displaced persons and to
guarantee the safety of refugees and displaced
persons as well as United Nations and humanitarian
aid workers. It also takes note with concern of
allegations of violations of international
humanitarian law in the conflict zone and welcomes
the sending of a United Nations fact finding mission
to the area.

"The Security Council reiterates its full support
for the joint United Nations/OAU Special
Representative for the Great Lakes region and urges
all Governments in the region and all the parties
concerned to cooperate with him fully. It also urges
the parties to the conflict to begin, under his
auspices, a dialogue in order to achieve a lasting
political settlement.

"The Security Council welcomes all efforts,
including those of the Organizations and States of
the region, aimed at resolving the crisis, including
the initiative of President Daniel Arap Moi of Kenya
to convene another regional meeting in Nairobi on
19 March 1997 and the initiative of the OAU to
organize a summit of the members of the Central
Organ of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict
 

Prevention, Management and Resolution on the Great
Lakes region in Lome before the end of March 1997.
The Council encourages other facilitators and
representatives of the regional organizations, including
the European Union and the States concerned, to
coordinate closely their efforts with those of the
Special Representative.

"The Security Council reaffirms the importance
of holding an international conference on peace,
security and development in the Great Lakes region
under the auspices of the United Nations and the
OAU.

"The Security Council expresses its gratitude to
the Secretary-General for keeping it informed of
developments in the Great Lakes region and requests
him to continue to do so on a regular basis.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/ 11.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.15 pm.

