Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to welcome the President of the Transitional Federal
Government of the Somali Republic, Mr. Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative Augustine
Mahiga for their briefings and for their personal
commitment to stabilization in Somalia.

The Kampala Accord of 9 June 2011, the
Mogadishu road map of 6 September 2011, the
reinforcement of support for the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) decided in September
2011, and the thorough reconfiguration of AMISOM
decided in February by the Security Council were all
decisive stages aimed at a single objective, namely,
stabilizing the political and security situation in
Somalia. Those stages have signalled an unprecedented
support by the international community for Somalia
with a view to altering the destiny of that country. The
international community has done its duty. It has the
right to maintain high expectations from Somali
political officials. Without their involvement, about
which we can still wonder, nothing is possible.

Today, almost a year after Kampala and three
months from the end of the transition period, where do
we stand? At the political level, we are concerned. The
road map had four main tasks, accompanied by specific
timelines, which the Transitional Federal Institutions
signed on to. Today, three of those four tasks have been
set aside in order to focus all efforts on adopting a
constitution and on reforming current institutions, thus
putting an end to the transition period that began in
2004. Unfortunately, even in that single area, certain
timelines that were set by the international community
and the Somalis themselves have not been met and the
political process is now delayed by several weeks.

We therefore need a new impetus, and that
impetus begins with appointing members of a Somali
Constituent Assembly. The clan leaders, currently
meeting in Mogadishu, must move forward and put
national interests before their own in order to appoint
without delay Somalis who would represent all
categories of society, in particular women, who will be
part of the Assembly in charge of reviewing the draft
constitution. That impetus would also involve
finalizing the text of the draft constitution. The drafting
experts must complete their work, bearing in mind two
elements: first, this is a provisional text that could be
subject to further improvement later on and, secondly,
the text must respect human rights in accordance with
Somalia's international commitments.

Of course, the end of the transition period is not
to everyone's liking. Some seem to be interested in
continuing the current instability in order to preserve
political influence or to derive financial benefit. To
those who want to prevent their compatriots from
living in peace, the international community is today
ready to say that they can no longer conspire with
impunity. The joint letter from the United Nations, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, which was issued a few days ago by
Mr. Mahiga, is very clear. Those who continue to
undermine the political process will be subject to
sanctions from States in the region and from the United
Nations.
At the security level, much remains to be done.
Mogadishu continues to be subject to sporadic attacks
and a large part of the territory of Somalia is still not
under the control of the Transitional Federal
Government. But progress has been considerable.
Thanks to the efforts of the AMISOM. soldiers,
Al-Shabaab has lost ground and life has resumed in the
Somali capital. We must pay tribute to the Ugandan
and Burundian contingents and to the action taken by
Ethiopia.

We support their efforts. Thanks to the adoption
of resolution 2036 (2012), AMISOM's means are being
transformed. The force will finally have an airlift
capacity and its troops will be significantly strengthened.
The strengthening is made possible by greater support
from the United Nations, but also support from the
European Union, which, we must remember, has been
financing for several years the entire salary of AMISOM
troops, amounting to approximately $200 million per
year. No other country in the world benefits from such
support. I would like to urge States that would like to
increase their support for security stabilization in
Somalia to provide financial support for AMISOM
soldiers alongside the European Union.

In the long-term, Somalia's security can only be
ensured by Somalis themselves. The training of Somali
national forces must be a priority. The European Union
is fully engaged along this path in the framework of the
European Union Training Mission for Somalia. A
restructuring of Government forces and strengthening
of the chain of command will still be necessary to
make those forces more effective.

As the transition period is nearing its end, of
course we have to strengthen our efforts for the
development of Somalia, but it is also up to the Somali
authorities and to the people themselves to do their
share and chart their path. One of the challenges in the
coming months will be the development of a new
administration, both national and local, that will be
able to provide basic services to the population, in
particular in the zones freed from Al-Shabaab control,
in order to establish the legitimacy of Somali
authorities. It is up to the Transitional Federal
Government to do its duty, as well as to meet the
expectations of the Somali people. In that regard, we
welcome the holding of the upcoming Istanbul
conference, which we hope will be an opportunity to
breathe new life into those issues.
