Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Vieira de Mello,
for their briefings. Their briefings on the security and
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo were very specific and informative and were
most helpful to the Council in monitoring the situation
in that country.

Developments in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, on the whole, are encouraging. At the same
time, we should note that the current situation is still
very fragile. The power-sharing agreement was signed
some time ago, but the parties concerned have yet to
reach consensus on some outstanding issues. A
ceasefire has not been achieved in the east. And in
defiance of the demands of the international
community, armed groups continue to engage in
military conflict, causing grave humanitarian disasters
and massive violations of human rights, as well as
heavy losses of human lives and property.

China calls on all parties in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to strictly comply with the
power-sharing agreement so that a transitional
Government can be established at an early date. We
strongly condemn acts of indiscriminate killing and
call on the parties concerned to cease all military action
in the north-east parts of the country and to strictly
implement the ceasefire agreement. As well, they
should adopt all possible measures to ensure the safety
and security of civilians.

It is our hope that the countries concerned will
abide by their commitment to carry out troop
withdrawals and will refrain from returning to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo under any pretext.

Given the current circumstances, it is our view
that the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) should
step up its phase III deployment in order to stabilize
the situation, to consolidate the results of the peace
efforts and especially to complete the programme of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.

I would like to inform the Council that the
Chinese peacekeepers for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo have completed their preparations and await
orders for deployment. As always, China will support
the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and will support the United Nations in its
peacekeeping efforts. We will continue to make our
contribution towards that goal.

