The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Germany
and Italy, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Barbalic'
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the
Council table; Mr. Gaedtke (Germany) and
Mr. Riccardo (Italy) took the seats reserved for
them at the side ofthe Council Chamber

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
2
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/154, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Austria, Croatia, France,
Germany, Italy, the Russian Federation, Turkey, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam


The President (spoke in Arabic): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1869 (2009).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.
09-27987

