Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to
associate the delegation of Brazil with the condolences
expressed by previous speakers to the Russian
Federation and to the victims' families over the terrible
and cowardly terrorist act that killed President Akhmad
Kadyrov and other persons in Grozny, Chechnya,
yesterday.

I express my appreciation to you, Sir, for
convening this meeting and to Ambassador Kamalesh
Sharma for introducing the Secretary-General's report.
The positive developments taking place in Timor-Leste
can be attributed to a large extent to Ambassador
Sharma's able and forward-looking leadership, as well as
to the work that the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) is undertaking in the country.
I would like to join you, Sir, and other speakers in
thanking Ambassador Sharma for his invaluable work
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
East Timor. We wish him the best.

I would also like to welcome the presence at this
meeting of Timor-Leste's Senior Minister, Ana Pessoa
Pinto.

The progress achieved so far must be
consolidated into a stable Timor-Leste with improved
political, social and economic conditions. Our steadfast
cooperation in a good number of critical areas is still
required to underpin the exercise of sovereignty by the
East Timorese. We therefore concur with the Secretary-
General's recommendations regarding the extension of
UNMISET for a consolidation phase, reduced in size
and under a modified mandate.

Improvements in the security sector, in particular
the recent approval of key legislation concerning the
police and defence sectors, have been encouraging.
Local authorities are fulfilling their commitments and
we expect Timor-Leste to further develop its own
capability and to reach self-sufficiency in security with
the support of the international community. The
extension of UNMISET's mandate will prove an
important measure to achieve this goal.

As the Secretary-General points out, limited
revenue and widespread poverty in the country
continue to pose severe constraints on reconstruction
and development efforts. The expected flow of revenue
from the exploration for oil and gas in the Timor Sea
has not materialized. Progress in this area is crucial to
providing sustained means of income for the people of
Timor-Leste. In this regard, we welcome the convening
of a conference of development partners in Dili on 19
May and we concur with the Secretary-General's
assessment that agreement between Australia and
Timor-Leste on exploiting mineral resources in the
Timor Sea, in a mutually beneficial manner, would
represent an essential contribution to that effort.

Brazil also welcomes the steady improvement of
relations between the Governments of Timor-Leste and
Indonesia. Brasilia has been actively supporting Jakarta
and Dili in their efforts to build upon their recent
achievements and strengthen new areas of cooperation.
While fully understanding all parties' concerns and
constraints, we believe that there is enough common
ground to meet the requirements for justice, stability
and peace.

Stability and improved economic and social
conditions in Timor-Leste are extremely relevant not
only for the region, but also for all members of the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries. On
their behalf, we would like to take this opportunity to
convey our appreciation for all international assistance
already provided to the country. We expect the
international community, through the United Nations
and its agencies, as well as bilaterally, to continue
providing support to the East Timorese. The decision to
be taken by this Council concerning the extension of
UNMISET can reflect such willingness.

No one wants an open-ended mission in Timor-
Leste. A clear exit strategy has been put forward by the
Secretary-General in his report, taking into account the
need for capacity-building and the importance of not
jeopardizing progress achieved so far. It is also in the
best interests of the international community that
Timor-Leste remain a showcase for the United Nations
accomplishments.
Finally, I would like to inform the Council that
Angola and Brazil will be circulating a draft resolution
regarding the extension of UNMISET's mandate for
consideration by the Council's members. We hope that
the Council will be able to adopt the draft resolution by
the end of this week.

