At the outset, I would like to congratulate Indonesia on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of August and welcome Her Excellency Mrs. Retno Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, to preside over the meeting. China supports the initiative of convening this open debate and thanks Ms. Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for their briefings. We thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/754). At present, terrorism and organized crime have been mutually colluding and infiltrating and posing serious threats to international peace and security and should be addressed seriously. The international community must strengthen cooperation at all levels, exchange intelligence and information, share best practices and take concerted actions, so as to effectively combat terrorism and organized crime and jointly maintain international peace and security. China wishes to stress the following points. First, counter-terrorism must be carried out by upholding the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations while respecting the central coordinating role of the United Nations and adhering to unified standards. Member States have the primary responsibility in countering terrorist acts. The sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the countries concerned should be fully respected. Countries must strictly implement the United Nations Global Counter- Terrorism Strategy and the resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly in that regard, including Security Council resolution 2482 (2019), while abiding by and implementing international laws on combating organized crime. Tangible and comprehensive measures must be taken to counter the linkages between terrorist organizations and organized crime in areas, such as trafficking in arms, persons, drugs, artefacts and cultural property; the illicit trade in natural resources and wildlife; and the abuse of legitimate commercial enterprise and non-profit organizations, among others. Secondly, it is imperative to enhance actions and synergy at international and regional levels to more effectively fight terrorism and organized crime. As international terrorism, transnational organized crime and other global security issues grow increasingly connected and diversified, no country can remain immune to the scourge of these common threats. It is of the utmost importance to further promote multilateralism and international cooperation to tackle the new and evolving challenges of terrorism, both during and after the coronavirus disease pandemic. The international community must actively support regional and subregional organizations in playing their important roles and conducting effective regional cooperation in the field of counter-terrorism and the fight against organized crime. China supports closer coordination between United Nations agencies such as the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the UNODC and INTERPOL, in accordance with their respective mandates, and regional organizations in order to utilize their respective strengths and expertise. Thirdly, it is important to support the domestic efforts of Member States and build their capacities to address the most prominent challenges. As part of capacity- building efforts in areas such as border control, customs, drug enforcement and judiciary matters, the international community must provide tangible assistance to Member States - especially African and developing countries - that considers the security situation and distinctive culture and history of each country. We should effectively combat the financing of terrorism, stop internet-based terrorism and put an end to the illegal activities of terrorist and organized crime groups in order to sever the linkages between terrorism and organized crime. We must follow international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, and support the efforts of Member States to deradicalize, enhance prevention and keep organized crime groups from participating in extremist and terrorist activities. In the face of the terrorist threat, we must stand united in solidarity. Terrorism is our common enemy, and there is no difference between so-called good and bad terrorists. Double standards and politicization must be avoided. China will always side with multilateralism and international justice. China has been rigorously implementing all United Nations counter-terrorism resolutions and actively engaging in counter-terrorism cooperation at the global and regional levels. As a State party to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, China has been actively fulfilling its obligations under the Convention with an all-fronts approach across the legislation, law enforcement and judiciary sectors. We will continue to conduct bilateral and multilateral exchanges and cooperate with all Member States, particularly developing and African countries, to build capacities on issues related to counter-terrorism and combating organized crime. We will also continue to support - politically and financially - United Nations counter- terrorism efforts in a joint endeavour to maintain international peace and stability.
