Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would like to express my appreciation to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Russia,
for his able leadership of the Council last month. We
also express our appreciation to Mr. De Soto for his
briefing.

I would like to associate my delegation with the
statements to be delivered later by the representatives
of the Arab Group, of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Lebanon was today subjected to a heinous
terrorist attack that took the lives of innocent
civilians - an attack that is emblematic of the
instability in our region. This morning, on the eve of
the second anniversary of the assassination of Prime
Minister Hariri, explosives were detonated inside two
public buses near the town of Bikfaya, killing three
people and injuring 22 others - some critically,
according to our latest information.

That act was aimed at intimidating the people of
Lebanon, causing panic and destabilizing the country.
On behalf of the Lebanese Government, the Prime
Minister has requested technical assistance from the
United Nations International Independent Investigation
Commission in investigating that act of terror. The
revelation of the truth about those who are behind these
acts is paramount for the long-term stability of
Lebanon and the consolidation of its democracy.

We would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
how important it is for the special tribunal for Lebanon
to achieve justice and provide the Lebanese with the
opportunity to live in sovereignty, security, and
tranquillity.

We meet once again in this body to discuss the
Middle East - a region rife with tensions, resulting in
large part from Israeli practices against the Lebanese
and the Palestinians. Israel recently began construction
and excavation work beneath the holy Al-Aqsa mosque
compound. Israel has also been heavy-handed in
dealing with civilians attending Friday prayers and
protesters peacefully making their opinions heard.
Israel's actions not only seriously threaten the
foundation of the mosque, risking its collapse, but they
also threaten the foundations of any possible peace or
goodwill in the region. Israel is touching on a very
sensitive issue for Muslims throughout the world, as it
is threatening one of Islam's holiest sites.

Israel continues to create a new fait accompli on
the ground in Jerusalem, in violation of relevant
Security Council resolutions. In Lebanon, Israel
continues its breaches of Lebanese sovereignty by not
fully complying with its obligations under resolution
1701 (2006), as demonstrated by the events along the
Blue Line on the night of 7 February. Israel claimed
that it was conducting demining activities by night in
an area where the Blue Line is not clearly demarcated.
The Lebanese Armed Forces conveyed a message
through the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
that Israel should postpone its activities until the
morning to avoid confusion as to the location of the
Blue Line. They further proposed that the matter be
resolved through regular liaison channels before any
military action was taken on the ground. Nevertheless,
the Israeli armed forces persisted, rejecting the
Lebanese request. The Israeli bulldozer crossed the

technical fence and continued to advance. In spite of
warning shots fired by the Lebanese Armed Forces, the
Israeli forces continued their advance, violating the
Blue Line and crossing into the Lebanese side to a
depth of 30 metres over a front of 50 metres.

It is clear that the Israeli armed forces provoked
the incidents at the Blue Line by not resorting to the
coordination and liaison channels and by insisting on
operating in a sensitive area where the Blue Line is not
clearly marked. The Lebanese Government strongly
protests against the ongoing Israeli violations of the
Blue Line in breach of resolution 1701 (2006).

We also look forward to the prompt settlement of
the Sheba'a farms issues, as stipulated in resolution
1701 (2006). To that end, we refer to our Government's
seven-point plan regarding the Sheba'a farms, and call
on all parties to cooperate to protect Lebanon's
sovereign rights in that area. Finally, we encourage the
important endeavours of the Secretary-General and
look forward to tangible developments in that regard.

Israel's July war on Lebanon continues today
with over 1.2 million cluster bombs that regularly
continue to kill and maim innocent Lebanese civilians.
Israel dropped those bomblets in blatant defiance of
international humanitarian law. A report published by
the United Nations Environment Programme describes
the disastrous environmental and humanitarian
consequences of the Israeli war on the population in
the South of Lebanon and its impact in their
livelihoods.

I should like here to take this opportunity to
thank all the countries that are helping Lebanon in the
daunting process of demining and making south
Lebanon a safe place for its population. We ask the
Security Council to press Israel to provide the
appropriate authorities with all the maps of where it
dropped those bomblets, as well as all the maps of
mines that it planted during its occupation of south
Lebanon.

On 25 January, the Paris III Conference
demonstrated the will of the international community
to help Lebanon, and we are grateful for that support.
The Lebanese Government presented a reform plan that
was hailed by donors and financial institutions alike. A
total of $7.6 billion was pledged. The political message
was clear: Lebanon's sovereignty and stability are vital
and the Lebanese deserve and require international
assistance to achieve those goals. We hope that the
reforms which that support accommodates will be
implemented in a stable Lebanon, where a permanent
ceasefire is achieved in accordance with resolution
1701 (2006).

The Lebanese Government has undertaken all
necessary measures within its capacity to ensure
security along its borders. The Lebanese army is doing
its utmost to combat arms smuggling across the border.
The Lebanese army is exercising its authority and duty
to defend the sovereignty of the country. What we need
is to reinforce the Lebanese army's capabilities to
discharge its national duties.

We thank the United Nations for its support of
Lebanon and its efforts to bring about peace and
stability throughout the region.

