Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): | would like to thank the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Prime Minister of Albania and Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Edi Rama, for his briefing. The OSCE cooperation model, which is an expression of the shared vision of its members to be responsible for their own collective security, must be commended. Today's briefing enabled us to understand the main focus of Albania's work at the helm of the organization - that of combating corruption, trafficking in persons and the spread of hate speech, and resolving the conflict in eastern Ukraine and other conflicts in the organization's area of operations. The spread of hate speech, which fosters the violent extremism that leads to terrorism, is a strategic challenge that must be met with further action by the international community. Such action should be demonstrated by concerted efforts in the areas of sustainable development, institution-building, the rule of law and good governance. The Niger welcomes the signing of a memorandum of understanding between the OSCE and the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the excellent cooperation between them. We encourage the two organizations to intensify their cooperation efforts in areas related to the women and peace and security agenda and urge them to identify opportunities for cooperation in the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), on youth and peace and security. With regard to the crucial role of regional and subregional organizations in the management and prevention of conflicts, and in line with the principle of subsidiarity, the Niger welcomes the outcome of the meeting of 9 December 2019 on Ukraine, in the Normandy Format, among France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine. It paved the way for the adoption of various confidence-building measures, including the exchange of prisoners, the establishment of new disengagement zones and the opening of new crossing points along the line of contact. We therefore encourage the Albanian chairmanship to work towards restoring peace and stability in Ukraine by bringing together the parties involved to overcome their differences in order to implement the Minsk agreements, in accordance with resolution 2202 (2015), of 17 February 2015. The fight against terrorism, threats to peace and security, climate change and the management of migration flows are areas of further enhanced cooperation between OSCE and other regional and subregional organizations, particularly those from Africa. Indeed, it is well known that security dynamicsin sub-Saharan Africa impact peace and security in Europe. That is why the Niger calls for the expansion and strengthening of cooperation between the OSCE and those organizations. Such an approach could be considered together with the Group of Five for the Sahel, with a view to seeking solutions, in a spirit of solidarity and concerted action, to the current challenges facing the Sahel region in terms of peace, security and the fight against poverty.
