Mr. Darsalia (Georgia): Let me express my sincere
gratitude to the French presidency for convening
today's important debate. Georgia was happy to
co-sponsor resolution 2462 (2019). My country aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered by the observer
of the European Union. Meanwhile, allow me add few
remarks in my national capacity.

With regard to the global security architecture,
the fight against international terrorism remains one
of the main priorities for Georgia. In that regard, the
Government is actively working to detect the constantly
changing threats of international terrorism and to
improve ways of responding to them. The effective
and targeted policy of the Government of Georgia has
reduced the number of supporters of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and their influences in Georgia.
The extremist and terrorist ideological propaganda has
also been minimized.

The potential threats in Georgia from the
counter-terrorism perspective are not exclusive and
are similar to the most visible trends evolving in the
world. As in many other countries around the globe,
the potential threats are related to persons connected
with international terrorism in various forms, such as
supporters of extremist ideologies and those involved in
the ongoing conflicts in the Middle East, for example,
self-radicalized persons, foreign terrorist fighters and
so on. The Government regularly assesses and identifies
the major challenges related to them and takes specific
steps in dealing with them.

At the same time, the occupied territories continue
to represent the major challenge for the Government
of Georgia in its efforts to combat terrorism. Given
Georgia's important transit role and potential, there is
a danger that the occupied territories could be used for
illegal activities such as the trafficking and trade in
arms and components of weapons of mass destruction,
which can be used for terrorist purposes that threaten
security in the entire region.

In recent years we experienced several recorded
attempts of smuggling nuclear and radioactive
materials through Georgia's occupied regions. That
further amplifies the sense of danger. Fortunately,
those illegal activities were duly prevented by Georgian
law enforcement agencies. However, in the absence of
an international presence in those territories, it has
become virtually impossible to conduct any kind of
verification activities on the ground. In parallel to that,
we had cases where the occupied territories were used
of the illegal transport of funds, which could potentially
be used there to finance terrorism as well.

Georgia has substantially enhanced its counter-
terrorism legislation since 2013. Moreover, Georgia was
among the first States Members of the United Nations
to explicitly criminalize travel by foreign terrorist
fighters in accordance with resolution 2178 (2014).

The Government of Georgia adopted a national
counter-terrorism strategy and its action plan for 2019-
2021 in January. The strategy is composed of the seven
pillars that are the main elements of the fight against
terrorism in Georgia. Among them is the prevention
and protection pillar, which sets out the actions that
Georgia will carry out with regard to issues such as
deradicalization and countering the terrorist narrative
and combating terrorist financing, as well as foreign
terrorist fighters. In the strategy, special attention is
given to international cooperation. We need to focus
on joint efforts to address the financing of terrorism.
Conducting terrorist activities, whether in Syria and
Iraq or beyond these territories, is greatly dependent on
financial ability. Therefore, the fight against financing
of terrorism should be one of the most important goals.

Over recent years, Georgia has, inter alia, amended
its criminal legislation in relation to terrorism financing,
adjusted its legislative framework for the application of
targeted financial sanctions, empowered the Financial
Monitoring Service of Georgia to temporarily suspend
suspicious transactions, introduced the requirement
for reporting entities to understand the ownership and
control structure of their clients, and enhanced client
due diligence measures through the application of a
risk-based approach.

Georgia has created an adequate legal framework
for freezing terrorist assets pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001). The Government established an inter-agency
commission for the implementation of the Security
Council resolutions, which consists of all the relevant
stakeholders, represented at the ministerial level.
The commission conducts its work in three major
directions - asset freezes, travel bans and arms
embargoes on individuals and legal entities suspected
of terrorism and designated as such, in line with
Council resolutions.

Bearing that in mind, we need to mobilize joint
efforts to address the challenging security situation in
the region and worldwide. As a reliable partner country,
Georgia reiterates its commitment to doing its utmost
to contribute to common security and stability.

