Ms. McLeod (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having brought
this critical debate before the Security Council. I
should also like to recognize the statements made by
Deputy Secretary-General Migiro and Under-
Secretary-General for Legal Affairs Patricia O'Brien.

On a daily basis, we address matters related to the
rule of law through much of our work in the Chamber
and in the General Assembly, including in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the Sixth
Committee. We therefore welcome the opportunity to
participate in this thematic debate on these critical
issues.

The rule of law lies at the heart of my country's
democracy. It is also central to the maintenance of
international peace and security and the pursuit of
global progress. President Obama has said, "In an
increasingly interconnected world, legal issues of
human rights, criminal justice, intellectual property,
business transactions, dispute resolution, human
migration and environmental regulation affect us all."

My Government is deeply committed to enduring
legal principles: due process, equal protection under
law, judicial independence and justice for all. Beyond
our fierce dedication to the rule of law at home, we are
also working to support and expand respect for the law
and human rights around the world.

As a member of the Security Council, we have
worked to ensure that the rule of law is an important
component of peacekeeping missions. We have brought
that same commitment to the General Assembly
committees responsible for operationalizing and
financing peacekeeping. By integrating the rule of law
into the mandates of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
missions and following through on those precepts, the
Security Council and the United Nations can help to
achieve more lasting, stable and sustainable peace in
nations emerging from conflict.

In addition, the United States supports the
important work done by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, particularly its
capacity-building activities to strengthen national rule
of law systems and respect for human rights around the
world. As a member of the Human Rights Council, the
United States is working to promote human rights and
strengthen international law and to create a more
credible Human Rights Council that can be a voice for
those suffering under the world's cruelest regimes.

Our commitment to the rule of law is also
reflected in our strong support for ratification of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and our signing of the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities - the first new human rights convention
of the twenty-first century.

In that the international rule of law does not
depend on multilateral discussions alone, international
judicial mechanisms can help peacefully resolve
conflicts and end impunity.

One such institution is the International Court of
Justice, which plays a vital role in the peaceful
resolution of international disputes. The United States
was pleased that its national group co-nominated
Ambassador Xue to fill the seat vacated by the
retirement of the distinguished Judge Shi. One of my
fellow citizens, Judge Thomas Buergenthal, has also
served with great distinction on the Court. He will be
retiring effective in September, and I am pleased that
the United States national group has nominated as his
replacement, Joan Donaghue, the State Department's
Principal Deputy Legal Adviser and a lifelong advocate
of respect for international law.
The United States strongly supports international
tribunals to bring to justice those who commit horrific
atrocities. We have been proud to serve on the
Management Committees of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone and the Special Tribunal for Lebanon and
to provide major funding for these two vital tribunals.
The United States also recently joined the Steering
Committee of the Khmer Rouge Tribunal and
announced a major contribution to it. The United States
continues to play an active role with the International
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda,
serving on the Security Council's Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals as it grapples with the
challenges of the successor institutions to those two
important bodies.

The United States was pleased to participate as an
observer in the first Review Conference of the
International Criminal Court's Assembly of States
Parties. We did so with a clear recognition that
international tribunals such as the International
Criminal Court can be an important part of the effort to
prevent and combat crimes that shock the universal
conscience.

At its heart, the rule of law depends on
developing strong domestic institutions around the
world. The United States therefore continues to provide
strong bilateral support for the rule of law. We are now
working with scores of countries, as well as with
international and regional organizations, on
programming that supports domestic rule of law. For
2011, for instance, the State Department and the United
States Agency for International Development have
proposed nearly $900 million for rule of law and
human rights programmes, a 28 per cent increase from
fiscal year 2009.

When we plan our bilateral work, we try to work
closely with the United Nations Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, donors, other United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations. The
number of actors working on promotion of
international rule of law can be daunting, but we must
coordinate and prioritize together to provide a better
future for host nations.

The responsible departure of United Nations
peacekeepers in post-conflict situations often requires
improving and expediting United Nations and other
efforts to build up national criminal justice sectors and
security institutions, which are central to local
authorities' abilities to sustain a hard-won peace on
their own. The political development and recovery
challenges that post-conflict countries face are often
complex, and a broad array of actors may be helping
host countries strengthen the rule of law. We must
ensure that our efforts are mutually reinforcing and
helping to build national capacity. We welcome the
Secretary-General's recent efforts to further develop
civilian expertise in these areas.

The rule of law is one of the founding values of
the United States, and we believe that strengthening the
rule of law around the world reinforces peace, progress
and security.

