Mr. Gaye (spoke in French): It is a privilege to
address the Security Council. Doing so as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General is an honour
accorded to me for the first time, and I take this
opportunity to express my deep respect to the Council.

I am pleased to present to the Council the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic (S/2013/470) and on the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in the Central African Republic (BINUCA), in the
presence of Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos
and Assistant Secretary-General Ivan Simonovic', both
of whom visited the Central African Republic in July
and will discuss the humanitarian and human rights
situations.

(spoke in English)

Since the publication of the report, the overall
situation in the Central African Republic has remained
highly volatile and unpredictable, although there has
been some progress on the political front. Following the
promulgation of the Transitional Charter, on 18 July,
and in accordance with its article 25, the Government
of National Unity appointed on 13 June was reshuffled
on 2 August. While its composition remains almost
the same, Mr. Michel Djotodia is no longer Minister of
Defence; a new Junior Minister in charge of defence,
restructuring of the army, former combatants and
victims of war was appointed instead.

The portfolio of water and forests held by former
Senior Minister Moussa Dhaffane has been filled. The
representation of women remains low, with only three
women out of 34 members of the Cabinet, although they
hold key ministries such as foreign affairs and rural
development; the Minister who holds the latter is also
State Minister.

Similarly, the National Transitional Council,
which was expanded from 105 to 135 members in
July, appointed a new Bureau on 8 August. While the
re-election was requested by the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS) to ensure greater
diversity and representation, the Bureau remains almost
intact, with only one of the Rapporteurs losing his seat.

Meanwhile, the members of the Transitional
Constitutional Court will be sworn in on 16 August.
They will administer the oath of office to Mr. Djotodia,
as the head of State of the transition, on 18 August.
According to the Transitional Charter, the ceremony
will officially launch the transition, which should last
from 18 to 24 months. Thus most of the transitional
institutions and mechanisms have been established in
accordance with the decision made by ECCAS.

That progress was made possible thanks to the direct
involvement of ECCAS leaders and the Mediator they
appointed for the Central African Republic, President
Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of the Congo.
However, tensions persist between Mr. Djotodia, Prime
Minister Tiangaye and the President of the National
Transitional Council over the management of the
transition process. Their relations are characterized by
mutual suspicion and mistrust. Therefore, the political
gains made remain fragile, while the road map for
elections remains to be established.

While there is still a total absence ofthe rule of law
nationwide, the security situation has improved slightly
in Bangui following the arrest of General Mohamed
Moussa Dhaffane, a former prominent military leader
of one of Sele'ka's factions and Senior Minister for
Water and Forests. Nine sites for the cantonment
or regroupment of Se'le'ka have been established in
five localities, and four sites for the cantonment and
regroupment of former elements of the Forces arme'es
centrafricaines, the former army, were also established.

Joint patrols by Sele'ka and the Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic
(MICOPAX), the subregional peacekeeping force, have
resumed in the capital. However, the looting of people's
property, plundering, kidnapping, torture and killings
continue. For example, a so-called Ramadan tax was
paid by local people in the provinces. On 9 August,
armed men suspected of being Seleka elements robbed
a local supermarket in broad daylight and kidnapped
the owners. In addition, human rights violations
have become widespread, further compounded the
breakdown of law and order, particularly in the
provinces, where Se'le'ka elements continue to prey on
the civilian population.

We must ensure that there is no impunity for
perpetrators of gross human rights violations.
Meanwhile, the humanitarian situation has reached
unprecedented levels; 4.6 million people are affected
by the dire humanitarian crisis, which has moved from
a protracted humanitarian crisis towards a complex
emergency. Assistant Secretary-General Simonovic'
and Under-Secretary-General Amos will present the
Council with a detailed picture of the grave human
rights and humanitarian situation, respectively.

As there is no proper chain of command, the
country runs the risk of descending into anarchy and
chaos. Some police officers are reporting to work, but
they are not equipped to work safely and effectively.
Furthermore, they do not trust but fear their Se'leka
counterparts.

The reorganization of the security and defence
forces is yet to be supported by a clear, credible and
structured plan. In that regard, the police and the
gendarmerie were instructed to absorb 500 Sele'ka
elements each, including suspected foreign elements,
without prior screening to determine their suitability.
The intended integration of an additional 1,000 Se'leka
elements into the newly established Armee de la
Republique centrafricaine is not based on any set of
objective criteria either.

The integration process in the police faces the
challenge ofthe lack ofproper facilities, as the Training
School of the National Police is still occupied by a
MICOPAX contingent. Many elements of the Forces
armees centrafricaines have reported for duty at four
different sites in Bangui, although some have also
sought refuge in neighbouring countries, including
the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Cameroon, with their weapons. Diplomatic efforts are
under way for their voluntary repatriation. Discussions
were ongoing between the Seleka leadership and the
rebel group Force de'mocratique du peuple centrafricain,
led by Abdoulaye Miskine.

Meanwhile, the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA)
has continued to thrive in the turmoil caused by the
political events of March 2013. Since May 2013,
BINUCA has been receiving reports on the presence of
LRA elements in the prefecture of Haute-Kotto, where
the diamond sites are located.

On 19 July, the African Union (AU) Peace and
Security Council authorized the deployment, for an
initial period of six months, of an African-led peace
support operation, the International Support Mission in
the Central African Republic, effective 1 August 2013.
The new mission will have a total strength of 3,652
civilian and military personnel, composed mainly of
the contingents currently serving in MICOPAX. The
mission is mandated to protect civilians and restore
security and public order; restore State authority;
reform and restructure the defence and security sectors;
and create the conditions conducive for the provision of
humanitarian assistance to populations in need.

The mission has a robust mandate and will have an
important role in stabilizing the security situation. The
African Union is dispatching a technical assessment
mission to Bangui from 17 August to refine the concept
of operations for the mission and to develop a realistic
logistical support plan for the mission. The United
Nations will participate in that technical assessment
mission in an advisory capacity. In parallel, the AU
is also deploying a joint transition planning team
to Libreville to develop, jointly with ECCAS, the
modalities for the transition from MICOPAX II to
the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic.

We welcome the establishment of the African
Union mission and encourage the Security Council
to lend its full support to the force. We hope that the
forthcoming deployment of the impartial force that is
the new mission will provide the leverage needed to
end the anarchy and the chaos in Bangui and in the
provinces.

On the political front, Mr. Djotodia, the Prime
Minister, and the President of the National Transitional
Council must work together to urgently bridge their
differences, which, if unaddressed, could jeopardize
the progress made thus far and seriously aggravate the
crisis in the country. Moving forward, there will be a
need to agree on a road map and a chronogram to end
the transition period and hold elections. There will also
be a need to tackle the question of impunity and ensure
proper assistance to populations in need.

(spoke in French)

The Central African Republic is facing tremendous
challenges, but I am convinced that with the continuing
and active support of the international community,
along with political will on the part of stakeholders,
together we can overcome those difficulties. During my
discussions with national stakeholders and with leaders
in the subregion, I took every opportunity to draw their
attention to the imperative need to resolve the security
problem, which remains by far the most urgent priority.
Without a doubt, much remains to be done elsewhere,
but resolving problems relating to security and the rule
of law will have a positive and immediate effect on the
political, humanitarian and human rights challenges
that we are facing. In short, it is time to act.

