Ms. Shalev (Israel): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for your stewardship of this Council. As

your presidency comes to an end, please accept my
congratulations.

If a stranger was seated among us today, he
would be under the impression that the Israeli
settlements in the West Bank are the primary and single
obstacle to peace in the region. It would appear to that
stranger that Hamas' violent coup in Gaza, its
enormous smuggling of weapons, its constant missile
attacks on Israeli towns and cities are not a problem.
To that stranger, the phenomenon of terrorism against
Israel and its citizens, including the attacks in
Jerusalem this week, is a fact of life.

To that stranger, Iran's pursuit of nuclear
weapons and its support of Hizbullah and Hamas are
irrelevant details. To that stranger, President
Ahmadinejad's despicable calls for the destruction of
Israel are just words. To that stranger, the transfer of
weapons from Iran and Syria into northern and
southern Lebanon and the rearmament of Hizbullah do
not merit discussion. With the same logic, books filled
with hatred and anti-Israel incitement have nothing to
do with the badly needed culture of peace.

Had the stranger arrived in these halls without
any prior knowledge of the situation in the Middle
East, he would not have known that those dangers and
problems prevail in our region. Mysteriously, all
previous speakers failed to mention those facts. Israel's
settlements, however, falsely appear to be the principal
issue. Something seems strangely amiss.

But we are no strangers to the realities on the
ground and to the mutual attempts to try to reach a real
solution to the Arab-Israeli dispute - a solution
through negotiations on the ground, not with words in
the Security Council.

We in Israel remain committed to achieving a just
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East. We in
Israel are committed to a two-State solution with our
Palestinian neighbours. For us in Israel, the question is
not whether to achieve a two-State solution but how to
do so.

Israel understands its responsibilities as the peace
process moves forward. We continue to negotiate with
the legitimate Palestinian leadership despite the
complicated situation, which includes, unfortunately,
many threats and obstacles. We are willing to discuss
all aspects related to the conflict. I wish to state,
without any ambiguity whatsoever, that Israel is
prepared, if the conditions are ripe, to make painful
concessions in the pursuit of peace. Israel has done so
in the past because Israel desires peace.

Let me also state clearly that settlements are not
an obstacle to peace. Yes, we understand the sensitivity
of the issue of settlements in the eyes of our
neighbours. Yes, there is also parallel sensitivity on our
side due to the historic bond of the Jewish people to
this biblical land. However, while settlements remain a
delicate issue, they are not the principal one. They have
been used here as another instrument to bash Israel
instead of addressing the realities on the ground.

Any progress begins with a genuine dialogue
among those committed to peace. It begins with the
release of Israeli hostage Corporal Gilad Shalit and an
end to all terrorist attacks. It begins with a renewal of
everyone's commitment to the two-State solution and
an acceptance of the basic principle that the rights of
each people are to be realized in their own homeland. It
begins by overcoming all threats to the realization of
peace.

While the peace process between us and the
Palestinians is essentially a bilateral one, the rest of the
Arab world has an important, vital role indeed, since
that peace will bind together Israelis, Palestinians and
all moderates in the region.

There is much that those in the region can do to
support the process, but it is not about more United
Nations meetings. First and foremost, it is about the
commitment to prepare the people of the region for the
price of peace, to accept the true meaning of peace and
to teach all children of the Middle East the values of
tolerance and the blessings of coexistence, not the
values of incitement and hatred.

The Arab world is a pivotal player in any effort to
strengthen elements within the Palestinian leadership.
The Council has a critical responsibility to support the
moderate Palestinian Authority and denounce Hamas.
It must condemn terrorism and incitement. It must
reject extremism, such as the toxic anti-Israel and anti-
Semitic provocations of Iranian President
Ahmadinejad. It must accept Israel's existence and the
Jewish people's right of self-determination in our
homeland.

To the representatives from the Arab world, I say:
Israel understands its responsibilities for peace. Faced
with today's Council discussion, we cannot but wonder
whether the Arab leaders really understand their
responsibilities.

Those who initiated this Council discussion in the
belief that it will contribute to the promotion of peace
are wrong. Efforts should be made on the ground by
confronting all obstacles to peace and by establishing
confidence-building measures with Israel. As I said
before, our region is facing many threats. International
terrorism, to name but one, is the black plague of the
twenty-first century. May I ask how many times this
Council has initiated a serious debate on the threat of
terrorism in the Middle East?

Some in this Chamber might find comfort in the
mantra that Israeli settlements are the primary
impediment to peace, yet that belief is utterly wrong
and blind to the historical realities. Let me take us back
to the peace treaty between Israel and Egypt signed
30 years ago. Let me take us back to Gaza in 2005.
Time and time again, Israel has demonstrated to itself
and to the world that settlements, no matter how
sensitive an issue, are not the obstacle to peace when
the conditions are ripe.

The Middle East is at a critical juncture and the
moderate Arab States have two paths before them. One
leads us down a road of excuses and false alibis, as the
peace process stumbles. The other path is one that
creates the foundations for a just and lasting peace.

Today's meeting comes dangerously close to
choosing the first option. We all must choose the
second. In his remarks to the General Assembly two
days ago, Israeli President Shimon Peres extended yet
another olive branch to the Arab world, stating that
Israel invites "all leaders to come to discuss peace in
Jerusalem, which is holy to all of us Israel shall
gladly accept an Arab invitation to designate a venue
where meaningful dialogue may take place"
(A/63/PVD. 
Today, we echo that call and urge our Arab
neighbours to reciprocate President Peres' offer.
Calling politically motivated meetings, such as today's
at the Security Council, serves no such goal. The
initiative to hold today's discussion in the Council and
the presentation we have seen and heard here today do
not promote peace. Only bilateral negotiations will
help us achieve a just and lasting peace.

In contrast, I would like to draw the attention of
the Council to the bilateral talks that have taken place

in recent weeks between Prime Minister Olmert,
Foreign Minister Livni and their Palestinian
counterparts on all substantive issues. What could be
more symbolic, in further contrast to today's Council
meeting, than the meeting that took place a short while
ago in this very building, two floors below us, between
President Shimon Peres and President Mahmoud
Abbas.

True progress is made through such bilateral
meetings. That is the only way to move forward, the
only way to achieve peace.

