Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to the thank Ambassadors Gerard van Bohemen
of New Zealand, Raimonda Murmokaite of Lithuania
and Roman Oyarzun Marchesi of Spain - respectively
as Chairs of the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities;
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), concerning Counter-Terrorism; and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), on non-proliferation - for their briefings. We
welcome their leadership as Chairs ofthose Committees.

While it is true that everybody is concerned
about putting an end to terrorism, it is also true that
the best way of achieving this is not to contribute to
it. We think that, in order to eliminate terrorism it is
important, among other things, to settle conflicts and to
destroy terrorist safe havens and cut off their supplies,
especially in terms of arms and ammunition. Chad,
which yesterday experienced three deadly attacks in
its capital, condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. It calls upon the Security Council
to take urgent measures against the illicit provision
of arms and ammunition to non-State actors, and to
terrorist groups in particular.

With regard to the threat posed by Al-Qaida and
its affiliated persons and entities, this is constantly
growing. Organizations, such as the so-called Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the Al-Nusra Front,
Boko Haram and others are conquering whole swaths
of territories. The flow of foreign terrorist fighters
recruited through the Internet and social networks to
go to Iraq, Syria, Libya and other countries it taking
on a very worrying dimension, while the human cost
of the attacks perpetrated by those groups is enormous.
Several welcome actions have been taken into order to
curb the terrorist threat. In that regard, I should like
to welcome the adoption of resolutions 2161 (2014),
2170 (2014), 2178 (2014), 2195 (2014), 2199 (2015), 2214
(2015) and 2220 (2015). I also commend the fact that
the relevant Committees have submitted reports on
ISIL, the Al-Nusra Front and foreign terrorist fighters.
We very much look forward to the next report of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya, because we
are particularly concerned by the presence of terrorists
groups linked to Daesh in the south of the country,
bordering Chad, and also by the terrorist threat in the
whole of the Sahel region.

It is also important to continue to list individuals and
entities that fall under sanctions. The Committee must
continue to update this list regularly. Nonetheless, we
commend the Committee for its 2014 triennial review
and we would encourage States to provide information
for the 2015 triennial review. We welcome the important
role of the Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberley Prost, the
Al-Qaida Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, as well as of the Coordinator, Mr. Alexander
Evans. We thank them all for their reports. We hope
that their successors will be selected and appointed
taking into consideration a geographical representation
as broad as possible, in line with article 101 of the
Charter of the United Nations.

With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism,
Chad welcomes the work done by the Committee in
response to the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters.
We take note of the three reports that the Committee to
the Council during this year and we would recommend it
to focus further on managing, controlling and securing
borders. We also note that since 2005 the Committee
has visited more than half of the Member States. Such
visits are crucial to following up the implementation
of anti-terrorist measures, in particular resolutions
1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014). They help
to facilitate technical assistance and to reinforce the
capacity of States to counter the terrorist threat. That
is why we encourage the Committee to continue to
undertake country visits. Nonetheless, we would
suggest recruiting experts at the national or regional
levels, over and beyond those recruited in New York,
so as to avoid very costly trips for them. We welcome
the fact that the Committee has adopted an approach
based on risk that aims to strengthen and build capacity
based on the abilities of each State. We agree with the
Chair of the Committee to recommend that each State
should design its anti-terrorist strategies based on its
own security problems.

In addition to country visits, we also encourage high-
level visits. In that regard, we welcome the trip made
by the Chair of the Committee to Mali and the Niger,
along with the Executive Director of the Committee,
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to the
Sahel and the African Union Special Representative for
Counter-Terrorism Cooperation. In future, it would be
desirable if those Committee members who so request
could participate in such missions in their respective
geographical areas. We encourage the holding of special
meetings away from New York, following the example
of the one to be held in Madrid in July 2015, and we
propose the organization of another such meeting in
Africa in coordination with the African Union.

With regard to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
concerning the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, we take note of the progress in the
implementation of that resolution since November
2014 and of the submission by the Committee to the
Council of its review of such implementation for 2014
and its programme of work for 2015. We welcome the
efforts of Member States to implement the resolution
and note that 174 countries, or 90 per cent of States,
have presented reports to the Committee on steps they
have taken in that regard. In addition, a large number of
States have submitted voluntary national action plans
for such implementation.

Much, however, remains to be done for the universal
implementation of the resolution, and we therefore
encourage the Committee to enhance the role of the
national focal points and to improve its system for the
facilitation of assistance to States. We also encourage
the organization of country visits and workshops
and cooperation with international and regional
organizations. We hope that the comprehensive review
of the implementation of the resolution, expected at the
end of 2016, will give impetus to such implementation,
and note in that regard that the Committee has already
agreed on four themes for the production of the review
and that a work plan is under development.

With regard to cooperation and coordination among
the three Security Committees established to combat
terrorism and their Expert Groups, it is essential to
fight together against threats to international peace and
security resulting from terrorist acts and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors. We
note in particular the participation of the Expert Groups
in various workshops, communication activities,
country visits, cooperation with international, regional
and subregional organizations and exchanges of
information since November 2014.

We welcome the establishment by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and the Group of Experts supporting the Committee
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1540 (2004) of a shared focal point for the Caribbean,
and the cooperation regarding terrorist financing and
the freezing of terrorist assets between the Executive
Directorate and the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1526 (2004), concerning Al-Qaida.
In that regard, we welcome the joint observations they
made to Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania
during the preparation of those countries' laws on the
implementation of resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373
(2001), particularly in relation to the freezing of assets
and the implementation of financial measures.

Lastly, Chad would like to thank Ambassadors Van
Bohemen, Oyarzun Marchesi and Murmokaite, and
assures them of its cooperation with the Committees
that they chair. We encourage the three Committees to
enhance their cooperation and coordination. Chad calls
upon all States to work in good faith to combat violent
extremism and terrorism.

