Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation supported the adoption of resolution 2536 (2020), extending the sanctions regime imposed on the Central African Republic. We were guided by the importance of pursuing coordinated international efforts to promote a peaceful settlement of the armed conflict in that country. We note the work of the French sponsors of the resolution, who succeeded in securing the support of all Council members, That was achieved not least by the decision to respond to Bangui's legitimate demands for the further easing of the sanctions regime. The simplified procedure for supplying grenade launchers for the needs of the Central African Republic, provided for in the resolution, is another small step in support of the Central African people. At the same time, we would like to recall that the authorities are calling on the Council to fully lift the arms embargo, and, of course, they have every reason to do so. We are therefore determined to further review the Security Council's restrictive sanctions. The arms embargo on the Central African Republic may have played a positive role in the early stages, but it is now effectively an obstacle to the rearming of the national army and security forces - the very institutions that bear the primary responsibility for upholding the security of their own citizens. Meanwhile, the saboteurs of the peace process continue to replenish their stockpiles of weapons through smuggling. We call on the Central African authorities to continue to meet the benchmarks for the review of the arms embargo so that the Council has every reason to lift it in a year's time. We wish to assure the Council that Russia will continue to provide assistance to the Central African Republic, both in its process of national reconciliation and in the context of strengthening its security forces, with a view to normalizing the situation in the country and reaching a sustainable settlement to the armed conflict.
