Mr. Hume (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
meeting, which we see as a prelude to an important set
of Security Council deliberations on the crisis in the
Great Lakes region. We are glad to see that your
delegation has been working with those of the next two
Presidents in order to ensure that these issues remain at
the forefront of our work. I would also like to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Annabi, for his briefing.

I would like to mention briefly that we have
noted the changing of the guard in the Congo from the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Morjane, who certainly carried the United Nations
flag high. We offer our very best wishes to the new
Special Representative, Mr. Ngongi, and to those
serving with him.

The implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement has been a roller coaster ride. On the
positive side, we have seen deployed the first elements
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), and the
ceasefire and disengagement lines are holding. There
has been progress on the withdrawal of some foreign
forces, but the forces of the principal belligerents
remain in place. The recent preparatory meeting of the
inter-Congolese dialogue was an important
milestone - one that my delegation looks forward to
discussing in the Council's open meeting with
President Masire.

On the negative side, the humanitarian and human
rights situation in the Congo has not improved; this is
an area of great concern. The negative forces continue
to receive arms, and we are witnessing a dangerous
escalation of fighting in South Kivu. We heard this
morning about the possibility of new violence in the
Ituri district. We are deeply concerned about the
offensive in South Kivu by members of the former
Rwandan Armed Forces (ex-FAR) and Interahamwe, as
well as about the fact that those forces appear to be
receiving support from elements in the Government.
This fighting will impede, not encourage, the peace
process, as surely must be evident to all.

Although the people of Kisangani have been
spared the ravages of renewed fighting, their city has
yet to be demilitarized. Finally, we have yet to see a
credible plan; such a plan must be based on a regional
political consensus for the disarming and
demobilization of negative forces, in particular the ex-
FAR and Interahamwe,

We are pleased that the Secretary-General, Kofi
Annan, will soon visit Kinshasa, Kigali and Kisangani
and that he will take with him the new Special
Representative. The Secretary-General's trip raises the
critical question of whether we have arrived at the
point of transition to phase III of MONUC's concept of
operations. We look forward to his trip and to his
report following the trip, which we hope will discuss
some of the issues that I shall mention. The withdrawal
of foreign forces and the disarmament and
demobilization of negative forces are closely related
concerns that test the political will of the parties. We
look forward to hearing the Secretary-General's best
judgement on how to move them forward.

The United States Government is eager to see
MONUC play a role in the voluntary disarmament and
demobilization of negative forces, but we will look to
other international entities to plan and execute the
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration of any
individuals not under indictment by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. This will obviously
require close coordination among MONUC, other
United Nations agencies, non-governmental
organizations and Governments in the region. We hope
that United Nations planning will go hand-in-hand with
that of the Joint Military Commission and
Governments in the region.

The Secretary-General helped to sustain a process
of bilateral dialogue between President Kagame and
President Kabila. The Security Council mission to the
region last spring identified this as a critical diplomatic
channel that needed to be strengthened. When the two
Presidents were here eight months ago, Ambassador
Cunningham told them that the United States
Government believed that they had a common interest
in ensuring that the territory of the Congo was not used
by negative forces to destabilize the region. Our
message, which we have consistently repeated in public
and in private, is that the long-term security interests of
both countries would best be addressed through a
policy of cooperation.

We hope that the Secretary-General will again
stress the need for bilateral contacts between the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and of Rwanda. Such contacts should include those at
the level of head of State, but these should also be
mirrored in contacts between the senior military and
diplomatic leadership of both countries. We believe
that the pursuit of common long-term security interests
is critical to accomplishing the military tasks laid out
in the Lusaka Agreement.

In response to three separate incidents of
Rwandan and Ugandan fighting in Kisangani, the
Security Council demanded, in resolution 1304 (2000),
the demilitarization of the city. We hope that the
Secretary-General will raise that issue while he is in
Kisangani, and also when he is in Kigali and Kinshasa.
While the Security Council resolution calls for the
demilitarization of Kisangani, the Kampala
disengagement plan gives the Rassemblement
congolais pour la democratie (RCD-Goma) the right to
administer the town until new national structures can
assume that function. As we have heard today, the
demand in resolution 1304 (2000) for the
demilitarization of Kisangani remains the unanimous
position of the Security Council. We hope that the
Secretary-General and his new Special Representative
can launch the process of implementing that resolution,
preferably in close cooperation with the RCD
leadership.

Finally, we hope that the Secretary-General will
be able to work with the Government of the Congo to
name and dispatch a United Nations humanitarian
coordinator. I think one of the striking things in the
briefing today was that, despite progress in other areas,
there really has been no meaningful progress in taking
people out of the risky situation that they have been in
for too long in the Congo. We think that getting the
right kind of leadership on the ground, in cooperation
with the Government of the Congo, will give hope to
people, particularly in war-torn areas. We know that
our partners in the international relief community feel
acutely the lack of such leadership, and we hope that
this situation will be resolved as soon as possible.

